Woodhull Passes Review By Regulators
Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn has been granted conditional accreditation by the nation's largest hospital regulatory group, which had refused to accredit it earlier this year, New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation announced yesterday.
The regulator, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, had previously decided to withdraw its accreditation to Woodhull, a 570-bed hospital that is one of the city's most modern, after concluding that it did not review enough surgical procedures to detect unnecessary surgery and mishaps.


INSIDE
Nazi Traitor or Failure?
Did Werner Heisenberg deliberately fail to build a Nazi A-bomb?
Newly released documents have rekindled the debate.
Science Times, page C1.
Stopping Speeding Buses
Undercover New York troopers have been riding buses to catch speeding drivers.
More than 100 of them will be summoned to court.
Page B1.
Athletics Trade Canseco
Oakland traded slugger Jose Canseco to Texas for Ruben Sierra and two other players.
Page B9.


With a Little Cheating, Organic Lawn Turns 2
TWO years ago, in the spirit of experimentation, the owner of a home in northeastern New Jersey stopped maintaining his modest lawn on synthetic fertilizers and pesticides and, like growing numbers of suburban householders, went organic instead.
At the end of that first year, as described in these pages on Aug. 27, 1991, the lawn appeared lusher and healthier than it had 12 months earlier.
It was also different: nature will not be denied once given free rein, and assorted broadleaf plants had jumped in to mix with the grass.
Some were weeded out.
Others, especially clover, pleased the eye and were allowed to flourish.
The resulting appearance, typical of many organic lawns, has since been described generically as "brocade rather than velvet" by Dr.
Vivienne N. Armentrout, a lawn consultant in Ann Arbor, Mich.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; 'Did Not!' and 'Did So!' Frame the Tax Debate
As the choice between Bill Clinton and George Bush moves this week toward the traditional Labor Day opener of the general election race, it is clear that earlier fears were overstated.
The 1992 Presidential election will not degenerate entirely into a cheap, shallow, demagogic discussion on such issues as the parenting skills of Woody Allen and the party affiliation of God.
While that sort of thing will remain a secondary subject of dialogue, the primary focus will be a debate on the economic future of America.


Aspirin Found to Act in Spinal Cord
A NEW study shows that aspirin relieves pain in part by blocking communication between certain nerves in the spinal cord.
The finding overturns the 20-year-old understanding that the most commonly used pain remedy works only at the place of injury rather than through the central nervous system.


The Days of a Scavenger Amid the Rubble
It was 92 degrees at noon Saturday, the fifth day after Hurricane Andrew.
Ronald Bruscia maneuvered his van around mounds of brush and tangles of fallen power line.
Shards of glass flew from his shattered windshield as he drove toward a friend's house that had collapsed during the storm.
The friend had offered 50 gallons of gasoline in exchange for help in moving, and Mr.
Bruscia was eager for the trade.
In the wake of the storm, he and his girlfriend, Pamela Jones, had become eager scavengers and barterers, bound to their neighbors, relatives and even strangers by good will and mutual desperation.


Dominican Immigration Alters Hispanic New York
Jackie Saltares remembers a time not that long ago when the Puerto Ricans were the undisputed kings of Hispanic New York and Spanish Harlem was the spiritual and physical center of their realm.
El Barrio, the neighborhood, was home to thousands of Puerto Ricans who settled into cramped walk-up apartments on the narrow side streets and who bustled along the wide shopping avenues, eager if weary travelers on the road to the American Dream.


By Design; Fasten Your Belts
Fashion is getting back into shape.
The silhouette for fall is long and lean, with an emphasis on the waistline.
That puts belts in the spotlight.
Not just any belts, but wide belts with chunky hardware, the more the better.
Blame it on Chanel, which started a craze for chain belts and has now gone to extremes with triple chains, with leather belts that drip rows of chains and with linked brass plates etched with "Coco," "5," "Paris" and other words associated with Chanel.
Bloomingdale's has them at prices starting at $870 and climbing to four figures.


Giants' Anderson, Reasons Are Gone But Not Forgotten
The Giants reached the 47-man roster limit today by waiving 16 players, including 35-year-old Ottis Anderson and 30-year-old Gary Reasons, who both helped them win two Super Bowls.
But on the National Football League's final cutdown day, what you see is not always what you get.
Anderson, the oldest running back in pro football, is almost sure to be re-signed this week, probably on Tuesday or Wednesday.
He would be ready to play Sunday in the season opener against the San Francisco 49ers.


As Striped Bass Run, L.I. Baymen and Sportsmen Fight
Fishing season for striped bass, prized by both recreational and commercial fishermen, begins this week amid a bitter dispute between Long Island baymen and sportsmen over new state fishing rules.
The baymen, or commercial fishermen, who say their survival depends on the high price the tasty fish bring, are limited by the regulations to less than 10 percent of this year's catch.
The rest is allotted to recreational fishermen, who want to end commercial catches altogether by having the state declare the striped bass a game fish.
They say the bass population has been threatened by the baymen's netting practices.


Sam Stickler, 37, Dies; Supervisor of Musicals
Sam Stickler, the production supervisor for "Les Miserables" and other Broadway shows, died on Monday in Albany.
He was 37 years old and lived in Oak Hill, N.Y.
He died of AIDS, said Marc Thibodeau, a spokesman for "Les Miserables."


Texan Wins U.S. Amateur
Exhibiting some of the qualities of a seasoned pro, 20-year-old Justin Leonard easily defeated Thomas Scherrer, 8 and 7, this afternoon to win the 92d United States Amateur championship.
On the only occasion the 36-hole final of the event has been played on a Monday, Leonard, a native of Dallas who is a junior at the University of Texas, joined Billy Maxwell and Scott Verplank as the only players from his home state to win the sport's most important amateur championship.


Preparations Before the Parade Can Pass By


For Ferraro, Cheers of '84 Are Still Resonating
They had made this pilgrimage once before, grandmother and 11-year-old granddaughter, heading off together to a political rally to get a glimpse at living history, at Geraldine A. Ferraro, the first woman to be nominated by a major party for the Vice Presidency.
That was in 1984.
Since then, Wendy Fresn has grown old enough to vote.
Her grandmother, Florence R. Corron, broke down political barriers herself, becoming, as she puts it, the "first and only" woman to be elected a Town Supervisor in Clinton County.
She's still serving strong at age 70.


Guatemala Peace Moves Need Support
To the Editor:
Any human-rights movement, however tentative, between the Guatemalan Government and the guerrillas is good news ("Guatemalan Rivals in Rights Accord," news article, Aug. 9).
I traveled to Guatemala in a Witness for Peace delegation last month and met with a variety of human rights activists and campesinos.
According to people I talked with, the military and Government are carrying out a bloody campaign of repression against indigenous people.
For many campesinos, the civil defense patrols have come to be the symbol of repression, dominance and control by the Government over their lives.


Research Head Quits Biogen To Join Start-Up Company
Vicki L. Sato, the top research manager at Biogen Inc., has resigned to take a similar job at Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc., a start-up company just down the street from the Cambridge, Mass., biotechnology pioneer.
Biogen's shares fell 75 cents in over-the-counter trading yesterday, to $22.75; Vertex's shares, which are also traded over-the-counter, rose 50 cents, to $9.50.
Analysts said the decline in Biogen reflected general weakness in the biotechnology sector as well as the loss of Ms.
Sato.


The Ad Campaign: Holtzman Striking Back


Montana Will Miss 4 Games
Quarterback Joe Montana, who missed most of training camp and the entire exhibition schedule, will be placed on the injured-reserve list Tuesday, requiring him to miss the San Francisco 49ers' regular-season opener Sunday against the Giants, Coach George Seifert said today.
It will mark the second time in two seasons that the 36-year-old Montana has begun the season on injured reserve.
He will not be eligible to return until the 49ers' fifth game of the season, which also puts him out of a Sept. 20 date against the Jets.
The earliest he could be back is Oct. 4 against the Los Angeles Rams.


Family Values and the K.K.K.
I entered a time warp recently while listening to a tape recording of a political rally in May 1963.
The 29-year-old celebrations of "family values" playing in my earphones were strangely similar to the sentiments expressed at the Republican National Convention two weeks ago.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Alejandro Henriquez, who was found guilty of killing a 10-year-old girl and two women, misstated the first name of the Bronx District Attorney.
He is Robert T. Johnson.


CHRONICLE
The Rev.
DONALD E. WILDMON is known for his verbal attacks on MTV, artists like Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano, the rap group 2 Live Crew and magazines like Penthouse and Playboy.
Now the range of Mr.
Wildmon's offensive against mainstream television has been described in a report in the Sept. 5 issue of TV Guide.
"So what is on Wildmon's current hit list? Just about everything but the evening news," writes CLAUDIA DREIFUS, naming some of the programs: "Roseanne," "Major Dad," "Coach," "L.A. Law," "The Simpsons," "Knots Landing," "Wings," "Beverly Hills 90210," "Homefront," "The Wonder Years" and "Designing Women."


A Word Is Misspoken, And 2 Stocks Get Hot
Investors heard a curious merger "announcement" Friday night, when the money manager Mario Gabelli said on "Wall Street Week" that BHC Communications, a broadcast company, would "merge with United Television, which hasn't been announced," adding, "I'll make the formal announcement now."
The weekly television program on the Public Broadcasting Service, which puts its viewership at 10 million, often moves stock prices as its core audience of small investors acts on Monday morning.


Global Issues Weigh on Town As Factory Heads to Mexico
When the red brick buildings on Main Street were new eight decades ago, and the autos were bulky, black and few, a local steel company brought hundreds of low-wage workers here to upstate New York from Italy and the Ukraine rather than pay more to local workers.
Today, the steel company has long since closed and a rainbow of sleeker vehicles cruises Main Street.
But once again a big local employer, this time the Smith Corona Corporation, is looking for cheap foreign labor.


Messner Vetere Partner to Retire
Wally Carey, a partner and founder at Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer in New York, says he will retire from advertising, effective Sept. 15.
Mr.
Carey, 52 years old, is one of the four original partners who in 1986 founded Messner Vetere, which has grown to an estimated $210 million in billings.
He is also known for his work for the Tuesday Team, which created President Reagan's re-election advertising in 1984.


Boston Bank Will Acquire Savings Unit
The carving up of the Connecticut banking market by larger banks moved ahead yesterday as the Bank of Boston agreed to acquire the Society for Savings, Hartford, in a stock deal worth about $200 million.
The merger is a signal that both Society, a savings bank with $2.8 billion of assets, and the Bank of Boston, with $32 billion in assets, have weathered the downturn of the region's economy and real estate market, and are now healthy enough to consider long-range prospects, not just solving immediate problems.


Mystery Man Pushing the Pawns
The Yugoslav economy, never the world's strongest, has collapsed during the civil war of recent months.
But one pugnacious businessman has continued to wheel and deal at a furious pace, culminating with his bold financing of the scheduled comeback of the United States chess genius Bobby Fischer against his old rival Boris Spassky in this Adriatic resort not far from the fighting.
In the remnants of Yugoslavia, now a cash-only economy where anything goes, Jezdimir Vasiljevic is known as the "mystery man." He appears to enjoy the title.
"I like to be mysterious," he said, pulling hard on a cigarette and mopping the sweat from his brow, "because I like to keep people guessing." Asked about his net worth, all he will say is "millions," adding coyly that his group's sales now amount to about $3 billion a year.  'A Believer in Money'
Officially, Mr.
Vasiljevic is the owner of a recently established private bank-cum-trading company called Jugoskandic, whose interests include the horse racing track in Belgrade and a large shipping company.
Unofficially, he has his hand in just about everything.


Waiting for Clinton, Democrats Hold Up Court Confirmations
In the latest battle in the war for ideological control of the Federal courts, the Democrats who control the Senate have begun to delay confirming some of President Bush's nominees for major judgeships to preserve the vacancies for Gov.
Bill Clinton to fill if he is elected President.
The action is the outcome of a sharp behind-the-scenes debate in which many Democrats have argued that the Senate should go further and stop approving any of Mr.
Bush's judicial nominations in the waning months of an election year.


NEIMAN MARCUS TO SHIP ONLY BY FEDERAL EXPRESS
Taking special delivery services one step further, the Neiman Marcus Group's mail-order division has hired the Federal Express Corporation to make all of its deliveries at no additional charge to customers.
The change in shipping, which will begin on Sept. 14 with the introduction of the Neiman Marcus Christmas Book, will reduce domestic delivery times to two days, compared with the five to seven days required when the company has used ground carriers to deliver its goods.


Chess
When the exhibition match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky begins tomorrow in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia, the overwhelming object of interest will be the quality of Fischer's play.
Can he shake off the rust of a long layoff from formal competition?
Can he regain the incredible power he displayed 20 years ago in Reykjavik, Iceland, when he ended 24 years of Soviet dominance by defeating Spassky and taking his title?
It would be a miracle, yet who can say?
He may just be able to muster enough strength to earn a rank among the leading title challengers of today.


Administration's Aid Plans
These are among the hurricane-relief initiatives announced by the Bush Administration today:
Schools -- To aid some 40,000 youths whose schools were damaged, the Education Department is providing a $40 million emergency grant to local school districts to bus children to alternative schools.
Colleges -- The Administration will give $5 million to three colleges and universities in Miami and Dade County to repair damaged buildings and will send teams to each school to help arrange loans, grants and housing for students.
Elderly -- The Department of Health and Human Services said it would spend $200,000 in emergency money to provide housing, meals and other basic needs for the elderly.
Health -- The Public Health Service has sent a preventive-medicine unit to Florida to cope with water purity and mosquito-control problems.
The Public Health Service has dispatched 400 disaster medical assistance experts.
Government benefits -- The Social Security Administration said it would staff all post offices in storm areas to insure that all Social Security and Supplemental Security Income checks are distributed "in a timely manner." Direct-deposit checks will continue to be sent as usual and an "alternative method of transfer" will be established for banks destroyed by the storm.
The Treasury Department said Railroad Retirement Board pensions, Veterans Administration benefits and Office of Personnel Management checks would be delivered by Sept. 1, on time.


Snowflakes In August And Mice Of All Sizes
Mice are everywhere.
There are little ones playing tag out on the grass near the parking lot, watched by a baby sitter speaking into a walkie-talkie.
Inside, a few larger mice dressed in what could pass for union suits mill about looking distinctly bored.
A minuscule rabbit totters off to the bathroom, his tiny paw grasped tightly by the much larger hand of a crew member as they negotiate their way through a sea of electrical wires.
A call goes out for someone to sweep snowflakes off the set.
It is winter in August.
Then the camera moves in once more on "The Nutcracker."
Due for release by Warner Brothers in the winter of 1993, the film of the George Balanchine ballet stars Macaulay Culkin as the Nutcracker Prince.
A few shots of the Christmas tree growing high up over the Victorian living room of the Stahlbaum family were overseen by George Lucas's Industrial Light and Magic Company.
But those were the production's only concessions to Hollywood glamour.


Panama's New Police Force Under Fire
Every morning at daybreak, 246 bright, obedient young men and women jump off their narrow cots and launch into the calisthenics that begin another day in their training to become career police officers for Panama's developing democracy.
The hot and humid camp at Gamboa, in buildings that were once part of the vast American military installations lining the Panama Canal, presents an orderly picture of a country trying to modernize police work and build an effective, democratic justice system.


Courier Is Forced To Work At Night
Jim Courier, who hasn't won a tournament since he won the French Open in June, didn't look as if he was ready to win the United States Open last night.
He should even consider himself lucky to have survived the first round.
The world's top-ranked player struggled mightily late into the night against an old friend, 185th-ranked Alex O'Brien, the 1992 National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, before escaping with a 4-6, 6-1, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5) victory in 3 hours 20 minutes on the chilly, windy Stadium Court.
Junior Rivals


White Supremacist Surrenders After 11-Day Siege
Randy Weaver, a white supremacist whose defiance of the law made him a hero to hate groups in the West, surrendered to the authorities today, ending an 11-day siege at his mountaintop cabin in the woods of north Idaho.
The standoff, which began with two days of gunfire that killed Mr.
Weaver's 13-year-old son, Samuel, his wife, Vicki, and a deputy United States marshal, William F. Degan, ended early this afternoon without a shot being fired.


Fugitive Told Of Search, Police Say
Police wiretaps indicate that a Queens bar employee who was a fugitive for six weeks in the killing of an off-duty Housing Authority police officer was being told details of the police search for him, law-enforcement authorities said yesterday.
They said they were seeking to determine if a detective familiar with the case leaked the information.


Just How Super Are These Stations?
Back in 1987, John McMullen, the owner of the Houston Astros, produced a video for his fellow major league baseball owners.
It was an advocacy piece in the style of "60 Minutes," with an anchorman interviewing critics of superstations like the Tribune Company's WGN and Ted Turner's WTBS, whose broadcasts of Cubs and Braves games are beamed to cable systems nationwide.
The video was a slick 30 minutes of propaganda that featured graphics such as ones comparing the modest markets club owners "paid dearly for" compared with the entire nation evil superstations staked out as their realm -- without paying their full share!


Rangers Sign a Bourque, but They Don't Get the Big-Name One
The Rangers, who haven't won the Stanley Cup since 1940, continue to add players who have enjoyed that experience recently.
Yesterday, they signed the best available Bourque, Phil from Pittsburgh, who is no relation to Ray Bourque, the superstar defenseman of the Boston Bruins.
Phil Bourque played for the Penguins' Stanley Cup teams for the last two seasons.
On the Rangers, he joins Mark Messier, Adam Graves and Jeff Beukeboom, all of whom played for championship teams in Edmonton, and Randy Gilhen, who got his ring with Pittsburgh in 1991.


Some Silver Linings for the Dollar
There could be some good news for the American bond market in the serious troubles that are facing the bond markets in Europe.
It is possible that the outcome of a French referendum on European currency unity could mean lower interest rates there.
And that would help stem the decline of the dollar, whose recent fall to record lows against the German mark has, at least temporarily, stalled the bond rally here.


Oregon Health Plan Is Unfair to the Disabled
To the Editor:
While the Administration is firmly committed to encouraging innovation in state health care programs such as the one submitted to the Department of Health and Human Services by Oregon, it cannot approve proposals that would allow for discrimination.
I recently urged Oregon to submit a revised application for a proposal to change its Medicaid program, commonly referred to as the "Oregon waiver," which would address our concerns.
Gov.
Barbara Roberts of Oregon criticizes our withholding of approval (Op-Ed, Aug. 11).
Many features of Oregon's proposal are innovative and would have the beneficial result of extending health care coverage to low-income people, including those with disabilities.
In addition, the proposal emphasizes preventive health care.
I strongly support these goals.


Daily News to Seek 10 Percent Pay Cut
The management of The Daily News announced yesterday that it would ask a bankruptcy judge to approve a 10 percent across-the-board wage cut on Sept. 13 if the bankrupt paper's unions cannot agree on a buyer by then.
James P. Willse, the publisher of The News, said in a statement that the cut would be necessary to prevent the paper from running out of money.
Mr.
Willse also indicated that the threat of a wage cut is intended to break "the logjam" in finding a buyer, a process which has been frustrated by union disagreement.


Review/Fashion; Lighthearted Elegance In Resort Collections
At a time when many fashion designers admit that most women's attitudes toward fashion are as sluggish as the economy, the leaders have produced fresh, lively party clothes that may turn things around.
The best of these styles have a lot of movement and swing -- there's nothing like a swirling panel or a rustling petticoat to stir up enthusiasm.
Every designer has his own approach.
Geoffrey Beene alternates his sculptural dresses with multilayered full skirts so light they seem buoyed by air.
Arnold Scaasi's entire collection is a flower garden of tropical as well as sedate English blooms.
Bill Blass revives the comfortably loose caftan and brings it up to date by adding a pair of pants.
Oscar de la Renta turns out the ball gowns his customers still demand, but makes them as easy to wear as play clothes.


Scientists Find Bones Of a Dinosaur Embryo
PALEONTOLOGISTS have discovered the partial skeleton of a 150-million-year-old dinosaur embryo that when intact was less than nine inches long.
The remains of the unhatched Camptosaurus shows the early bone structure of a plant-eating dinosaur that usually grew to be about 25 feet long.
The first documented fossil of a Camptosaurus embryo, the find was made in Utah at the Morrison Formation of Dinosaur National Monument.


Not Quite the Season


Medco Plans a 2d Deal: It Will Buy Diagnostek
Medco Containment Services Inc., the nation's largest mail-order drug company, announced yesterday that it would acquire Diagnostek Inc., a drug distributor that recently disappointed investors, in an exchange of stock valued at about $436 million.
Diagnostek shares jumped 60 percent on the news, gaining $6.125 each, to $16.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Medco Containment declined $1.625, to $28.25, in over-the-counter trading.


Dwain Tedford, 54; Booked Performers At Many Jazz Clubs
Dwain Tedford, a booker for jazz clubs, died on Sunday in Lubbock, Tex.
He was 54 years old.
Mr. Tedford died of a brain tumor, his business partner, John Condon, said.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Argentine Wins English Open
Vicente Fernandez of Argentina made a 75-foot birdie putt on the final hole to win the English Open yesterday in Sutton Coldfield, England.
The 46-year-old Fernandez shot a three-under-par 69 to capture his fifth victory in 22 years on the PGA European Tour with a five-under 283 total on The Belfry course.
Sweden's Fredrik Lindgren and Per-Ulrik Johansson closed with 73's to tie for second.
England's Barry Lane shot a 68 to finish fourth at 285. (AP) CYCLING  Huebner Takes Another Title
Michael Huebner of Germany overpowered the field yesterday in the world cycling championships in Valencia, Spain, and won his second professional match sprint title in three years.
Huebner breezed through quarterfinal and semifinal races and then won two final head-to-head sprints against Frederic Magne of France, who finished second.
Eric Schoefs of Belgium took the bronze medal.
The match sprint is a three-lap race in which riders usually use the first two laps to jockey for position -- often almost standing still -- before going all out in the final loop around the banked track. (AP)


Knicks' Jackson Going to Clippers? Just One Obstacle
A proposed three-way deal involving the Knicks, the Los Angeles Clippers and the Orlando Magic has been blocked by center Stanley Roberts of the Magic, who is invoking his contractual right to reject a trade.
According to several National Basketball Association front-office people familiar with the negotiations, the Knicks had agreed to trade Mark Jackson, their starting point guard, to the Clippers in exchange for forward Charles Smith, point guard Doc Rivers and shooting guard Bo Kimble.
The Knicks had also agreed to send two first-round draft picks (1993 and 1997) to Orlando.
Roberts would have gone to Los Angeles, and the Clippers would have sent a first-round draft choice to Orlando.


France Is Stepping Up Campaign To Build Support for Unity Vote
The French Government, which has long fought to build a strong and united European Community, is suddenly facing a rebellion among ordinary French voters who are threatening to reject an ambitious treaty on European union in a referendum here in September.
Hailed by its authors as a watershed in modern European history, the treaty contemplates creating a single currency and adopting common foreign and security policies with a view to turning the community into an economic -- and even political -- superpower by the end of the century.


Hyenas' Hormone Flow Puts Females in Charge
BY popular reputation, hyenas are repulsive scavengers, their coats a mass of mange, their mouths rabidly agape, their laugh-like calls psychotic in pitch.
So it is a splendid surprise to discover, upon visiting a research colony of spotted hyenas sequestered in pens on the hills of Berkeley, that the beast is in fact a beauty, a creature every bit as baronial as that more celebrated carnivore, the lion.
Its espresso-brown face is at once tender and strong, familiar and alien, combining a bit of bear, a hint of snow leopard, even a flicker of harbor seal.
Its rear legs are considerably shorter than its front, a body plan that allows it to run extremely long distances in pursuit of its prey, and its chest and neck are a mesh of dense muscles, powering a jaw that can easily crush the skull of a large antelope.


Imprisoned China Pro-Democrats Charge Torture
Pro-democracy campaigners imprisoned in northeast China have smuggled out a letter in which they charge that they are are often beaten, shocked with electric cattle prods and forced to work 12 or more hours a day making matchboxes.
The letter, which was made public today by Asia Watch, a division of Human Rights Watch, accuses prison officials of torturing some political prisoners so severely that they passed out.
It also says the officials often call on common criminals to beat and humiliate the pro-democracy prisoners.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  FRENCH DISSENSION ON UNITY  France is facing a rebellion among voters who are threatening to reject a treaty on European union in a referendum this month.
Fears over the treaty's fate come at a time when faith in a prosperous Europe has given way to pessimism.
A1  U.S.
TO BUY RUSSIAN URANIUM  The U.S. said it had agreed in principle to buy billions of dollars' worth of bomb-grade uranium to try to bolster Russia's economy and to reduce the risk of nuclear accidents.
The uranium would be diluted for sale as commercial reactor fuel.
A1


Militant Muslim Groups Gain In Lebanese Legislative Vote
Results issued today showed that Muslim fundamentalists widened their gains in the second stage of parliamentary elections, which were held in the capital and adjacent mountain areas.
The majority of Christians have boycotted the polls to protest the continued presence of Syrian troops on Lebanese territory.
Muslim turnout has been heavy in the elections, which are being held on three consecutive Sundays.


To Golan's Israelis, No Land to Give Up
From the roof of the dining hall on this kibbutz, Shmuel Mandel took in the mountainous terrain that gives him pleasure but also sometimes makes him jumpy.
There, Mr.
Mandel saw the ridge of volcanic rock, almost close enough to reach out and grab.
It separates this small community in the northeastern corner of the Golan Heights from the nearest point of the cease-fire line with Syria, just on the other side, maybe two miles away.


Books of The Times; A Real Singer Is the Starting Point for a Novel
Alma By Gordon Burn  210 pages. Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.
The real Alma Cogan, known as "the girl with a chuckle in her voice," was one of Britain's most popular recording stars of the 1950's.
England's answer to Doris Day, she sang and chirped her way through hits like "Bell-Bottom Blues," "I Can't Tell a Waltz From a Tango" and "Twenty Tiny Fingers." She hung out with Sammy Davis Jr. and Cary Grant, flew off to the Italian Riviera for weekends and attracted flocks of avid fans.
With the advent of the Beatles and other Mersey-sound groups, however, her career came tumbling to a swift end.
She began doing detergent commercials on television and playing smaller and smaller squalid clubs.
She died of cancer at age 34 in 1966.


Food and Shelter Crises Ease But Diseases Pose Dangers
With food and other supplies flowing into the areas devastated by Hurricane Andrew and temporary housing finally being erected, government and private relief agencies say they now face a new crisis: the breakdown of hygiene, sanitation and normal health care here.
Although the Homestead branch of South Miami Hospital was able to reopen today, the rest of the half-dozen major hospitals in the disaster zone of south Dade County remained closed.
Makeshift clinics have been set up at schools and community centers, but doctors and nurses have been so busy treating the hundreds of injured who have come to them that few of them can spend time on preventive medicine: going into the neighborhoods to tell people how to avoid dysentery, heat prostration, diarrhea and other ailments.


For Nokes, a Losing Night at the Races
When teams play the Brewers, there are no secrets.
Whether they are leading, losing, tied or tired, they run and run.
The Yankees knew the Brewers would run recklessly tonight.
Their job was to stop them.
But stopping base stealers has been a glaring weakness for the Yankees and they failed to cope again tonight as the Brewers raced to two runs in the first inning after pivotal stolen bases and then kept running to a 4-1 victory at County Stadium.


How to Help the Victims of the Hurricane
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations for the hurricane relief effort:
The American Red CrossChecks may be sent to American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10256.
Credit-card donations may be made by calling (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.
AmeriCares The relief agency is transporting supplies to South Florida.
Checks may be sent to AmeriCares, 161 Cherry Street, New Canaan, Conn. 06840.
Telephone: (800) 486-4357.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BECHTEL GROUP INC., San Francisco, announced it was part of a consortium of companies that had been awarded a contract to construct a $245 million office building in Tokyo for Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.
MRS.
FIELDS COOKIES INC., and Pasteleria el Molino S.A., a retail bakery chain in Mexico, announced a multi-unit licensing agreement to open 50 Mrs.
Fields Cookies stores in Mexico over a five-year period.


Bridge
Play in the NEC World Team Championship was delayed this afternoon when an argument erupted between France and Sweden over the acceptability of a Swedish bidding method.
Subject to further committee discussion, the standings in their group were: 1.
Netherlands 504; 2.
United States 495; 3.
Turkey 488; 4.
France 478; 5.
Sweden 465.
With three rounds of play remaining, it seems certain that the Americans, who scored 46 out of a possible 50 this afternoon, will qualify for playoffs beginning Wednesday.
In the other open group the position was less clear: 1.
Poland 445; 2.
Denmark 440; 3.
Hong Kong and Austria, each 435; 5.
Israel 428: 6.
Egypt 423.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile; The Clinton Team's 'Utility Infielder' Is Becoming a Major-League Hitter
At 6 A.M., George Stephanopoulos arrives at work in his red Honda, sliding into a prime parking space behind the former Arkansas Gazette newspaper building that now houses the Clinton for President campaign.
In the next 14 hours, at least, which is a typical work day for Mr.
Stephanopoulos, he will help write speeches, approve paid commercials, stroke the egos of elected officials or try to shape the reports by the press.
His title is communications director, but his tasks can be as varied as the needs.
Mr.
Stephanopoulos is perhaps the most broadly powerful force in Gov.
Bill Clinton's organization right now.


A Hobbling Hector Is Dropped by the Jets But He Could Be Back
Running back Johnny Hector was not surprised that he was one of the 12 players cut by the Jets today.
He saw it coming.
He also isn't sad, because there's still an outside chance that he could return to the team.
Besides Hector, the players waived by the Jets as the team got down to a mandatory 47-man roster were quarterback Troy Taylor, cornerback Tony Stargell, guard Mike Haight, defensive tackle Bill Pickel, safety R. J. Kors, linebackers Rickey Andrews and Troy Johnson, tight end Pat Beach, receiver Reggie Moore, running back Leroy Kinard and defensive end Wayne Wicka.
Kicker Raul Allegre was waived on Friday.


Executive Changes
ADVANCED PROMOTION TECHNOLOGIES INC., Deerfield Beach, Fla., appointed John H. Newhall president and chief operating officer.
AT&amp; T AMERICAN TRANSTECH INC., Jacksonville, Fla., an information and marketing services unit of A.T.&amp; T., appointed Monica Mehan president and chief executive.


Judge Temporarily Halts Tests At Medical-Waste Incinerator
A judge yesterday ordered a temporary halt to testing of a new medical-waste incinerator in the South Bronx, a decision community groups hope will help in their fight against a project they say would endanger residents' health.
Preliminary testing of the $20 million plant, in the largely industrial Port Morris section, began on July 3.
But the judge, Howard R. Silver of State Supreme Court in the Bronx, issued a temporary restraining order, saying the 18-week testing period must halt within 48 hours, pending a full hearing Sept. 10.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about the book "Stanford White's New York" misstated the year when Henry Villard asked White to design a home for him on Madison Avenue.
It was 1882.


Suffolk Increases Financing for Its College
In its first action on spending for the coming fiscal year, the Suffolk County Legislature today let stand an $818,492 increase in the county's contribution to its community college.
Critics said the increase, the maximum allowed under a county law that caps rises in annual spending at 4 percent, would mean higher property taxes.


A Foreign Legion for the World
The U.S.
Cavalry has finally arrived in Somalia, bringing food and sympathy to a people beset by civil war and famine.
Four big American transport planes packed with bags of rice and beans shuttle from an airlift base in Kenya, with 500 American soldiers ready to protect food deliveries in turbulent regions of Somalia.
President Bush deserves much credit for mounting this hazardous humanitarian mission.
More than a million civilians are at risk, their haunting desperation evident in unfocused, staring eyes.
But when will Mr.
Bush gather the political courage to say what this specific Somalia operation demonstrates about a larger problem -- that the world needs a permanent, multinational cavalry on call for just such emergencies?


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Attorney General Robert Abrams campaigning in Riverdale misstated his wife's first name.
It is Diane.


Connors Aiming to Celebrate Twice
New York City will sing "Happy Birthday" to Jimmy Connors tomorrow night on the Stadium Court of the National Tennis Center.
It will be his 40th, and what a coincidence that his first-round match with Jaime Oncins of Brazil happened to fall on it.


Israel Releases Palestinian Prisoners in a Good-Will Gesture


Mets' Streak Fades In 14th
The streak did not end quickly or painlessly.
Not for the Mets.
This one was long and miserable and about as bad as Manager Jeff Torborg could have imagined.
Torborg spent most of Sunday and yesterday sweating out his roster moves and his pitching decisions -- how to make room on the roster for another starter, how to shore up his bullpen, how, basically, to survive last night's doubleheader against the Atlanta Braves with a room full of tired arms.


Envoy Urges Stronger Role for U.N. Forces in Bosnia
A United Nations envoy called today for the Security Council to send more peacekeeping soldiers to Bosnia and Herzegovina and give them new powers to counter abuses including the practice known as "ethnic cleansing" that has made refugees of scores of thousands of Bosnians, mainly Muslims.
The envoy, former Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki of Poland, said the United Nations peacekeepers were powerless to prevent the "massive and grave violations of human rights occurring throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina."


With Computers' Help, Cable TV Serves Up Music Videos a la Carte
Def American Recordings was struggling to get airplay for Sir Mix-A-Lot's rap number "Baby Got Back," a paean to black women's posteriors.
So it sent the song's music video to the Box, the cable network that lets television viewers select, by telephone, the music videos they want broadcast into their homes.
The record zoomed into the Box's Top 10 in the first week, and a few months later was at No. 1 on Billboard's pop singles chart for several weeks.
"Baby Got Back" has now sold more than a million copies.


'We're Still Open,' Florida Tells Tourists
Even without the assistance of its agency, the Florida Division of Tourism wasted no time in urging tourists not to put off plans to visit the state despite the damage caused by Hurricane Andrew.
"We had to take a proactive position," said Gary Stogner, a tourism spokesman in Tallahassee.
It was important, he added, to address public perceptions that the storm damaged an area far larger than the portions of Dade County that it ruined.


No Headline
When it's like Russia or something, then Bush is there right away.
But here we are nothing.
We just sat here Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.
Nothing.
I bet George Bush eats some of the tomatoes we pick.
But where was he? -- DOMINGO TORRES, a 29-year-old field hand in South Florida.  [ A12:2. ]


Business and Health; Managed Care: Is It Effective?
TRYING to slow the rise in health-care costs, American employers spent some $13 billion last year for managed-care services.
But national spending on health continued to grow at double-digit rates, leading some experts to question the effectiveness of managed care.
Managed care typically includes a review of each case before agreeing to pay for treatment.
The payers often also encourage patients to use networks of hospitals and doctors to meet cost- and quality-related standards of care, often at discounts.


California's Lead on Health
California's sullen two-month budget crisis has overshadowed a proud legislative victory on health care reform.
The state legislature has just passed a bill that would provide every Californian affordable medical insurance through a reform known as managed competition.
The bill creates a commission to work out details that would be presented to the legislature in 1994.
Gov.
Pete Wilson must now decide whether to sign the bill.
He has taken no position on its merits, but he is a Republican.
The bill's author, John Garamendi, is the State Insurance Commissioner and an ambitious Democrat who might well desire Mr.
Wilson's job.
It would not be surprising if the Governor looked hard for reasons to veto the bill.


No Coke Comment On 2 Reports
Coca-Cola U.S.A. said yesterday that it would not comment on reports this week in Advertising Age and Adweek about a forthcoming major change in ad themes for Diet Coke.
Both publications reported that Lintas New York, the Diet Coke agency, would introduce "Taste it all" as the brand's theme.
The current theme, "Just for the taste," is a bobtailed version of the original Diet Coke theme from 1982, "Just for the taste of it."


In a Migrant Labor Camp, Relief Is Slow and Chaotic
For a week, the migrant workers and field hands in the spartan Everglades Labor Camp four miles west of this farming center found themselves at the end of the relief lines, ignored and isolated as they battled hunger, thirst and then the weekend's rains.
Time and again, an ambulance or police car would stop, residents said today, scan quickly for life-threatening emergencies, then drive on again to tend to other problems, leaving the impoverished community to fend for itself.


Subway Cars Pass Inspections for Welds
Transit Authority officials said yesterday that a faulty weld in a subway car was to blame for a weekend fire, but they said a quick inspection of nearly 500 other cars found no signs of similar problems.
On Saturday, a 20-pound control box fell off the bottom of a subway car on the uptown No. 5 train, starting a fire that injured 13 people and delayed traffic for more than an hour for passengers on the East Side.


Using God as a Cudgel
President Bush's attempt to portray the Republicans as holier than the Democrats has now drawn the rebuke it deserves from the National Council of Churches.
In a letter to the White House, the Council asserts that invoking God's name for political purposes is blasphemous.
The Council's words are timely.
Mr.
Bush would do well to heed them -- and rein in his political confederates as well, including the increasingly shrill Pat Robertson.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
R.H.
Macy announced plans to shore up its operations.
The preliminary plan that was sketched out was Macy's first public acknowledgement that its problems go far beyond excessive debt.
Four of the six strategies, which were presented to creditors last week, go to the heart of the way the bankrupt retailer merchandises and markets itself, indicating that the problems will take more time to fix than analysts had expected.  [ Page D1. ]
A "merger announcement" from Mario Gabelli, a money manager, on the TV show "Wall Street Week," sent shares of BHC Communications and United Television up in early trading, but their gains were trimmed later in the day.  [ D1. ]
Boeing promoted Philip M. Condit to president, and he was widely viewed as heir apparent to Frank Shrontz, the aircraft maker's 60-year-old chairman.  [ D1. ]
Bank of Boston agreed to acquire Society for Savings, Hartford, in a stock deal worth about $200 million, furthering the carving up of the Connecticut banking market by larger banks.  [ D3. ]
Biogen shares fell 75 cents on Nasdaq to $22.75 after Vicki L. Sato, a 44-year-old former Harvard biology professor said she would leave the company, where she was the top research manager, for a similar job at Vertex Pharmaceuticals, a Cambridge start-up company.
Its shares rose 50 cents, to $9.50.  [ D3. ]
Medco Containment Services announced a $436 million agreement to acquire Diagnostek Inc., a drug distributor that recently disappointed investors, through an exchange of stock.  [ D3. ]
Meyer Blinder was sentenced to 46 months in prison on Federal charges of racketeering and securities fraud.
The 70-year-old founder of a Colorado penny-stock brokerage firm was convicted of bilking thousands of investors of millions of dollars.  [ D3. ] International
Cortland, N.Y., where Smith Corona is laying off 875 of its 1,300 workers before moving its typewriter manufacturing operations to Mexico, is feeling the pinch that other communities may suffer under a North American Free Trade Agreement.  [ A1. ]
The U.S. said it had agreed in principle to buy billions of dollars' worth of bomb-grade uranium from retired Soviet nuclear arms in a bid to bolster the shaky economy of the former Soviet Union and to reduce the risk of nuclear accidents and theft.  [ A1. ] The Economy
Sales of new homes slipped 2.6 percent in July to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 563,000 units, the Commerce Department said, despite cheaper mortgage rates and a median price of $115,000, which was down sharply from June.  [ D5. ] Markets
The Dow industrials fell 10.26 points to close at 3,257.35 in a late selloff, ending a streak of four winning sessions.  [ D6. ]
The Treasury bond market was little changed ahead of the Labor Day weekend, as investors focused attention on European markets and the outlook for the dollar.  [ D13. ]
The dollar declined in uneventful trading, while the mark and the Swiss franc benefited from a move to quality.  [ D14. ]  Energy futures prices extended their recent strong gains.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
The effectiveness of managed care is being questioned as a means of slowing the rise of health- care costs.
The Congressional Budget Office says it appears not "to have affected systemwide costs." Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
Shares of restaurant companies have held their own after a banner 1991.
Despite the recession, Americans are spending 43 cents of every food dollar eating out.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
Time Warner Cable's New York 1 News plans competition for broadcast TV's local newscasts, eschewing their sensationalism and accent on crime news.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D11. ]


Remembering the Music Of Vladimir Horowitz
A monthlong tribute, "Vladimir Horowitz, Remembered and Celebrated," is to feature lectures, concerts, an exhibition of memorabilia and the unveiling of a new oil portrait of the pianist by John Meyer.
Highlights include lectures by Harold C. Schonberg, a former chief music critic of The New York Times and the author of a new biography of Horowitz, and David Dubal, an author, pianist and broadcaster.
The tribute, which is being presented by Steinway &amp; Sons, is to open on Sept. 17 with an invitational symposium entitled "Vladimir Horowitz: The Man and His Music," with Mr.
Schonberg, Schuyler Chapin, Thomas Frost, Franz Mohr and others.
On Oct. 8 Eduardus Halim, a student and protege of Horowitz's, is to give a memorial concert.
An exhibition of Horowitz memorabilia from the Vladimir and Wanda Toscanini Horowitz Archives of Yale University and the Steinway Archives is to be on display from Sept. 17 through Oct. 15.
Also on view is to be the piano that Horowitz played in concerts at the White House and in the Soviet Union and Japan.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Harnischfeger Industries, Brookfield, Wis., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $150 million in debt securities. *
Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp., Los Angeles, is offering $100 million of 10 3/8 percent senior notes due 1999 at 100 through Merrill Lynch.
Callable after five years, the notes are rated Ba-2 by Moody's and BB+ by S.&amp; P. *
National Medical Enterprises Inc.
Santa Monica, Calif., is offering $58.5 million of 7 3/8 percent notes due 1997 at 99.60 to yield 7.472 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P. *
The Procter &amp; Gamble Co., Cincinnati, is offering $100 million of 4 7/8 percent notes due 1995 at a price of 99.761 to yield 4.963 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities Inc.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P. Common Stock  *
Data RaceInc., a San Antonio-based manufacturer of internal data/fax modems for portable computers, has filed for an initial public offering of 1.5 million common shares through Raymond James &amp; Associates, Inc. *
PMC Capital Inc., North Miami Beach, Fla., is offering 2.45 million common shares at $9.75 per share through Fahnestock &amp; Company.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a meeting of the Connecticut Taxpayers Committee rendered the name of a radio commentator incorrectly.
He is Jeff Katz.


Lifetime of Devotion Is Cut Short in a Manhattan Subway Robbery
In the living room of Daniel Bowser's Upper West Side apartment last night, his roommate and two of his friends sat in disbelief, struggling to comprehend that Mr.
Bowser had died so violently only hours earlier as he took the subway home from work.
Mr.
Bowser, who worked as a cook at a Bronx senior citizens center, was riding a southbound B train yesterday afternoon when he was approached by two teen-agers, the transit police said.
Although the sequence of events was unclear last night, Mr.
Bowser, 46 years old, was robbed and shot once in the lower back at 4:35 P.M., somewhere between the 116th and 110th Street stations in Harlem, said a spokesman for the transit police, Albert W. O'Leary.


Dr. Eugene Klein, 82, New York HIP Founder
Dr.
Eugene C. Klein, a founding member of the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York, died on Thursday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of emphysema, his son said.


Winfield Finishes Month With a Bang
Blue Jays 9, White Sox 2
TORONTO, Aug. 31 (AP) -- Dave Winfield hit a three-run homer, giving him a club-record 32 runs batted during a single month, and Todd Stottlemyre threw a five-hitter as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Chicago White Sox, 9-2, tonight.
Winfield, who has driven in 87 runs this season, hit his 23d homer in a four-run fourth inning and surpassed George Bell's mark of 31 runs batted in, set in May 1987.


Lawyer for Ferraro Clears Her on Finances
Geraldine A. Ferraro yesterday released a report that she hoped would defuse her rivals' attacks on her family's business dealings.
The report, by a former Federal judge whom Ms.
Ferraro hired to review her financial affairs, "found no instance in which you aided, or even transacted business with, a person whom you knew or had any reason to know to be associated with organized crime."
But the former judge, Harold R. Tyler, said in an interview that "no such thing could be said" about Ms.
Ferraro's husband, John A. Zaccaro, a landlord in lower Manhattan, who heads a family realty company of which Ms.
Ferraro has long been an officer.


American Children, Too, Don't Get Vaccinations
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 11 article on Dr.
Anatoly Belilovsky, a Russian-born Brooklyn pediatrician who treats immigrant patients, documents the failure of the Soviet medical system to administer antibiotics and vaccinations to children.
You quote him, "I have cabinets filled with charts of kids who didn't get their vaccinations on time."
Plenty of American kids don't get their vaccinations either, on time or ever.
In 1980, 19.3 percent of 2-year-olds had not been fully immunized against polio.
By 1985 this figure had jumped to 23.3 percent, nearly one child in five.
In 1985, 18.3 percent of 2-year-olds had not received full immunization for measles; 22.7 percent for rubella, and 21.1 percent for mumps -- all higher proportions than in 1980, when Ronald Reagan was elected President.
Half of all black preschoolers are not fully immunized.


One Channel Says Crime Doesn't Pay
"There are eight million stories in the Naked City," a stern-voiced announcer said in narrating that police drama set in New York.
The producers of a 24-hour local news cable television channel that begins operations a week from today are painstakingly planning to insure that potential viewers and advertisers will not tune in to eight million stories about crime.
New York 1 News, as Time Warner Cable calls its service, will compete against local newscasts on broadcast television stations that are infused with enough sensationalism to fill a newsstand's worth of tabloids.
Cable television often presents counterprogramming for somewhat younger, more affluent audiences, and New York 1 News will present alternative fare for those seeking information beyond what local newscasters delight in describing as "senseless slayings" -- no doubt to distinguish them from the sensible ones.
Not the Murder Network
"It is not the New York City Murder Channel," Paul Sagan, vice president of news and programming at New York 1 News, asserted during an interview last week at the channel's office at 460 West 42d Street, near 10th Avenue.
The office was bustling with start-up activities, from news anchors rehearsing to sets being built.


Oregon Health Plan Is Unfair to the Disabled; Doesn't Single Out Poor
To the Editor:
"Too-Bitter Medicine" (news analysis, Aug. 5) inaccurately portrays a key provision of the Oregon health plan, which was denied Federal approval by the Bush Administration on Aug. 3.
In citing problems with the proposal, you state, "The plan rationed health care only for poor people enrolled in Medicaid." This is the same mischaracterization made by many critics of the proposal.
The prioritized list of medical procedures, which Oregon's Health Services Commission developed, establishes the minimum set of basic health benefits to which every Oregonian is entitled.
The benefit level for the Medicaid program is tied directly to the minimum benefit level available to working Oregonians through small group insurance reform legislation and an employer mandate.
The plan does not single out the poor.
While almost all health reform proposals talk about developing a set of basic health benefits, Oregon made the mistake of actually doing it in an open, public process.
The Oregon plan is not perfect, but it is better than the Medicaid mess, which funds Cadillac care for a few, while many others don't even receive bus fare.
It is unfortunate the Bush Administration lacked the political courage to back its rhetoric of allowing states to be "laboratories for experimentation" on health policy.
You are correct when you state that the Bush Administration would "prefer to ration care case by case, through myriad decisions made by thousands of individuals, employers, insurers and Federal and state legislators."
Progress for developing a national health care strategy looks bleak under this Administration.
I suggest voters ration their support for President Bush.
JAMES A. CARLSON  Portland, Ore., Aug. 12, 1992
The writer works in the Oregon health-care industry.


Why Not Relocate Flower Market on Pier 40?
To the Editor:
Pier 40, the mammoth square structure extending more than 800 feet into the Hudson River at the foot of West Houston Street in Manhattan, is up for grabs.
On a site exceeding 15 acres, it is a quarter the size of Trump City.
The lease of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey will soon expire.
Options outlined by the New York State-New York City West Side Waterfront Panel range from modifying the building to demolition and constructing 85-foot-high luxury residential towers.
Housing would violate planning developed by the community, and also be in conflict with the Borough President's waterfront plan.
Across West Street from the St.
John's complex that straddles Houston Street, such housing would be a fragment without adequate services, isolated in an industrial area.


Macy Plan Sees Slow Recovery
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company announced yesterday some of its plans to shore up its operations, indicating that the bankrupt retailer will require more time to fix its business than analysts had expected.
The preliminary plan, which was presented to creditors last week, is the first public acknowledgment by Macy that its problems go far beyond excessive debt.
Four of the six strategies it sketched out yesterday went to the heart of the way the company merchandises and markets itself.
Only one -- reducing expenses -- directly addressed the balance sheet.


Sky Beauty Is Dropped From First To Third
Saratoga's rousing five-week racing season came to a prosperous but controversial ending today when the undefeated 2-year-old filly Sky Beauty was disqualified after finishing first in the $200,000 Spinaway Stakes.
The filly, the top-heavy 1-to-5 favorite, was charged with interfering at the very start of the race with the horse in the next lane, Standard Equipment.
So, in a sweeping judgment by the stewards that changed the order of finish of the first four horses, Family Enterprise, who had finished second, was declared the winner.


A's Trade Canseco for Sierra and Two Others
In baseball's second stunning beat-the-deadline trade in five days, the Oakland Athletics last night sent the controversial but colorful Jose Canseco to the Texas Rangers for outfielder Ruben Sierra and pitchers Bobby Witt and Jeff Russell.
Unlike the Mets' trade of David Cone to the contending Toronto Blue Jays last Thursday, this one had the pennant contender, the Athletics, trading away the biggest name in the deal.
But like the Blue Jays, the Athletics acquired a star player, Sierra, who can be a free agent after the season.


Robert N. Kreidler, 62, Is Dead; Headed Charitable Foundation
Robert N. Kreidler, the president of the Charles A. Dana Foundation, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan and on Long Island.
He died after a long illness, said Stephen A. Foster, the vice president of the foundation, but he did not elaborate.


Linguists Debate Study Classifying Language As Innate Human Skill
A STUDY of a deaf child's linguistic abilities is stirring up an ancient debate over the nature of language.
Is the human brain uniquely programmed to make and learn languages or does it simply pick up on ordered structures perceived when a child is first exposed to speech?
The subject, a 9-year-old boy named Simon, is uniquely appropriate for the experiment of asking whether language is learned or innate because he learned an error-riddled form of American Sign Language from his parents, who are also deaf, and a quite different sign language, with different grammatical rules, at his school.
Despite the faulty teaching of American Sign Language, Simon signed the language with correct grammar, which the researchers see as evidence that he was drawing upon innate language ability.


The Talk of Hollywood; After Months of Political Attack, The 'Cultural Elite' Fires Back
It's war!
The entertainment industry, led by television, and Vice President Dan Quayle were in open conflict today in a noisy, angry and even funny clash that has sharply intensified the uneasy political mood in Hollywood.
Although there are, most certainly, some highly visible Republicans in town supporting the re-election of President Bush and Mr.
Quayle, the dispute over "family values," the "cultural elite" and single motherhood has whipped up heavily Democratic Hollywood into an us-versus-them furor.
"I've never seen a time where people have responded this viscerally and taken the attacks so much to heart," said Gary David Goldberg, the creator of "Brooklyn Bridge" and other series.


Q&amp;A
Shutting Out the Wind
Q.
Should doors and windows be left open or shut when a hurricane is approaching, and why?
A.
As a matter of common sense, doors and windows should be kept closed or even boarded up against the rain and wind of a hurricane, said Daniel H. Graf, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University.
Close the curtains, too, so broken glass falls on them, not on people, he said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues: Job Training; President Joins Debate On Retraining Workers
In offering a comprehensive skills and education plan for workers, the Bush Administration has joined in a debate over an issue that has grown in importance during the Presidential campaign.
The Democratic nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton, several months ago outlined an apprenticeship and training proposal that is much more ambitious than the Bush plan.
Still, the Administration's proposal would be a significant expansion of the Government's job training efforts.


The U.S. Open Begins With Peace and Quiet
It felt almost unnatural, but the United States Open got under way at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park yesterday without incident, upset or controversy.
The relative silence at this much-maligned site, where the planes overhead once outnumbered the clouds, made for a swift and uneventful day session.
Except for the ripple of a breeze that made pinpoint play impossible inside the stadium, it was the most languid of beginnings for what usually turns out to be the most raucous of the Grand Slams.


U.S. to Buy Uranium Taken From Bombs Scrapped by Russia
The United States announced yesterday that it had agreed in principle to buy billions of dollars' worth of bomb-grade uranium from scrapped Soviet nuclear arms in an attempt to bolster the shaky Russian economy and to reduce the risks of nuclear accidents or theft.
The agreement, which would require the formal approval of both Governments, calls for highly enriched uranium from Russian nuclear arms to be diluted for sale as commercial reactor fuel.
It would be the first such agreement, and, if approved, would be a major step to reducing the dangers that made the cold war so unnerving.


Sports of The Times; McEnroe, The Bird Of the Open
HE was standing near the tunnel that leads to the Stadium Court of the National Tennis Center, the buzz of the crowd like music to the most sensitive ears in the history of tennis.
"This and Wimbledon are where it's at," said John McEnroe, as another United States Open, perhaps his last, was getting under way.
In the language of professional basketball, another game that stirs McEnroe's warring emotions, the Open and Wimbledon represent the playoffs, the foundation of the sport, circles on the calendars of even the most cynical and battle-scarred.


CHRONICLE
Donning another hat, the actor MICHAEL MORIARTY, best known for his role as Ben Stone, the district attorney in NBC-TV's "Law and Order," will conduct his own symphony for the first time on the opening night of the Bachanalia Festival at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Manhattan.
Mr.
Moriarty's Symphony for String Orchestra received mixed reviews when it was first presented at the St.
Louis Art Museum in 1985.
The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch and Globe-Democrat praised his lyricism and intensity, but both noted that he was a self-taught composer with much to learn.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.28
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.15
5.34
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.24
5.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.11
6.14
7.64
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.40
7.41
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.47
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.36
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about a new General Motors stock issue described the dividends of GM Hughes, a subsidiary of General Motors, incorrectly.
They are paid by General Motors, not the subsidiary.


Police Inquiry Cites Buses For Speeding
Undercover New York State troopers have been secretly riding commercial buses for the last six months in an attempt to catch speeding drivers, more than 100 of whom will soon be summoned to courts, officials said yesterday.
Sixty-six percent of the 201 buses boarded by the troopers exceeded the speed limit by 10 miles per hour or more on part of the trips, said Thomas A. Constantine, the superintendent of the New York State Police.
One bus was traveling 78 m.p.h. in a 55 m.p.h. zone upstate, he said.


Mr. Specter's Deserved Discomfort
Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvanian who seeks a third term this fall, has lived the often-tortuous political life of a "moderate Republican." As the White House moved his party rightward, Mr.
Specter clung to the middle of the road, splitting with his President on civil rights issues and even playing a key role in the 1987 defeat of the Supreme Court nominee Robert Bork.
Now battling for political survival, Mr.
Specter carries the extra baggage of his televised cross-examination last year of Anita Hill, the law professor who accused another Supreme Court nominee, Clarence Thomas, of sexual harassment.
Whether the Senator wins or loses in this close race, he deserves every moment of anguish over the Anita Hill episode.
Mr.
Specter more than proved his party loyalty when he agreed to lead the Republican cross-examination of Ms.
Hill in hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee.
But while claiming to be "not adversarial," he exceeded the call of partisan duty by charging Ms.
Hill with perjury.
The alleged perjury arose when the Senator asked Ms.
Hill whether anyone had ever suggested to her that her complaint alone might be a sufficient "instrument" to persuade Judge Thomas to withdraw his name -- without a full public airing of her charges.
The witness denied such a scheme under repeated questioning.
When she later testified that someone had told her the nominee's withdrawal was a possibility, Mr.
Specter complained that she was changing her story to protect herself against a perjury charge.
There was no inconsistency between the two statements, yet the Senator, invoking his expertise as a former District Attorney, cried perjury anyway.
Oddly, both the Senator and his challenger, Lynn Yeakel, see the issue as overblown by the national media.
No sooner had Mrs.
Yeakel won the Democratic primary with the help of footage from the Thomas hearings than she sought to stress her stands on other issues of interest to women and families.
But that image of Anita Hill on the witness stand still haunts Mr.
Specter's campaign.
As well it should.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  SHIFTING EQUATION IN HISPANIC AREAS
Twenty years ago Hispanic New Yorkers were almost always Puerto Rican.
Now the city is home to ever-increasing numbers of Central and South Americans, particularly Dominicans.
Members of both groups acknowledge that rivalry between them could hinder their intertwined aspirations for power and influence.
A1.
HOW DINKINS WON THE INCINERATOR VOTE
To win City Council approval of Mayor Dinkins's far-reaching garbage-disposal plan last week, the Mayor and his supporters used an old-fashioned divide-and-conquer strategy that took advantage of parochial concerns.
B3.


Observer; Under Deep Cover
George Bush is running as Harry Truman.
Harry Truman did the same thing in 1948.
Ran as Harry Truman.
Afterward he said, "It was a lot easier than I thought it would be."
That was the year everybody said Harry Truman couldn't win.
Since nobody wants to run as a sure loser, Harry Truman naturally toyed with the idea of running as somebody else, but Mrs.
Truman said, "Over my dead body." That's why Harry Truman called Mrs.
Truman "the Boss."


Accounts
*
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, said yesterday that it would resign the Chi-Chi's Mexican Restaurants account after Chi-Chi's said it would review its account.
Although billings were not disclosed, Adweek last week reported them at $9 million to $12 million.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; PRESIDENT TO VIEW RELIEF EFFORTS IN STORM-HIT AREAS
Capping a furious four-day effort to defuse criticism of his response to Hurricane Andrew, President Bush said today that he would return to South Florida and Louisiana on Tuesday to personally review Federal relief programs there.
White House officials said the trip was part of a plan devised last week by Mr.
Bush's new chief of staff and campaign manager, James A. Baker 3d.


Officials Plan Strategies To Combat Car Thieves
Vowing not to be intimidated by young car thieves who strike back at the police with violence, the prosecutors of Union and Essex Counties met today with state law-enforcement officials to discuss ways to combat the increasingly dangerous problem of car theft.
"We're talking about a couple of hundred kids holding the city hostage, and we're not going to walk away from it," the Union County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., said today as he and the Essex County Acting Prosecutor, James F. Mulvihill, left a two-hour meeting with the State Attorney General, Robert J. Del Tufo, and the state Director of Criminal Justice, Robert T. Winter.


U.S. to Buy Uranium Taken From Bombs Scrapped by Russia; Biological-Arms Data
Irritated by Moscow's failure to provide information about its secret biological weapons program, the Bush Administration asked Russia today to demonstrate that it has ended the program.
Administration officials said they did not question the commitment of the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, to end the manufacture or stockpiling of these weapons.
But they said they believed that the political authorities in Moscow were having difficulty getting the Russian military to divulge details about a program that violated the 1972 biological-warfare treaty.


George A. Roeper, 81, Educator in Michigan
George A. Roeper, an educator and founder of the Roeper City and Country School in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., died Aug. 24 in Oakland, Calif.
He was 81 and lived in Oakland.
Mr. Roeper died of pneumonia, said Loiro Zinser, a spokesman for the school.


Market Place; Restaurant Issues Hold Their Own
CONSUMERS may have less money to spend, but dining out is decidedly not out.
According to the National Restaurant Association, the average family spends 43 cents of every food dollar at restaurants.
That number, which includes everything from takeout pizza to meals on airliners, has never been higher.
This year, the group estimates that food service sales will reach $262 billion, up 5.6 percent from the $248 billion spent in 1991.


Rebellion a Factor Keeping Egypt Out of U.S. Air Campaign in Iraq
When President Hosni Mubarak and his advisers considered the reasons for staying out of the American-led air campaign to protect Iraqi Shiites, it was a rebellion in southern Egypt, rather than southern Iraq, that was on their minds.
In recent months, Egyptian officials have grown worried about a sporadic and sometimes violent rebellion in the southern region, known as Upper Egypt for its Nile River topography compared to the lower-lying, northern Nile delta.


To Be Seen and Heard: Modernism in the Arts
The American Symphony Orchestra is to present two concerts this year in cooperation with art exhibitions.
The first, "Surrealism and Music: The Musical World Around Rene Magritte," is to take place at Avery Fisher Hall on Nov. 13 at 7:25 P.M., in conjunction with an exhibition of paintings by Magritte, the Belgian Surrealist, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art from Sept. 12 through Nov. 22.


Volunteers Delivering First Aid In the Ruins
Jim Walker, a lanky paramedic from Leesburg, Fla., held up a hand as a shield against the unrelenting sun this afternoon and called out to the doctor in surgical greens halfway down a block.
"Hey, Doc, I got a pediatric down here with diarrhea," he yelled, referring to 6-month-old boy.


Times Anchors Named For Cable's Local News
New York News 1, Time Warner's all-local-news cable channel, which starts operating around the clock next Tuesday, yesterday announced the anchors for "New York Close-Up," its nightly public affairs program, which is to be produced in association with The New York Times.
They are Joyce Purnick, a Times editorial writer, and Sam Roberts, who writes an urban affairs column for The Metro Section of The Times.
The 45-minute program will be broadcast on Channel 1 on Time Warner's cable systems in New York City at 11:15 P.M.
Sundays through Thursdays.


1992 Emmy Winners --
Drama Series -- "Northern Exposure," CBS
Comedy Series -- "Murphy Brown," CBS


National League Finds It Too Late to Realign in '93
While the National League continues to struggle with a schedule that already is a month overdue, the task has become easier because it has become obvious to major league officials that the league cannot be realigned for 1993.
Now all the schedule-makers have to do is figure out how to deal with the unanswered question of where the Giants will be next season.
No one has officially proclaimed realignment of four teams, including the litigious Chicago Cubs, dead for 1993.
But a lawyer close to the league said it had become obvious that no matter when the Appellate Court in Chicago rules on Commissioner Fay Vincent's challenge of the preliminary injunction the Cubs gained to block his ordered realignment, it would be too late to disrupt the plans of the league, its teams and related entities, such as the television networks.


Review/Film; Frog Prince as James Bond, or Is That Poirot?
One lesson that the creators of animated features never seem to grasp is that simpler is better.
An excess of plot and mythical baggage, along with a needless freneticism, helped sink "Rock-a-Doodle" and "An American Tail: Fievel Goes West," two of the year's more elaborate cartoon features.
The same confused overreaching undermines Jon Acevski's "Freddie as F.R.O.7," which opened nationally on Friday.
The movie, which bills itself as the most ambitious animated film ever to come out of Britain, is a convoluted adventure story that swirls classic fairy-tale mythology together with modern pop-cultural iconography into an unwieldy hodgepodge.
Its characters include a wicked queen out of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" and her nephew, Freddie, a former prince she has turned into a frog after drowning his father.
Freddie, who has just barely eluded his aunt's murderous schemes, grows up to become a celebrated detective, F.R.O.7 (shades of James Bond), whose mannerisms recall Hercule Poirot fused with Inspector Clouzot.


Budget Fight Goes On in California
With only hours to go before the Legislature was due to adjourn for the year, the two-month-long budget crisis in California reached a flashpoint this afternoon when Gov.
Pete Wilson threatened to veto the budget bill because he could not accept an education spending plan approved earlier in the day by the state Assembly.
The new impasse, more of a dispute over future financing for public education rather than a clash over this year's spending, could wreck the budget package, major components of which passed the Legislature over the weekend.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Acquired Sean Ross, outfielder, and Nate Minchey, pitcher, from the Atlanta Braves to complete the trade for Jeff Reardon pitcher.
Assigned Ross and Minchey to Pawtucket of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Ken Ryan, pitcher, from Pawtucket.


Shanghai Journal; Chinese Are on Notice: The Giant's on the Move
Each evening, the lawbreakers emerge from their homes, lugging a few pots and tables and setting them up on the street as three- or four-seat outdoor restaurants charging $1 or $2 for a meal.
These restaurants are unlicensed and unsanitary, but they seem an apt symbol of the new and more entrepreneurial Shanghai that is emerging from the winding streets of China's largest city.
After four decades as the punching bag of Chinese Communism, absorbing new blows with each political campaign, Shanghai is finally making progress in its goal of reviving its economy and reasserting itself as a center of trade and finance.


Boeing Names a President Who Is Seen as Future Chief
The Boeing Company yesterday named Philip M. Condit president and a member of the board.
Although Frank Shrontz, Boeing's 60-year-old chairman and chief executive, said he had every intention of keeping his position until he reached the company's customary retirement age of 65, Mr.
Condit's promotion was widely viewed as the naming of an heir apparent.
Mr.
Condit, who is 51, has most recently been an executive vice president and general manager of Boeing Commercial Airplane Group's 777 division, where he had primary responsibility for developing the company's newest commercial jet.


Back-to-School Shopping Tips
ADULTS know that personal computers can be powerful productivity enhancers in business.
It would seem to follow, then, that computers can raise a child's productivity in school.
With this aim, many parents start the new school year by shopping for a PC, either for a younger pupil's use at home or for a college-bound offspring.
For some parents, shopping for a computer can seem as daunting as algebra or physics.
There are several ideas to keep in mind to make sure the computer allowance is wisely spent.


The Lines Get Fuzzy Between Contenders And the Pretenders
The dog days of August can be looked at in two contexts: It's either the time of year in baseball when the most doggedly determined contenders successfully hold off the baying packs of also-rans.
Or it can be a time when top-tier teams find themselves trying to stem the bleeding caused by the big bites taken out of their pennant hopes.
Oakland definitely fits into the former category, catapulting into September with a more than comfortable lead in the American League West.
But all August seemed to do for some other division leaders and the teams nipping at their backs was confuse the line between the contenders and pretenders.


Guns of Guadalcanal
To the Editor:
The evocative drawing for "Guadalcanal, Aug. 7, 1942. And Forever" by William Manchester (Op-Ed, Aug. 7) is not quite right.
It shows a Garand M-1 eight-shot semiautomatic rifle struck down into the ground, surmounted by an American pot helmet, to mark the grave of a Marine.
But as Mr.
Manchester says, the Marines landed with World War I equipment.
They had old-style flat dish helmets and five-shot Springfield 1903 bolt-action rifles.
There is a tale, which I may well have read in one of Mr.
Manchester's books, that after the better-equipped Army troops came to Guadalcanal, a Marine was seen following an infantryman everywhere.


28 Acres of Roof and a Place to Play in West Harlem; Riverbank State Park Is Under Construction Atop North River Sewage Treatment Plant
The people of West Harlem are about to be repaid for putting up with a sewage treatment plant in their neighborhood.
Their payback, a most unusual park, will have pools and fields and a view of the Hudson River, all atop a building that processes 170 million gallons of raw sewage a day.
Is this really the sort of place one wants to take in the evening air?


What a Difference A Decade Makes!
BACK in mid-1980, a New York Times reporter, Peter J. Schuyten, wrote a series of three articles about his first encounter with the personal computer, then a novelty.
A look back to the beginning of the last decade is instructive today.
"The first thing to know about personal computers is how hard it is to buy one," Mr.
Schuyten wrote, citing the "literally scores" of models and the ignorance or arrogance of salespeople.
That situation may have improved slightly, but now there are literally hundreds of models to choose from.


Patterns
A Tent at Saks
Anyone looking for an American designer on the evening of Sept. 15 should check out the east side of Fifth Avenue between 49th and 50th streets.
That's where Saks Fifth Avenue is pitching a tent for a "Sidewalks of New York" party to honor 16 designers and salute the 125th anniversary of Harper's Bazaar.
Guests can sample regional American foods and listen to a blues band while admiring designers' clothes in the store's Fifth Avenue windows or watching a models' audition, or "go see," enacted in the 49th Street windows.


Bergner Files Sears Lawsuits
P.
A.
Bergner &amp; Company, the bankrupt retail company that operates the Carson Pirie Scott department stores, filed a lawsuit yesterday against Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and Arthur C. Martinez.
The suit accuses Sears and Mr.
Martinez, the new chairman of Sears's retail division, of breaking the executive's commitment to become chief executive of P. A. Bergner.
The lawsuit, filed in New York, contends that Mr.
Martinez, who was until yesterday vice chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue, committed himself to accepting a position as Bergner's chief executive in a deal that included a $1 million salary for three years, a $1 million signing bonus and several other perquisites.


Cry of the Corn
When sweet corn plants are attacked by a caterpillar, they release chemicals to call wasps to rescue them in a defensive response from all over the plant, not just the part under attack, researchers say.
The new twist in the repertoire of plant defense mechanisms is described today in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences by Dr.
Ted Turlings and Dr.
James Tumlinson of the Department of Agriculture.
Chemical counterattacks are common among plants, but most responses are direct defenses that are either aimed at the digestive system of the offending herbivore or mire the intruder in sticky ooze.
Triggered by some substance in the caterpillar's saliva, volatile chemicals called terpenoids are released into every leaf of the corn plant only hours after an encroaching insect starts biting.
From the leaves the chemicals become airborne and entice wasps to follow the chemical trail to the damaged leaf.
The wasps are able to find and attack the herbivores, which would otherwise be too tiny to find.
Terpenoids, which are largely responsible for the fresh smell of pines, are found in a wide range of plants.
Dr.
Tumlinson has found that the predatory wasps do not respond solely to the terpenoids emitted by one type of plant but can be trained with rewards to follow just about any terpenoid scent trail.
The investigators have also shown that the wasps are so reliant on chemical signals that they will hone in on the insect-damaged plant rather than the insect itself.
Dr.
Tumlinson said he believes these terpenoids may have initially functioned as digestive toxins that somehow evolved with the wasp to form the complex and mutually beneficial system.


Confusing Insurance Claims Extracted, for a Fee
THIS is a column (hereinafter referred to as The Column) about health insurance companies (The Companies) and how frustrated thousands of Americans (The People, Part A) feel trying to get The Companies to pay them or The People, Part B (also known as the health care industry).
Problem A, which begins at 12:01 A.M.


Saboteur Or Savant Of Nazi Drive for A-Bomb?
WERNER HEISENBERG, the leading physicist in the Nazi attempt to develop atomic weapons, passed information to foreign scientists that alerted the Allies about the progress of the top-secret German effort, a forthcoming book reports.
The report, based on declassified intelligence records, gives weight to Heisenberg's statement after the war that he had moral scruples about developing the weapons, but may or may not be decisive in the renewed debate over Heisenberg's motives.
Secret recordings of his reaction to the bombing of Hiroshima, made surreptitiously by British intelligence agents, were recently declassified and have been seized upon by Heisenberg's critics as showing he was technically inept.


Civics Lessons in the Art of Persuasion
When the New York City Council finished voting to approve Mayor David N. Dinkins's far-reaching garbage disposal plan just after dawn on Thursday, Bill Lynch Jr., the Mayor's political mastermind, was sitting in the Council chamber, arms crossed, smiling like a Cheshire cat.
A plan that only a month ago was dead on arrival, opposed by a solid majority of the 51 members, ended up passing with 10 votes to spare.
Asked how this feat of lobbying had been accomplished, Mr.
Lynch demurred.
"It's not lobbying," he said with a wily grin.
"It's education."


Young Athletes End Up as Healthy Adults
To the Editor:
As your Aug. 12 letters say, we are proud of and concerned about our Olympics athletes.
But let's not forget that while the favored few are successful, the rest are in poor shape: 75 percent of 7-year-olds have one or more risk factors for heart disease.
College football and basketball players, on the other hand, end up healthier and 10 percent better off economically than their peers, even though only 2 percent are in recreation or entertainment.


A Fleet of the Mind Takes Tiny Form
MURRAY CUKIER smiles at the thought of the Normandie, the Andrea Doria and the Queen Mary colliding in his living room.
He's no malevolent mariner, but a model maven whose creations flow from the currents of imagination.
A deck here, a smokestack there, and the next thing you know, you've got yourself a boat.
Decades ago, he dreamed of sailing the world as a merchant mariner, only to end up exploring the insides of machines and factories as a maintenance man.
Seven-day workweeks weren't conducive to sailing and besides, seawater aggravated his psoriasis.
"Like a lobster I turned," he lamented.
"I couldn't walk."
So, for most of his 77 years he has carried on a shore-to-ship romance, spending countless hours piecing from scratch everything from rugged tugboats to posh liners, relying on books, pictures and his mind.
"It has to come out the way it is in my mind, or I break it up," he said, surrounded by a tiny armada in his living room in Parkchester, the Bronx.
"They say I have a photogenic mind. That's what people say."
He still recalls vividly his inspiration for his first model, the Arabic, a Red Line ship that took him, his mother and brother to the United States after they left Poland in 1928.
He was the only family member who was not seasick and he bucked the shipboard caste system to wander from his third-class deck throughout the ship.
His voice betrays his Polish roots and his childhood wonder when he recounts his amazement at the mighty engines and the massive steel ship.
"I was spellbound," he said.
"You're in a big steel hull and you're floating. It takes you places. I just loved it and that's it."
Eventually, it took him to East New York, Brooklyn, where he joined his father, who made elegant pocketbooks, a trade he decided early on was not for him.
Nor were his family's strict Orthodox Jewish ways.
He often skipped temple to spend time building models or to go on excursions with the Sea Scouts, a group for youths enamored with ships.
A teacher encouraged him to build models.
The Depression forced him to leave school after eighth grade and work in a watch factory.
For a while, he thought he could join the merchant marine, but anti-Semitism kept him out, he said.
Instead, he settled into factory work, becoming a maintenance man who proved handy reviving balky machines.
He fixed himself up with Mae, a vivacious older woman who also worked at the factory, and moved in with her, and in time they married.
Through their years together, Murray always found time for his beloved ships.
Sometimes, he and Mae would go to the Manhattan piers, paying 50 cents to board the liners that ruled the seas in that age.
It's an era whose rhythms still appeal to him.
"People go to Europe on the Concorde and in three hours they're over there," he said.
"Or they take a jet and they're there in six hours. What are you rushing for?"
The older the ship, the greater his affection.
"Wooden ships and iron men, that's what I like," he said.
"Man fought against nature then. Today they press a button and this goes up, that goes down. Eh! Forget it!"
Dozens of ships sit in the silent harbor that is Murray's living room, side wheels near steamships, trawlers near luxury liners.
A couple of zeppelins and seaplanes dangle from the ceiling.
Many of them are emblazoned with the letter M, in memory of Mae, who died five years ago.
Near a four-masted schooner with elaborate rigging rests his current project, a World War I destroyer whose blueprint hangs on the wall by his dining-table workbench, although it seems more for atmosphere than guidance.
The room smells of mothballs, which he uses to mask the smell of plywood in the humidity of his living room.
The boats are made from wood, and he cleverly recycles bits of cardboard, string and even the needle mount from a syringe -- which he used for prescribed vitamin injections for his psoriasis -- to fashion a cannon.
"This is what you call scratch," he confided.
"When you buy a kit somebody else makes the parts and all you do is follow the numbers. I want to do the thinking for myself."
There really are no directions, he said.
He prefers to cobble together his creations, taking a feature of one ship and melding it to another.
What he can't find in his reference library, he finds in a two-and-a-half-foot stack of newspaper clippings dating to 1929,featuring seemingly every article ever written about ships and sailors.
Retired for 12 years, the closest he gets to the sea these days is Mystic Seaport or South Street Seaport, where he has exhibited his models.
But he said he doesn't feel cheated.
"I never expected nothing from anybody," he said.
"Whatever I have I did with my own hands."


Dartmouth Redesigns Medical Training To Give Future Doctors a Human Touch
Nervous students in surgical gloves and aprons filed into a flourescent-lighted laboratory here and lined up alongside steel tables where cadavers lay ready for dissection.
Instead of feeling pressured to maintain a stoic composure, these first-year medical students were encouraged not to suppress their emotions but to cry, laugh, faint or leave the room if they wanted to.
None did, but many said they appreciated the "permission" to do so.


Negotiators Agree on Accord To Ban Chemical Weapons
Negotiators have completed a landmark agreement that would ban the production, use and stockpiling of chemical weapons and are preparing to submit it to the United Nations for endorsement, senior officials of the Bush Administration said today.
Still, even with the expected agreement, significant obstacles remain before the world might be free of the dangers of poison gas.


Food Industry Views the Thrifty Bean With New Admiration
Long a key part of most ethnic cuisines and increasingly gaining favor among the nation's chefs, beans are moving squarely into the mainstream of the American diet.
Bean consumption rose to 7.5 pounds a person last year, up from 6 pounds in 1990 and 5.5 pounds in 1989, according to the United States Department of Agriculture.
Some 3.2 billion pounds of beans, a record high, were harvested last year, according to the department.


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Dip in Yield
Yields of bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit slipped another notch in the week that ends today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based interest rate publication.
The publication said banks were setting rates in a narrow range and waiting for the Government to make another economic assessment.
"Thus far the indicators have all been mediocre at best, but the next employment report could shed more light," The Monitor said.


New Delhi Journal; Gandhi Epic Still Unfolds: Now, a Widow's Wrath
Sonia Gandhi, the Italian-born widow of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, has swept aside the enigmatic veil and stoic silence with which she has long guarded her private life with a bittersweet account of life at the heart of one of the world's most influential political dynasties.
Mrs.
Gandhi's reflections are contained in a newly published 214-page book filled with pictures of the Gandhi family and called, simply, "Rajiv." In the weeks that it has come into bookstores, it has drawn widespread praise and criticism from Indians, including friends of her late husband, thrusting back into the public eye a woman whose loathing for Indian politics is well known.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis - Incumbency's Ace; Returning to Devastated Area, Bush Uses Powers of Office to Help Others, and Himself
With a few deft words, President Bush threw the full weight of incumbency behind Florida's hurricane victims today, and showed in the process why even Presidents who lag in the polls are electoral forces to be reckoned with.
Seeking to recover from an early stumble in the Federal relief effort, Mr.
Bush flew Air Force One to the site of the worst storm damage and opened the Federal treasury to residents of South Florida.


The Pop Life; Seizing A Chance To Make Changes
Garth Brooks is the record industry's equivalent of a 900-pound gorilla, in a position to do whatever he wants whenever he wants to do it.
Mr.
Brooks, the country singer who is easily America's most popular musician, has sold 21 million records in four years.
He's had at least one album in Billboard's top 10 for months.
His next concert, to be on Saturday night at the Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., is sold out, as his shows usually are.  (They usually sell out within a few hours.)
Mr.
Brooks happens to be doing several things at once.
He's on a sweeping, sold-out tour.
In August, he released a Christmas album, "Beyond the Season" (Liberty), which industry insiders predict will hit Billboard's top spot next week; his company says it has shipped 1.6 million copies to stores.
And on Sept. 22, he is to release "The Chase" (Liberty), a collection of new songs that already has Mr.
Brooks's fans and record retailers excited.


Emulex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fonic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


School Days in Russia: New Canon and No Lenin
In Russia, a child is everybody's business, and perfect strangers think nothing of offering their uninvited advice.
Teachers got plenty of it today, as 19 million Russian children started a new school year in a new country with plenty of problems.
There are shortages of money, teachers and textbooks.
And in a new candor unlikely even during the most liberal days of the old Soviet Union, Education Minister Eduard D. Dneprov disclosed that across the vast expanse of Russia, 29 percent of the schools have no heat, 38 percent have no running water, and nearly half have no sewage systems.


No Headline
"When it comes to right-wing extremists, the world is watching Germany closely because of its past. Hostility and hatred of foreigners is the last thing we can afford." -- FOREIGN MINISTER KLAUS KINKEL.  [ A8:2. ]


Bobby Fischer Ends Silence With Rancor
Brooding and bitter, the American chess genius Bobby Fischer emerged today from two decades as a recluse to dismiss the world's leading chess players as "the lowest dogs around" and to spit, almost literally, in the face of the United States Government.
The gaunt figure who fascinated the world when he crushed the Russian Boris Spassky in 1972 to become the first American world chess champion was gone, replaced by a heavyset fellow with a beard.
But Mr.
Fischer's prickly character appeared more extreme than ever as he gave vent to anti-Semitic views and outlined his vision of a world in which plot after plot had been mounted against him.
Spassky at His Side
For his reappearance, 20 years to the day since his defeat of Mr.
Spassky in an extraordinary series in Iceland, the 49-year-old Mr.
Fischer chose the fringes of the Balkan war.
Flanked by Mr.
Spassky, whom he is scheduled to start playing on Wednesday, he held what was billed as a news conference in this balmy coastal resort just 70 miles from the killing in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Traffic Alert
A water main break on South Street near Broad Street in Manhattan yesterday forced the closing of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive.
These parts of the drive will be affected for two weeks for repairs:
Southbound: No traffic between the Brooklyn Bridge and the Battery Park underpass.


Cuba Sharply Reduces Its Overseas Phone Links
Without official explanation, Cuba has reduced by two-thirds the few telephone calls it will allow into the country at a time when the Cuban emigre community in southern Florida is urgently trying to reach Cuban friends and relatives in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew.
There are at least 675,000 Cuban-Americans and Cuban emigres in Florida, and when non-Cuban relatives in Florida and the rest of the nation are included, the number of people in the United States with Cuban ties is perhaps more than one million.


We Can Turn Monster Schools Into Mini-Schools Right Now
To the Editor:
"Bright Ideas for Dull Schools" (editorial, Aug. 11) and your news articles on the New York City Board of Education's announcement of a plan to create 30 new high schools have added to the perception that the plan is the answer to our problems.


Books of The Times; How Stephen Crane Made His Life Imitate His Art
The Double Life of Stephen Crane By Christopher Benfey 294 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Food Notes
Straight From the Oven
Ecce Panis, the fine Italian-style bakery at 1120 Third Avenue (65th Street), has added a store at 1260 Madison Avenue (90th Street).
The new shop has a warmly provincial look enhanced by stenciling, bare wood and lace curtains.
The facade is turquoise.
Is this the latest color for bakeries?
Amy's Bread, which opened on Ninth Avenue about a month ago, sports the same shade.


University and a College in Miami Put Off Openings Until Sept. 14
The havoc created by Hurricane Andrew has delayed the start of classes at the University of Miami and Miami-Dade Community College more than two weeks, until Sept. 14.
Two of the five campuses of Miami-Dade -- one of the largest community colleges in the nation -- were hardest hit.
Seven of eleven portable classrooms at the college's newest campus, in Homestead, disappeared in the storm while the gymnasium at the Kendall campus lost its roof, forcing the evacuation of 1,200 people who had sought shelter there.


What's Next? Emotion Runs High
Chess players differ widely over the likely impact of the exhibition match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky beginning today in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
Will it turn out to be just a singular event that leaves scarcely a blip on the history of the game?
Or will it have important repercussions for the future?
Emotional reactions have run the gamut, sometimes reaching extraordinary intensity.


Hawkins Chemical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


ITT Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Camps for Car Thieves Win Endorsement
Several community advocates met today with state officials to try to enlist support for new social programs aimed at young people who now make a hobby of stealing cars.
Salaam Ismial, president of the United Youth Council in Elizabeth, said he has reluctantly decided to support the establishment of a camp for young car thieves as an alternative to jail.
But rather than the boot camp-style programs advocated by several state legislators, he said the camps should emphasize cultural instruction and community service.


Plowshares From Russia
What an astonishing turnaround!
For four decades Americans have cowered before the threat of nuclear annihilation from the Soviet Union.
They have dug fallout shelters and marched to ban the bomb.
They shivered at the 1959 movie "On the Beach" that portrayed a doomed species after nuclear war.
And they kept on shivering into the 1980's over theories of a devastating "nuclear winter" and film images of "The Day After."
Meanwhile, hoping to head off Armageddon, America built enormous arsenals of atomic weapons that could reach anywhere.
And then, when the enemy just kept building bombs, the strategists put their faith in Star Wars, incredible defenses to bat down an atomic blitz.


No Cookie-Cutter Answers in 'Mommy Wars'; Women Are Struggling With Their Choices About Having Jobs or Staying Home
There are no maps to motherhood in 1992, so Anne Jaffe is struggling to find her way, trying to make peace with her choice to be a full-time mother rather than pursue a full-time career.
"I feel like I'm a disappointment for the women who have worked so hard to broaden opportunities for other women," said the 36-year-old Mrs.
Jaffe, once a co-president of the student body at Stanford University and now a mother of two and a volunteer at the Yorktown Community Nursery School.


Let Civility Reign in Homosexuality Debate; Leviticus Is Explicit
To the Editor:
In "Homophobic? Re-Read Your Bible," Peter J. Gomes mistakenly assumes that by disproving some frequent biblical citations against homosexuality, he has reconciled homosexuality with biblical law.
The biblical injunction against homosexuality, however, is not open to the interpretive reading Mr.
Gomes claims we all perform, reconciling " 'what it meant then' to 'what it means now.' "


A New Line of Work For Nadia Comaneci
As an Olympic champion gymnast, NADIA COMANECI had all the exposure she could imagine.
In a sense, that might pale beside how much more she will receive as a spokeswoman for Jockey underwear for women, which she became as of yesterday.
For one thing, she follows other notable athletes, like JIM PALMER and NANCY HOGSHEAD, who also modeled underwear on billboards high above Times Square.
And a picture of Comaneci wearing Jockey underwear and hosiery will be a large part of a print advertising campaign.


Imperial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the air embargo on Iraqi flights over southern Iraq misstated the Pentagon's rules for journalists accompanying American forces.
They have agreed not to write about future operations, the rules of engagement or other classified information, but they are not required to show their articles to military officers before they are transmitted.


General Mills Plans to Buy Nabisco's Lineup of Cereals
General Mills, maker of the breakfast of champions and the aspiring champion of breakfasts, announced yesterday that it planned to add RJR Nabisco's ready-to-eat cereal business to its lineup.
General Mills, which trails only Kellogg in the growing and fiercely competitive cereal business, said it would pay $450 million in cash for the Nabisco cold cereal line, which includes 100-year-old Shredded Wheat, Spoon-Sized Shredded Wheat, and Shreddies.
They would join General Mills cereals that include Wheaties, Cheerios, Total and others.


On and in the Air as Primary Nears End
As Geraldine A. Ferraro barnstormed around New York State in a 24-hour marathon campaign swing yesterday, the State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, began broadcasting his first television advertisements in the race for the Democratic Senate nomination -- including two commercials in Spanish.
Mr.
Abrams has saved his money for a television blitz in the final days before the Sept. 15 primary.
His rivals said their checks with stations showed that he would spend just over $1 million between now and then, 80 percent of it next week.
That is close to what Ms.
Ferraro is likely to have spent in the final four weeks and more than twice what City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman has said she intends to spend.


GO TO ANNOUNCE SOFTWARE LINKS TO JAPANESE COMPANIES
The Go Corporation, Foster City, Calif., developer of the Penpoint operating system for pen-based computers, plans to announce today that six Japanese computer makers will adopt its system.
The companies are: Canon, Fujitsu, Matsushita Electric Industrial, IBM Japan, OKI Electric and Toshiba.
The companies have agreed that together with American software publishers, they will sell Japanese language applications for the Penpoint operating system.


Japanese Governor Resigns in Campaign Scandal
A widening political scandal claimed its second prominent victim when the Governor of Niigata prefecture announced today that he was resigning because one of his aides probably accepted an improper contribution from a trucking company with ties to organized crime.
The resignation of Kiyoshi Kaneko, a rare event for a sitting governor, follows the stunning news last week that the governing Liberal Democratic Party's shadowy kingmaker, Shin Kanemaru, was stepping down from his party posts because he had accepted an improper contribution from the same company, Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin.


Griffin Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


N.H.L. Set to Vote On Pact With ESPN
National Hockey League owners will vote by conference call today on a new television contract with the ESPN cable network, a league spokesman, Gary Meagher, said yesterday.
The tentative package might not be as lucrative as the team owners expected last week when they met in Florida.
A team executive close to the negotiations said yesterday that instead of selling five years for $80 million, the league might settle for one season at considerably less money.


Goldfarb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Intercan Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


COMPANY NEWS
AMERIANA BANCORP, New Castle, Ind., completed the acquisition of Deer Park Financial Corp.
ARVIN INDUSTRIES , Columbus, Ind., and Houston Space Industries International signed a letter of intent to combine their research, aeronautics and industrial space operations.


Michael A. Braun, 79, Lawyer in War Cases
Michael A. Braun, a prominent lawyer who defended accused war criminals during the American military's postwar occupation of Japan, died on Thursday in Tokyo.
He was 79 years old and lived in Tokyo.
He died of cancer, said Hugh J. Freund, a family spokesman, adding that he had no further details on the cause of death.


Cabano Transportation reports earnings for Year to April 25


Transactions
Football  National Football League
BUFFALO BILLS -- Placed Al Edwards, wide receiver, and Clifford Hicks defensive back, on injured reserve.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Rickey Dixon, safety.


Market Place; A Squeeze Hurts A Health Niche
PROFITING from pressures to get patients out of expensive hospital beds quickly, companies that provide intravenous nutrition and drugs in the home have been on a roll.
Sales of these so-called home-infusion companies tripled in three years to $3.2 billion in 1991 and may reach $4 billion this year, analysts said.
But when health-care stocks began slipping early this year, some high-flying home-infusion stocks were hit even harder.
Many investors who thought the economy would pick up this year switched from health care to cyclical stocks like autos and chemicals.


23 States Face Suits on School Funds
As schools reopen this week from the summer break, many begin the new year under a cloud: Increasing numbers of states face lawsuits over their failure to close spending gaps between rich and poor school districts or their failure to give adequate aid to all schools.
Twenty-three states are embroiled in suits, most filed since 1990, over how they finance school districts.
Three others -- New York, New Hampshire and California -- could face lawsuits again if plaintiffs make good on threats to appeal or refile cases that were decided this year.


60-Minute Gourmet
A DELECTABLE soup of seafood and vegetables can be assembled this time of year in far less than an hour.
Summer vegetables impart extra flavor to the broth, but if you have a fresh fish stock, all the better.
To make the stock, you need the bones from a non-oily fish.
Most fishmongers happily give them away.
Stocks made with these bones can be frozen for a month or more.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.51
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.17
5.34
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.26
5.39
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.04
6.11
7.62
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.40
8.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.47
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.33
6.35
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Morris Carnovsky Is Dead at 94; Acting Career Spanned 60 Years
Morris Carnovsky, a pipe-smoking character actor who endured the blacklist of the 1950's to triumph in Shakespeare, died yesterday at his home in Easton, Conn.
He was 94 years old.
His family said he died of natural causes.


Aryt Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Networks Intensify The Courtship Of David Letterman
David Letterman is the most wanted man in television.
Though no decision can be made about his future television home, the intensity of the courtship of this NBC late-night star by other prospective suitors has increased in recent weeks and so has NBC's own interest in doing everything it can to keep Mr.
Letterman from going elsewhere.
The odds may have changed recently in the Letterman sweepstakes, but the race to sign the late-night comedy star to a new contract won't -- and can't -- begin until NBC first negotiates with Mr.
Letterman.
John Agoglia, the president of NBC Enterprises, said yesterday that the network's contract calls for an exclusive negotiating period with Mr.
Letterman, which will not begin until early next year.
Mr.
Letterman's contract will expire in April.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  GERMANY RETHINKS ASYLUM POLICY
German politicians from all parties are predicting that the country will soon tighten its immigration law, one of the most permissive in Europe.
That is just one aftershock from the recent racist violence against foreigners.
A1
Almost 200 tombs are desecrated in a Jewish cemetery in France.
A8  CHEMICAL ARMS PACT EMERGES
Negotiators have completed an accord that would ban the production, use and stockpiling of chemical arms and are preparing to submit it to the United Nations, Bush Administration officials say.
A1  NEW LESSONS FOR YOUNG RUSSIANS
There was not a portrait of Lenin to be seen, not to mention Marx or Engels or even Yeltsin, as students trooped to school in Moscow.
It's the first full school year in a new country with plenty of problems.
A1  SERBIA, SPURNED AND BITTER
News Analysis: Blamed by much of the world for the war in the Balkans, Serbia is descending into bitterness and a sense of persecution that hardly bode well for peace efforts.
A3
Four from U.N. team killed in new attack on Sarajevo.  A3  NEW SYRIAN TONE AT TALKS
In a document given to Israel, Syria has committed itself to reaching a peace settlement and acknowledged that Israel has security concernsthat could be addressed.
A6  CHINA SEIZES RETURNING STUDENT
Police officers in Beijing detained a Chinese student leader who had just returned from exile in the United States.
The student had been preparing to talk with reporters about plans for setting up a chapter of a pro-democracy group.
A8  IMPEACHMENT REQUEST IN BRAZIL
Two groups formally asked Brazil's Congress to impeach President Fernando Collor de Mello.
A8  Nonaligned nations open a meeting in search of a reason to exist.
A9
Floodwaters wash coastal Nicaragua after an earthquake. A7
A second major politician quits in a Japanese financial scandal.
A8  National A14-20, D18  BUSH STEPS UP SOUTH FLORIDA AID
Touring the Miami area, the President said the Government would rebuild an Air Force base destroyed by Hurricane Andrew and pay almost all costs of restoring the region's public property and services.
Relief was also promised uninsured homeowners.
A1
Storm victims had a mixed reaction to Bush's visit.  A16
In Homestead, a ghost town sprang up in olive drab.  A15
The hurricane did not spare Dade County's colleges.  A15  DOWN, BUT HARDLY OUT
News analyis: In opening the Treasury to South Florida, Mr.
Bush demonstrated anew why even Presidents who lag in the polls are electoral forces to be reckoned with.
A1  CLINTON APPEALS TO THE AGED
Campaigning among the elderly, Governor Clinton said the President's budget plans would trim their entitlements and harm their children as well.
A1
In an Iowa race, the House bank scandal is being replayed.
A17  BEHIND THE LABOR DISPUTE AT G.M.
A strike and resulting plant shutdowns that have already affected more than 30,000 General Motors workers involve labor's first concerted reaction to the company's campaign to lower costs.
A1  CALIFORNIA TRIES AGAIN
Governor Wilson and state legislative leaders began intense talks aimed at resolving a dispute over education aid, the last hurdle to ending California's two-month-old budget impasse.
A14  THOUSANDS OF TEACHERS ON STRIKE
With the beginning of a new school year, teachers have struck a number of districts in Michigan, Illinois and Vermont.
And several districts in Pennsylvania, Massachusetts and California are under a threat of walkouts.
A20  A CLOSE CALL ALOFT
Two jetliners carrying more than 200 passengers came dangerously close to each other over Virginia.
Federal investigators said they were trying to determine whether the cause was a system designed to avoid midair collisions.
A14  SETBACK FOR LIVER PATIENT
The world's first recipient of a baboon liver took a turn for the worse, and his prognosis is guarded.
D18  Cold Spring Journal: Throngs in search of a vision.
A14  A month after her accident, the QE2 set sail.
D18  The tobacco industry drew fire over children's smoking.
D18  Education Page B7  C. Everett Koop starts a new education program at Dartmouth.
Lawsuits charge 23 states with shortchanging districts on funds.
Campus Journal: At Gallaudet University, teaching deaf students.
Arts/Entertainment C13-18  AN OUTBURST FROM FISCHER
After 20 years of silence, Bobby Fischer, the American chess genius, vented many complaints at a news conference in Yugoslavia.
Among his targets were the United States Government, leading chess players and world Jewry.
A1  The elusive director Hans Jurgen Syberberg re-emerges.
C13  Music: A new Jeremiah in Elizabeth Swados's "Jerusalem." C13  The Pop Life.
C13  Word and Image: Wooing David Letterman.
C13  Times dynasty biography.
C14  TV and Somalia.
C18  Living Section C1-10
Americans wake up and smell the coffee.
C1  At lunch with Al Roker: Bright and warm and hold the thunder.
C1  Eating Well: Pollack or cod?
Fish or fowl?
F.D.A. takes a closer look.
C1  Wine Talk C8  Health Page C12  Study suggests how anger may harm the heart.
Personal Health: Achilles' tendon is not the only vulnerable one.
Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Sports B8-13  Baseball: Coleman's temper flares after ejection.B9  Yankees are likely to pursue Cone.
B9  Column: Vecsey on Jose Canseco.
B9  Football: Amid controversy, Marinovich stays calm.
B9  Tennis: Navratilova advances at U.S.
Open.
B9  Obituaries D18-19  Antoinette M. Kraushaar, an art dealer.
D18  Dr.
Irving Philips, an educator in child psychiatry.
D18  Charles L. Weltner, Chief Justice of Georgia.
D19  Morris Carnovsky, an actor.
D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Mr.
Bush inherits the wind.
Plowshares from Russia.
Bosnia's tragedy, and Bobby's.
Rocky 2: democracy on the ropes.
Letters  Glenn Garvin: Hunting for scapegoats in South Florida.
Shen Tong: The next revolution.
Bai Yong: The torturers of Ling yuan.


Navratilova Fights to Get the Last Laugh
Shaun Stafford never did figure out the true identity, champ or chump, of the apparition she faced on the stadium court last night at the United States Open.
Just when she realized the submissive version of Martina Navratilova cowering on the other side of the net was only a mirage and the real Navratilova was out to get her in the second set, the mirage returned in all its unassertive glory in the third set.


Edmund H. Kerr, 67, An Investment Lawyer
Edmund H. Kerr, a senior partner in the international law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, died yesterday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 67 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Kerr, a native of Pittsburgh, saw wartime service with the Army in North Africa and Europe before graduating from Stanford University in 1949.
He earned his law degree at Stanford Law School, where he was managing editor of the Law Review and a member of the Order of the Coif.


Orenda Forest Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Litton Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Let Civility Reign in Homosexuality Debate
To the Editor:
"Homophobic? Re-Read Your Bible" by Peter J. Gomes (Op-Ed, Aug. 17) offers a superb illustration of a problem that confronts dialogue within the Christian community or in larger public forums on honest differences about the "sinfulness" of homosexual practices.
Mr.
Gomes suggests that those who oppose efforts to legitimate homosexual practices do so for three reasons.


James Brady Takes His Fight for Gun Control to Manhattan


Hospitalized Juror Was Being Treated With Methadone
A juror who was hospitalized last week during deliberations in the murder trial of a Bronx man had been suffering from methadone withdrawal and needed medication, according to court records unsealed yesterday.
The defendant's lawyer said he remained under a gag order by the court not to talk about the juror's condition and would not comment.
But the revelation is almost certain to be used in an appeal of the verdict against his client, Alejandro Henriquez, a 31-year-old livery car driver who was convicted on Friday of strangling a young woman and two girls in the Bronx.


Bosnia's Tragedy, and Bobby's
Think of Bosnia overrun by Serbian-backed militias.
Then think of the chess genius Bobby Fischer violating United Nations sanctions, and decency itself, to play a chess match for profit in Serbia against his old rival Boris Spassky.
The contrast reeks of callousness, not to mention disregard for international law.
The match also violates President Bush's executive order forbidding Americans to do business in Yugoslavia.


The Race in Different Polls
Bill Clinton increased his lead over George Bush in the 10 days since the Republican convention ended, according to the latest Washington Post/ABC News poll.
In the poll conducted last Wednesday through Sunday, 55 percent of 768 registered voters supported Mr.
Clinton while 36 percent favored Mr.
Bush.
The nationwide telephone poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.


A Rice-less Risotto Makes a Delicious Paradox
The fad of giving dishes names they should never have has struck this column.
This corn risotto has no rice in it even though risotto means a rice dish in Italian.
Risotto is also a slow method of cooking rice that produces a creamy texture.
In this dish the corn becomes creamy by putting it in a food processor for a few twirls. .
If you think you've been seeing a lot of corn in this column in the last few weeks, it's only because corn season is so short and doesn't return until next summer.


COMPANY NEWS: Dipping vs. Snacking; Can a Tortilla Chip Ever Be Too Thin?
In snack-food parlance, it is called "out-of-bag snackability." Today's tortilla chips, it would seem, don't have it.
Too thick.
Too plain.
Too many munchers left hankering for a bowl of salsa after the first mouthful.
So Frito-Lay Inc. has an idea, hoping that once again thinner is better.
The unit of Pepsico Inc. has developed a thin version of its Doritos brand tortilla chips that it hopes snackers will gobble up like potato chips.


MetroVision of N. America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  SILENCE AFTER A SHOOTING?
New York City's acting police commissioner said that several off-duty officers were nearby when an off-duty Housing Authority officer was killed on a Queens street but did not immediately come forward with information.
But he said that to the best of his knowledge none of the officers actually saw the shooting.
B3.
A WARNING ABOUT LEAD
Soil near the Brooklyn, Manhattan and Williamsburg bridges shows high concentrations of lead, which could endanger the health of children in those areas, the City Health Department reported.
Several city officials called for a task force of agencies to determine how to proceed with maintenance on the city's bridges.
B3.


Let Civility Reign in Homosexuality Debate; Removing the Stigma
To the Editor:
Oregon voters will be asked to approve an amendment to their state's Constitution that would remove legal protection for homosexuals and mandate schools to teach that homosexuality is "abnormal, wrong, unnatural and perverse" (front page, Aug. 16).
Colorado has a similar measure.


Books of The Times; How Stephen Crane Made His Life Imitate His Art
The Double Life of Stephen Crane By Christopher Benfey 294 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Do-It-All Gizmos That Don't Do a Thing
Anyone who knows Ponchitta Pierce might well wonder why she has a microwave oven, a blender, a juicer, an electric can opener and a few other gadgets she can't remember because they're stored away somewhere.
Ms.
Pierce doesn't cook.
For that matter, she isn't in the kitchen too often.
But she does have occasional visions of changing her pattern, having little dinner parties, preparing fresh juice, blending wonderful ingredients into a wonderful something.
Someday.
In the meantime, her appliances are gathering dust, and every so often she helps the economy by writing another check for another appliance that is going to gather more dust.


Geographics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


VANDALS IN ALSACE HIT JEWISH TOMBS
Almost 200 tombs in a Jewish cemetery in the Alsace region of eastern France were desecrated by unidentified vandals this weekend, prompting fears of a resurgence of the attacks on Jewish targets that last swept France two years ago.
The Mayor of the tiny village of Herrilsheim near Colmar, Pierre Buschek, said 50 headstones had been broken, while another 143 tombs were damaged or knocked over.
No anti-Semitic leaflets or graffiti were found at the cemetery and the police said they had no leads as to who was responsible.


Petrolite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Wine Talk
Grapes and wine books have much in common.
There is a new crop of both every year; for both, some years are better than others; both seasons begin around now and end in December.
Grapes picked after Christmas, with one or two exceptions, aren't worth much.
Wine books arriving after the holidays are like mittens arriving in July; they may be excellent but the season is over.
The wine-book season is no accident.
Most wine books are bought as gifts and it will soon be gift-giving time.
Wine books are like pet foods: the purchaser and the consumer are rarely the same.
In many cases, it doesn't matter; new wine books are often just rehashes of old wine books.
As with so many California white wines, it's difficult after a time to tell them apart.


Campus Journal; Foreigners Accept Their Deafness, Then Learn Sign Language
Pablo Pomeranec, an engaging young man from Buenos Aires and a freshman at Gallaudet University here, plans on being a revolutionary.
Because of his experiences in a special program at Gallaudet, Mr.
Pomeranec said, he will return to Argentina some day and revolutionize the teaching of the deaf by getting schools there to teach sign langauge.


New Challenge For Civic Leader
In taking up the task of leading the private-sector effort to rebuild South Florida after the hurricane, Alvah H. Chapman Jr. is stepping into a role that he has shouldered on other occasions for his adopted state of Florida.
Mr.
Chapman, 71 years old, is the retired chairman and chief executive of Knight-Ridder, the Miami-based media company that owns newspapers throughout the United States.
He is widely acknowledged to be a civic leader who can raise vast sums of money quickly.


Critic's Notebook; Why It Took TV So Long To Focus on the Somalis
Scenes of catastrophe are so common on the television screen that the heartbreakers of a year or two ago are constantly being overwhelmed by last week's.
But the enormity of the horror in Somalia, only now receiving the attention it has long demanded, will not soon be erased from memory.
And along with pity for a suffering people, many viewers must feel anger and frustration.
You have probably seen the pictures or turned from them in distress: children with arms like splinters and ribs pressing into near transparent flesh; 6-year-olds the size of 2-year-olds, their heads and bellies grotesquely large for the shrunken torsos; dry-eyed mothers waiting for their babies to die in camps that look like garbage dumps.


Dresser Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Charles L. Weltner, 64, Chief Justice of Georgia
Chief Justice Charles L. Weltner of the Georgia Supreme Court, who as a young Congressman a quarter-century ago sacrificed a promising political career by defying his state's segregationist Democratic leadership, died Monday at his home in Atlanta.
He was 64 years old.
His family said the cause of death was esophageal cancer, diagnosed two years ago.


Ramsay-HMO Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Child Wants to Cook? Lead the Way if You Can, and Quickly
Cooking teachers will tell you children love to cook: all that stirring and mixing and beating and most of all, the cutting.
A knife!
Power!
Children, though, don't always present it that way.
Plenty of them do like to cook.
Rachel Wachtel, for instance, a 5-year-old New Yorker, likes to make chocolate cakes with her mother because "I get to put the egg in, and the flour and the sugar." But in an informal and very unscientific kitchen-affinity survey, just as many said they don't.


Newcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Back To School, Undaunted


Russian Research Pact For Sun Microsystems
Sun Microsystems said today that it had signed a contract with a team of Russian computer experts to help the company develop advanced software for use with its work stations.
The new agreement follows a joint research project that Sun announced with the Russian researchers in February.
Those efforts have led to the establishment of a research center in Russia called the Moscow Center of Sparc Technology.
Sparc is the name of the microprocessor chip technology on which Sun's work stations are based.


A Times Dynasty Biography
Little, Brown &amp; Company announced yesterday that it would publish the first comprehensive biography of four generations of the Ochs-Sulzberger family, the family dynasty that has presided over The New York Times for almost 100 years.
Little, Brown said that the authors, Susan E. Tifft and Alex S. Jones, had been granted complete, exclusive and unconditional access to family members and archives and that this was the first time the family had granted such access.
The publishing house said the authors had been given full control over every aspect of the book.
Publication is expected in 1996.


PRESIDENT PLEDGES MONEY TO REBUILD IN SOUTH FLORIDA
President Bush came here today and promised to rebuild Homestead Air Force Base, an economic mainstay of South Florida that was virtually destroyed last week by Hurricane Andrew.
In a three-hour visit this morning, he also said the Federal Government would pay almost all the costs of rebuilding public property and services in Florida.
Ordinarily the Federal Government would pay 75 percent of such costs and the affected state would pay 25 percent.
Washington, however, has paid the entire cleanup bill for at least one other recent disaster, Hurricane Hugo in 1989.
No Estimate on Cost
In addition, the Federal Emergency Management Agency will issue grants of up to $11,500 to families who can prove they lack insurance for their homes or belongings or who are not being helped adequately by other emergency services.


Yanks Start Showing An Interest in Cone
David Cone pitching in the Bronx?
Several miles from Shea Stadium?
The former heart and soul of the Mets pitching for the hated Yankees?
It could happen.
Joseph Molloy, Yankee managing partner, conceded today that the club would actively pursue at least one free-agent pitcher after the season and also hinted that Cone would be at the top of the wish list.


Bridge
One American team advanced in the NEC World Team Championships here today, but another was eliminated.
The American open team, consisting of Bob Wolff, Bob Hamman, Jeff Meckstroth, Eric Rodwell, Michael Rosenberg and Seymon Deutsch, headed their qualifying group and will face Egypt as an opponent in quarterfinal play Wednesday.
The standings in their group were: 1.
United States, 564; 2.
Netherlands, 544.5; 3.
France, 544; 4.
Sweden, 529.
Turkey, which was among the leaders for several days, was overtaken by Sweden in the last round.


Capriati Answers a Timely Wake-Up Call
There has been little reason lately for self-deprecation from Jennifer Capriati, but there is no place quite like the stadium court at the United States Open for extracting everything that is cool, calm and composed in a player and leaving a troubled soul to writhe alone before an audience of 20,000 skeptics.
Capriati came into the Open on a cloud with a gold lining, but her Olympics-induced confidence was blown away briefly yesterday by an antic breeze that prohibited her from doing what she likes to do: use the court's outer perimeters for target practice.


Perkin-Elmer reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Coleman Shoves Torborg and Mets Shove Back
The fire to the season went out long ago for the Mets, but the club goes on and on generating smoke.
Last night, in a development that could have long-term ramifications for the makeup of the Mets, Vince Coleman and Manager Jeff Torborg engaged in an angry and physical confrontation on the field.
The Mets, acting instantly, announced after the Atlanta Braves' 4-1 victory at Shea that Coleman had been suspended for two days without pay.
The center fielder, who told management he would contest the financial component of the suspension, stands to lose $32,222.
He will not accompany the club to Cincinnati on Thursday, and will join the Mets on Friday.


Audrey Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Black Swan Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Perez Again Gets Run Support And Shuts Down the Brewers
Melido Perez scratched his eyes, blinked and stared at the scoreboard.
Could the Yankees really be scoring runs for him?
Again?
They could, they did and Perez celebrated the loud offense by silencing the Brewers on eight hits and pitching the Yankees to a 7-1 victory tonight at County Stadium.
It was the second straight game in which the Yankees scored at least five runs for Perez during a season of meager support.


New Test Can Find Cystic Fibrosis Gene Without Blood Samples
The first noninvasive test to diagnose cystic fibrosis, or detect the presence of the gene that causes the disease in people who might pass it on to their children, is to be available soon.
The new test uses DNA in cells collected by brushing the inside of a person's cheek, rather than extracting the DNA from blood samples as in previous methods.
The test is also less costly and time consuming, said its developer, Integrated Genetics Laboratories Inc.


Decision Time Near for Implant Suits
Women with complaints about silicone breast implants may soon have to decide whether to join a class-action lawsuit against the manufacturers of the devices or to file separate suits on their own.
Several thousand lawsuits arguing that silicone breast implants have harmed women have been filed in state and Federal courts, and a Federal judge in Cincinnati has certified that such lawsuits are suitable for class action.


Mr. Bush Inherits the Wind
Americans are, as President Bush said last night, a nation of neighbors, and they join in his heartfelt concern for the victims of Hurricane Andrew.
Even so, no matter how much Federal aid he might now dispatch to South Florida, he cannot avoid responsibility for Washington's slow response.
Federal and state officials blame each other for the four-day delay in activating assistance for South Florida.
But the problems raised by Hurricane Andrew trace back four years, to the Administration's early neglect of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.


Giant Food Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15


Electronic Arts
Electronic Arts, the entertainment software manufacturer in San Mateo, Calif., said yesterday that it had awarded its $8 million sports video game account, previously handled in-house, to Goldberg Moser O'Neill in San Francisco.
The two other finalists in the two-month review were Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco and Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore.


Miscellany
*
SAI Promotions Inc., Melrose Park, Pa., a sales promotion agency, merged yesterday with Earle Palmer Brown &amp; Spiro, Philadelphia, creating a shop with $114 million in billings that, Earle Palmer said, would be tied with Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Philadelphia, as the city's largest.


China Arrests a Student Leader Back From Exile in the U.S.
The police today detained a prominent Chinese student leader who had returned from exile in the United States and was preparing to meet with foreign reporters to discuss his plans for setting up a chapter in China of the pro-democracy organization he heads.
The security forces seized Shen Tong, a 24-year-old graduate student at Boston University, at 12:30 this morning at his family home in Beijing.
Two other Chinese, Qi Dafeng and Qian Liyun, were taken away with Mr.
Shen at about 4 A.M. and none of the three have been seen since.


2-Year-Olds and Up Had a Fine Summer
If you saw a herd of horses, trainers, riders and grooms driving south along the New York Thruway yesterday, you saw the annual migration from Saratoga Springs back to New York City, where the season will be resumed this afternoon at Belmont Park after five weeks in stately splendor and commercial success under the shade trees upstate.
For the next seven weeks, New York will offer you nine races a day six days a week, with 28 stakes and nearly $6 million in purses.
Unfortunately, it can't offer you Saratoga Springs.
No knock on the Big Apple or Santa Anita or Arlington or anyplace else.
But Jerry Lawrence, general manager of the New York Racing Association, puts it this way: "Saratoga is the most solid race meet in the country, both from a business and esthetic standpoint."


Brazilians Push to Oust President
Two Brazilian organizations formally asked Brazil's Congress today to impeach President Fernando Collor de Mello for lying and for profiting from corruption.
"The lack of decorum, the knowledge, the disorder, the immoderation of life style, the links with dishonest people, the receipt of improper advantages represent treason and abuse of public trust," read the document prepared by Brazil's Bar Association and Press Association.


Limits for Council On Landmark Role
An effort by the New York City Council to involve itself in a legal battle over landmark designations has been rebuffed by a state appeals court, which ruled that the Council could not intervene in the case.
The battle involves the City and Suburban York Avenue Estate, a 14-building complex between 78th and 79th Streets.
The case is widely seen as a barometer of how much power the Council will have in reviewing designations by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.


Cincinnati Utility Prices Offering
A $300 million three-part financing by the Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The first part of the mortgage bond offering consists of a 6 1/4 percent noncallable issue due 1997 that is priced at 99.879 to yield 6.278 percent, or about 70 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


High Lead Levels Found Near 3 East River Bridges
Soil near the Brooklyn, Manhattan and Williamsburg bridges shows high concentrations of lead, the City Health Department reported yesterday, including levels that exceed Federal safety recommendations.
The report, released at a meeting to determine how New York City should proceed with the sandblasting and maintenance of the aging Williamsburg Bridge, also showed high levels of lead stretching beyond the immediate vicinity of that bridge.
The tests show that of 120 samples taken in a five-block radius of the bridge, 41 contained 1,000 parts per million or more of lead.


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Dan Maloney to Join Rangers?
The Rangers aren't making any announcement yet, but it is expected that they will soon hire DAN MALONEY as an assistant coach.
Maloney, formerly the head coach of Winnipeg and Toronto, would replace WAYNE CASHMAN, who left ROGER NEILSON's New York staff for a similar position with the expansion Tampa Bay Lightning.
Maloney is no relation to DON MALONEY, the general manager of the Islanders.
In an 11-year playing career with four teams, Dan Maloney had 451 points and 1,489 penalty minutes.
He coached in Winnipeg from 1986-87 through part of the 1988-89 season.
Before that, he coached the Maple Leafs in 1984-85 and 1985-86.


Even 'New' Mains Can Break
Water mains that rupture in New York City are usually described as "aging." But the 30-inch main that broke early yesterday in the Wall Street area was only 41 years old -- a mere youngster in the city's water system.
City officials emphasize, though, that age is only one factor in determining whether a water main will burst, particularly for those installed before 1970, when the city began using a stronger metal for the mains.


U.S. to Buy Russian Bomb Uranium
The United States announced on Monday that it had agreed in principle to buy billions of dollars' worth of bomb-grade uranium from scrapped Soviet nuclear arms in an attempt to bolster the shaky Russian economy and to reduce the risks of nuclear accidents and theft.
The agreement, which would require the formal approval of both Governments, calls for highly enriched uranium from Russian nuclear arms to be diluted for sale as commercial reactor fuel.
It would be the first such agreement, and, if approved, would be a big step to reducing the dangers that made the cold war so unnerving.


Computone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


Executive Changes
ACU-TRAC INC., Easton, Md., a coupon management and data base company, named Charles P. Jones executive vice president.
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP, New York, appointed Allan B. deSchweinitz senior vice president and director of fraud investigations in the cost containment division.


Citizens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AT LUNCH WITH: Al Roker; Bright and Warm And Hold the Thunder
Al Roker is ignoring the weather.
On a rare blue-sky day made for salad and sidewalk cafes, he is in his favorite steakhouse, ordering his usual: a 30-ounce prime rib, hold nothing.
"I never could stand the nouvelle cuisine stuff," he said cheerfully.
"Give me the red meat. Give me the potatoes."


BRIEFS
Debt  *
City of Ashland, Ky., is offering $30 million of tax-exempt pollution control refunding revenue bonds for an Ashland Oil Inc. project through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The bonds due in in 2009 are priced at par to yield 6.70 percent and rated Baa-1 by Moody's.


Study Documents How Anger Can Impair Heart Function
The things that make your blood boil may be damaging your heart.
That is the conclusion of a study, published in the August issue of The American Journal of Cardiology, showing that when people with heart disease recount incidents that still make them mad, the pumping efficiency of their hearts drops by five percentage points, a significant, though temporary, impairment.


Marie Paxton Is Dead; Actress on Broadway
Marie Paxton, an actress who appeared in many Broadway plays, died on Aug. 16 at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center after a brief illness.
She lived in New York City.
Her family would not give her age or the cause of death.


Penn Traffic reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Americans Wake Up and Smell the Coffee
Americans are finally waking up to the pleasures of good coffee.
In the last five years the taste for darker-roasted, better-quality, stronger coffee has been rolling east from the West.
And with this taste have come new ways of enjoying coffee.
This new coffee culture is catching on in New York, where pots of 90-cups-to-the-pound weaklings sit on warmers for hours on end.
Virtually every New York restaurant, from the exalted to the expedient, now serves something called espresso, strong Italian-style coffee in small cups.
In Manhattan alone, the number of new espresso bars, cafes and stands that offer hot and cold, regular and decaffeinated espresso-based drinks with names like caffe latte have risen in the last year, from only a few to more than a dozen.


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 8


Sports of The Times; Even Jose's Departure Was Huge
THOSE of us who were sitting halfway up in the Skydome in 1989 will never forget the moon-launch trajectory of the home run that kept soaring until it finally connected with something solid: the fifth row of the fifth deck.
That was the Canseco home run, all 480 rising feet of it.
And nobody who was in the Oakland Coliseum on Monday night will ever forget the mysterious sight of Lance Blankenship suddenly becoming the answer to a trivia question: Who was the pinch-hitter on the night of the Jose Canseco trade?


INSIDE
Wall Street Flooding
A 30-inch water main burst in the Wall Street area, flooding the basements of two major office towers and forcing road closings.
Page B1.
Economic Forecast: Poor
The Government's chief economic forecasting gauge, the index of leading indicators, signals little improvement until at least 1993.
Page D1.
Tidal Waves Flood Nicaragua
An earthquake in the Pacific off Managua set off tidal waves, destroying homes in coastal towns and leaving at least 14 dead.
Page A7.


5-Year-Old Killed By Police Squad Car
A police squad car carrying two officers on their way to investigate a shooting in Brooklyn struck and killed a five-year-old boy who had chased his puppy as it ran into their path from between two parked cars, the police and a witness said.
The car, which was traveling northeast on Cortelyou Road in Flatbush, struck the boy at 8:44 P.M. at the corner of East 16th Street, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Edelle James.
The boy, who was not immediately identified because the authorities had been unable to reach his mother, was pronounced dead at 9:30 P.M. at Kings County Hospital, Sergeant James said.


Gas Rigs' Storm Loss Is Rising
The damage estimate from Hurricane Andrew's assault on oil-and-gas operations in the Gulf of Mexico climbed sharply today, bolstering the view that natural gas prices will rise in the coming weeks.
The Minerals Management Service in Washington, which regulates energy production in Federal waters, said today that 13 platforms were toppled by the hurricane as it raced into Louisiana and that 100 more within 20 miles of it were severely damaged.


People
*
Sean Fitzpatrick, executive vice president of McCann-Erickson North America, Troy, Mich., said on Monday that he would leave the November Company, the private firm creating advertising for the Bush re-election campaign, confirming a report this week in Adweek.
Mr.
Fitzpatrick said his departure was for personal reasons.


As Serbs See War: Foreign Plots and Ingratitude
Isolated and embittered, the people of Serbia seem gripped by a kind of national psychosis fed by the Balkans' grim history and by visions of intricate international plots to humiliate them.
Their dark mood was captured by a crowd here this week on a central thoroughfare, Kneza Mihaila Avenue.
Standing beside banners saying "Western countries want to rape Serbia!" and "Serbs need media justice," they signed a petition to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, protesting United Nations economic sanctions.


CHRONICLE
Among the volunteers helping with deliveries in the ruins of Hurricane Andrew, GEORGE STEINBRENNER could hardly go unnoticed.
The sweaty, weary driver at the wheel of a Salvation Army tractor-trailer, delivering water to the devastated city of Homestead in South Florida, was none other than the owner of the New York Yankees.
Last Thursday, before President Bush sent in troops, Mr.
Steinbrenner heard a radio appeal for help in loading relief trucks, a spokesman for Mr.
Steinbrenner said.
Without fanfare, Mr.
Steinbrenner, who lives in Tampa, showed up at the Salvation Army's main distribution center with three other men, and told Capt.
LARRY WHITE: "Put me to work."


Off-Duty Officers Failed To Step Forward in Killing
Six to 10 off-duty police officers were socializing in a strip of Queens bars when an off-duty Housing Authority police officer was shot to death on the street in July but did not come forward to volunteer information about the incident, as they are required to do by departmental regulations, New York City's acting Police Commissioner said yesterday.
Instead, said the acting Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, the officers had to be tracked down by departmental investigators and questioned about their presence at the scene of the killing and what, if anything, they knew.


Restaurant Chain Dropping Agency
Martin/Williams in Minneapolis and Bonanza Restaurants in Dallas have agreed to end their five-year relationship, the agency said yesterday.
In a telephone interview, Tom Weyl, the shop's president and chief creative officer, confirmed reports this week in Advertising Age and Adweek that Bonanza's contract would not be renewed.
He said that "the marketing dollars became leaner over time" and, as a result, "looking at the economics of the situation, we had to let them find another agency."


Latest Cease-Fire Threatened in Azerbaijan


Corrections
An obituary on May 23 about Edouard Roditi, a poet and translator, misstated the place of his death.
He died at a friend's home in Spain, not in Paris.
In July, Mr.
Roditi's brother wrote to The Times about the error.
His letter went astray and he has now written again.


Burst Pipe Disrupts Wall Street
A 30-inch water main burst in the Wall Street area early yesterday, flooding the basements of two major office towers, forcing the closing of the southern part of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive and disrupting the morning for tens of thousands of downtown workers and commuters.
Though the incident happened at 1:30 A.M., hundreds of workers, many of them data-entry clerks for financial firms, were at work and had to be evacuated from the two buildings, 55 Water Street and 125 Broad Street.
The 41-year-old main that ruptured is under South Street near the F.D.R.
Drive.


Krelitz Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Rocky 2: Democracy on the Ropes
In a troubling decision yesterday, a Federal judge dismissed without a hearing claims that local election officials thwarted Larry Rockefeller's effort to force a Republican primary against Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York.
The judge thus undercut the right of candidates and voters to free and fair elections.
To qualify for the ballot, Mr.
Rockefeller, a lawyer and nephew of former Gov.
Nelson Rockefeller, needed to collect 10,000 valid petition signatures in 18 days -- a challenge for any insurgent.
Mr.
Rockefeller gathered a bare 10,673 signatures.


5 Gunshots From an Officer Hit Hostage, Investigator Says
One police officer fired all five of the bullets found in the body of a hostage who was killed by the police in a shootout with gunmen in Queens last month, an investigator in the case said yesterday.
The New York City Police Department and a Queens grand jury have been investigating the shootout to determine whether the police acted properly in the bloody confrontation on a street in Corona.
One police official, Deputy Chief Raymond J. Abruzzi, commander of the Queens detectives, has publicly suggested that their actions were within departmental regulations.


Electoral College Shuts Out 3 Million
To the Editor:
Absolutely "Don't Fix the Electoral College. Scrap It." (letter, Aug. 2), but not only for the reasons having to do with the unequal clout of large states and small states that are discussed by David I. Wells.


CALIFORNIA HURDLE IS SCHOOL SPENDING
Negotiators for the State Legislature entered intense talks with Gov.
Pete Wilson's staff today to resolve a dispute over future state support for public schools, the last remaining hurdle to ending California's two-month budget crisis.
People on both sides familiar with the negotiations said they were trying to find some face-saving concessions to offer Speaker Willie L. Brown Jr. and the fractious Democratic-controlled Assembly as inducement to vote for the main elements of the Republican Governor's plan.


Bold Canseco Trade Gives A's Flexibility
If Ruben Sierra recovers from his chicken pox and helps the Oakland Athletics win a championship or two next month, then leaves as a free agent, the A's would have achieved their two primary goals and would consider their electrifying trade of Jose Canseco a move well made.
They would have won the American League pennant and maybe the World Series, and they would have reduced their payroll.
The Athletics, who want to lop $10 million from their $40 million payroll by next year, traded Canseco to the Texas Rangers on Monday night for Sierra and two pitchers, Bobby Witt and Jeff Russell.
That stunning transaction was the most intriguing of the flurry of deals that were made in time to beat the midnight deadline for postseason rosters.


No Pressure? No Problem. New Tires Run Flat.
For years, tire companies have sought to produce a passenger-car tire that would continue to run even after deflating.
But the race among the world's giant tire producers recently grew more intense when both the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company and the Bridgestone Corporation of Japan announced the separate development of what they call run-flat tires.
Bridgestone's tires, which require special wheels, are currently available on some customized Chevrolet Corvette models.
Goodyear, which apparently hurried to make its announcement after Bridgestone introduced its run-flat tire, says its version will work with regular rims.
But Goodyear is not expected to have its tires on the market until late next year.
An Earlier Version
The notion of such a product -- a tire that will carry a passenger car 50 to 200 miles or so after being deflated -- is not new.
Continental A.G., the German tire company, tested one eight years ago on certain Mercedes-Benz models.
But that product would also have required the auto makers to build a special wheel, a prospect the car companies dismissed as too costly.


Dr. Irving Philips, 70, a Leader in Child Psychiatry
Dr.
Irving Philips, an educator in child psychiatry and president of the International Association for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, died on Saturday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 70 years old.
He died of cancer of the bile duct, said his daughter, Laura, of Ithaca, N.Y.


Jets Pull Off a Reverse: Pickel In, Malamala Out
Although it was the players' first official day off of the 1992 regular season, the Jets' front office tried to stay busy behind the scenes yesterday, pulling some strings and tying some loose ends for Sunday's opener against the Atlanta Falcons in the new Georgia Dome.
As expected, offensive tackle Siupeli Malamala, a third-round pick this year out of the University of Washington, was put on injured reserve one day after making the final roster of 47.
The move means Malamala must miss only four games and not the entire season, which would have been the case had he been put on injured reserve on Monday as part of the final cutdown.


Questions Arise as Tents Go Up in Stricken City
Flanked by broken buildings and downed trees, a village of olive-drab tents that is to shelter 1,500 hurricane victims has risen on a field across from City Hall.
But by early this evening, nearly a week after city officials asked for the tents, it looked like a canvas ghost town.
Not one of the tens of thousands of families who lost their homes in the storm had moved in and it was not clear when they would.


Books of The Times; How Stephen Crane Made His Life Imitate His Art
The Double Life of Stephen Crane By Christopher Benfey 294 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Reading "The Double Life of Stephen Crane," Christopher Benfey's analytical biography of one of America's legendary writers, it still seems incredible how much Crane packed into his eight writing years before his death in 1900 at the age of 28:


Insurers' Florida Tab: $7.3 Billion
The first formal survey of the damage caused by Hurricane Andrew in Florida has found that the insurance industry will pay out an estimated $7.3 billion in claims, making it by far the most expensive catastrophe ever for insurers in the United States.
The insured losses, calculated by an industry group that specializes in estimating the cost of catastrophes, are more than 70 percent higher than the losses caused by Hurricane Hugo in 1989.
They do not include, however, a host of uninsured losses, ranging from the damage to electrical systems in Dade County to the costs of calling out the military.


Non-Aligned Bloc Seeks a New Reason for Being
The Non-Aligned Movement, founded a generation ago on the premise that third-world nations should remain independent of the world's two superpowers, opened a summit meeting today in search of a reason to exist now that one of the superpowers has collapsed.
In their first summit meeting since the breakup of the Soviet Union, leaders of the organization's 108 member nations, representing more than half of the world's population, insisted that the movement still had a purpose, even if the superpower rivalry was over.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON SAYS BUSH IMPERILS ELDERLY
Opening a planned three-day attack on his Republican opponent, Gov.
Bill Clinton spent the day among the elderly today, trying to put the fear of George Bush into them.
The new assault by Mr.
Clinton comes after he has spent the better part of two weeks on the defensive, answering daily volleys from Mr.
Bush and his surrogates.
His approach today seemed designed to imitate and counter that of the Republicans by emphasizing the theme that the re-election of Mr.
Bush would cause suffering through reduced levels of Government aid.
The Republicans have been asserting that electing a Democratic President would mean suffering through higher levels of taxes.


Review/Music; A New Jeremiah in Jerusalem? Don't Despair
When Elizabeth Swados's dramatic oratorio "Jerusalem" was first performed in New York City at La Mama eight years ago, this rich musical portrait of a city torn with ethnic hatred was still a work in progress.
The completed piece, which received a full-bodied but minimally staged performance on Monday evening at the Delacorte Theater, ranks as one of Ms.
Swados's most rewarding scores.
Like much of her work, it also resists conventional categorization, although folk opera might be the closest definition.
Its simple story follows the movements of an American tourist who is led around contemporary Jerusalem by a cynical guide who makes grim wisecracks about the city's future.
When he tries to persuade the traveler to become a prophet, the story deliberately alludes to the biblical account of Jeremiah, who foresees the destruction of the city but whose warnings are met with ridicule until he is eventually forced into exile.


Teen-Agers and 110 Pounds of Powerful Explosives
It was no terrorist attack in the making, the Suffolk County police said yesterday, though the consequences could have been terrible.
Some 110 pounds of a powerful explosive were found in weeds beside railroad tracks in St.
James, on the North Shore of Long Island, on Monday night.
The explosives had been abandoned there, officials said, by one of five teen-agers who, on a lark, had helped his friends steal them from a construction site in Pennsylvania over the weekend.
Then, they said when his mother told him, "Get them out of this house!" he did so.
The teen-ager, 17-year-old Kenneth Mabie of 30 King Arthurs Court in St.
James, was arraigned on weapons possession and reckless endangerment charges yesterday, the morning after two Long Island Rail Road detectives spotted him leaving two large, thick-walled gray boxes -- clearly marked "Explosives" and containing 110 pounds of Tovex -- a short distance from the St.
James train station.
He was held in $25,000 bail.
Tovex is a water-gel type of explosive used to splinter boulders in mines and gouge out foundations at construction sites, and the 220 half-pound tubes found near the tracks about 5:15 P.M.
Monday "were enough to level a city block," said Detective Joseph Kistinger of the Suffolk County police, who is heading the investigation.
Detective Kistinger said that although Mr.
Mabie is the son of a Long Island Rail Road maintenance foreman, he had no dispute with his father and he never intended to use the explosives to blow up the tracks or trains along the heavily traveled Port Jefferson commuter line, which his father happened to be traveling that night.
Service on the line was halted for 90 minutes after the explosives were found and some homes in the vicinity were evacuated.
Drew Biondo, a spokesman for the Suffolk District Attorney, James M. Catterson Jr., said Mr.
Mabie just left them there "while on his way to pick up his father at the train station."
He also said Mr.
Mabie had told the police that he and his friends had experimented with several of the explosives, setting them off under a derelict car in a vacant lot on Sunday night.
Detective Kistinger said the four other youths were questioned on Monday night, "and we did recover what we believe is the remaining Tovex," bringing to 120 pounds the amount of the explosive recovered by the police.
The other youths are expected to be arrested, the detective added.
Mr.
Biondo said Mr.
Mabie told the police that he and his friends found the explosives, along with 10 blasting caps and 61 blasting cap boosters, at a construction site in Stroudsburg Penn Estates near the Alpine Mountain ski resort in Stroud Township, Pa., where the family of one of the youths owns a home.
About 11:30 P.M.
Friday, Mr.
Biondo said, Mr.
Mabie and his friends were in front of a Grand Union supermarket in Smithtown when they decided to "get away from it all" by driving to the house in Pennsylvania.
Early Saturday evening, Mr.
Biondo said, "They decided to go for a drive and there, in the development, they see these two big gray boxes on the side of the road."
"Inside they found an instruction manual," Mr.
Biondo added, pointing out that the police in Suffolk and Pennsylvania are investigating to determine who is responsible for leaving the explosives unattended.
The teen-agers returned to St.
James on Sunday night, "driving very slowly" with the explosives in the back of Mr.
Mabie's car, Mr.
Biondo said.
"They go to a field near Sanson Lane, find an old derelict car and detonate three explosions under it."
Mr.
Mabie then drove home and went to bed, leaving the explosives in his car.
"Monday afternoon, he gets up," Mr.
Biondo said.
"He takes the explosives into the house and puts them on his bed. His mother unexpectedly comes in and -- she clearly can read 'Explosives' -- and she tells him, 'Get them out of here!' He has to go to the St. James station to pick up his father. So he places them in the weeds."


Cucos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


6 Counties That Shine In Ratings For Bonds
Although fiscal success stories are hard to find in the New York region, they do exist: 6 of the nation's 28 most credit-worthy county governments, for example, are in the suburbs of New York City.
These counties have had sound credit ratings for more than a decade.
But experts say their fiscal strength is remarkable now because of the recession, which has been longer and deeper in the New York region than in most of the nation.


Recipient of Baboon Liver Suffers a Serious Setback
The world's first recipient of a baboon liver has taken a serious turn for the worse and his prognosis is guarded, doctors at the University of Pittsburgh said yesterday.
The setback began Friday when the patient went into shock about an hour after undergoing a diagnostic X-ray procedure that involved manipulation of the bile ducts with needles and injection of a chemical, Dr.
John J. Fung, the surgeon in charge of the patient's care, said in an interview.


German Unrest Expected to Bring Tightening of Law on Immigration
Political shock waves from Rostock, where racist demonstrators besieged and burned a hostel housing foreign asylum-seekers last week, have jolted German politicians into actions that may transform the country's political landscape.
Politicians of all parties now predict, for the first time, that Germany will soon tighten its immigration law, which is the most permissive in Europe.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Six weeks or so ago, while I was enjoying the last few pages of Eric Lax's biography, "Woody Allen," on the uptown B train, a young woman squeezed into the seat next to me.
Checking out what I was reading, she turned to me and said, "They've broken up." I turned to her and said, "What?" She repeated, "They've broken up." I said, "How do you know these things?" She said, "I have friends."


Broader Oil and Gas Damage
The toll on oil and gas operations in the Gulf climbed sharply, signaling higher natural gas prices.
Page D1.


Bonds Rally on Buying by the Fed
So goes the dollar, so goes the bond market.
That has been the rule since the dollar began to plunge to new lows a week ago.
But it was not the case yesterday.
The bond market ignored the dollar's fall to its latest new low against the German mark and rallied, instead, on the back of Federal Reserve buying of Treasury securities.


Dollar at Low Against Mark As Officials Do Not Intervene
The dollar sank to another low against the German mark yesterday, stung by another round of negative economic news and left undefended by central banks, which chose not to intervene in world currency markets.
The dollar also approached an all-time low against the Japanese yen.
In late trading, the dollar dropped to 1.3903 marks, down from 1.4030 on Monday, and falling through the 1.40 level for the first time since Germany's modern currency was established after World War II.
It was the fourth time in 10 days that the dollar set a successive low against the mark.


Corrections
A heading in an article on Aug. 23 about Geraldine A. Ferraro's financial affairs misstated her response to a 1987 subpoena from the Queens District Attorney's office.
The subpoena, during a trial of her husband, John A. Zaccaro, demanded official papers from her years in Congress.
As the article said, Ms.
Ferraro and lawyers for the House of Representatives resisted the subpoena as unconstitutionally broad.
It was later narrowed, and Ms.
Ferraro complied with it.
The trial ended in the acquittal of Mr.
Zaccaro on a charge of seeking a bribe from a cable television company.


IEH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 26


CHRONICLE
During a meeting of several thousand aerospace scientists in Washington yesterday, a French-born countess and philanthropist announced the creation of an award for scientific contributions to the field of aerospace.
Declaring her faith in the benefits of aerospace research, Countess ALBINA DU BOISROUVRAY told the World Space Congress at the Washington Convention Center that she had established a $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize "to encourage the advancement" of related sciences.
The prize, to be awarded every two years, is named for the Countess's son, a pilot who had dreamed of becoming an astronaut but who died in a helicopter crash in Mali in 1986, at the age of 24.
The first prize is scheduled to be awarded in the fall of 1993.


Teachers Say They Will Report (but Not Happily) for the Opening of School
With New York City's schools set to open next week and contract talks stalled, the union representing the city's 65,000 teachers says it will return to work without a new contract.
But through radio advertisements and demonstrations at schools, the teachers will try to pressure the Dinkins administration to settle.
The city, for its part, says a settlement, if it is to include the raises that teachers want, will have to be financed through concessions, which officials assert could also improve the schools while making teachers more efficient.


New F.T.D. Service Goes to Thompson
The Florists' Transworld Delivery Association in Southfield, Mich., said yesterday that, as expected, J. Walter Thompson Detroit had won a $14 million advertising account to introduce a national telephone ordering service tying F.T.D. florists to a single "800" number.
An article this week in Adweek said the association would announce the awarding of the account to Thompson Detroit.
In a telephone interview, Roger Gullickson, the association's group director of marketing, said the program, scheduled to begin at the end of the first quarter of 1993, was intended to make it easier for consumers to order flowers.
The program, which will set up the number 800-SEND-FTD, follows similar programs from other floral delivery services like 800-FLOWERS.


Syria Said to Pledge in Writing to a 'Peace Settlement' With Israel
Syria has presented Israel with a document in which Damascus, for the first time, committed itself in writing to reach a "peace settlement" with Israel and acknowledged that Israel had "security concerns" that could be addressed, Israeli officials said today.
The Syrian document, detailing its views on Middle East peace, was presented on Monday by Muwaffaq al-Allaf, the chief Syrian negotiator to the Middle East peace talks here.
Neither Syria nor Israel made the document public.


Graphic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Accounts
*
Mercedes-Benz of North America, Montvale, N.J., to the Stenrich Group Inc., Glen Allen, Va., to handle its national and regional direct marketing account, previously at McCaffrey &amp; McCall, New York.
The shift followed the awarding of Mercedes-Benz's national and regional advertising account to the Stenrich Group's sibling agencies, Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, and the Martin Agency, Richmond.
Billings were not disclosed. *
The Ms.
Foundation, New York, to Public Interest Advertising, New York, to handle advertising for Take Our Daughters to Work Day, a program scheduled to be introduced in the spring.
Billings were not disclosed.


Haitian Factions Hold Talks in Washington
Representatives of Haiti's exiled leader entered direct talks today for the first time with the military Government that overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in a coup nearly a year ago.
A two-hour meeting took place at the Organization of American States this afternoon between the Rev.
Antoine Adrien, a priest who heads the commission set up by the exiled president more than two months ago, and Francois Benoit, Foreign Minister in the Government of Marc Bazin, whom the Haitian military installed as Prime Minister in June.


As Raider Controversy Swirls, Marinovich Is Tranquil
The gentle ocean breezes have a way of beckoning, especially in the late afternoons of a California summer.
Sometimes, when the day is over and the freeways are full, they can be irresistible.
Sometimes, when there is work to do, they must be ignored.
It is possible -- even miles from the beach -- to stand in the middle of a grassy field and feel them calling.
But as Todd Marinovich stepped back in the pocket the other day and locked his eyes on a receiver, all he could hear was bodies crashing.


Teachers in 3 States Strike, Signaling Wider Unrest
Teachers in three states have gone on strike in work stoppages that could spread to three other states.
And union leaders and education analysts say the bitter mood among teachers goes beyond wage and compensation issues.
In the largest of the strikes, 10,000 teachers in the Detroit school system walked off their jobs on Monday, as did teachers in four other Michigan school systems of Mount Pleasant, Clarkston, Grand Haven and Plainwell.
In Illinois, teachers in Harrisburg, Rochester, Bethany, Tri-Valley and Belvidere are on strike, as are teachers in the Bennington, Vt., school district.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
With 30,000 workers striking seven G.M. plants, the U.A.W. is fighting for job security as the company campaigns to cut costs by subcontracting work to outside suppliers, many of them nonunion, and reduce its work force by 74,000 people by 1995.
The strike is also a personal response to J. Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the Spanish engineer who is leading G.M.'s Detroit cost-cutting.  [ Page A1. ]
General Mills announced a $450 million deal for RJR Nabisco's ready-to-eat cereal business.
Shredded Wheat, Spoon-Sized Shredded Wheat and Shreddies. will join Wheaties, Cheerios and Total, while Nabisco will be able to retire some of its debt.  [ D1. ]


Becker Is Making His Points on a Mellower Note
Seven years later, Kevin Curren looks across the net at his former teen-age nemesis, Boris Becker, and mostly sees signs of adulthood in the makings of a reddish beard, the attempted containment of a rebellious temper, the abandonment of the need to dive across a hard-court surface for a single point in a tennis game.
Some would look at Boris Becker, No. 8 in the world and going who knows where, and wonder what went wrong.
Against Curren that Sunday afternoon in 1985, on the Wimbledon grass in the final, Becker seemed an unyielding 17-year-old serve-and-volley machine headed for years of Grand Slam domination.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug 28
Aug 21
Aug 30
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
7.0
7.4
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.9
3.1
Gasoline stocks
205.1
209.2
209.6
Distillate stocks
126.1
123.5
126.7
Crude imports, daily
5.4
6.5
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.1
1.8
Crude stocks
325.9
332.5
350.3
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
86.3
90.1
90.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Thompson Arrives and Goes to Work
Later arrived yesterday for the player to be named.
Ryan Thompson, the widely acknowledged but officially unannounced part of last week's David Cone trade, reported to Shea Stadium before last night's game against the Atlanta Braves.
With the cloak of official quiet at last shed, the Mets made roster space for Thompson and then made room in the clubhouse for the 24-year-old center fielder.
And instantly, the organization found itself asked to make predictions and projections for Thompson.


Alubec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Fixing Corporate America's Short-Term Mind-Set
Business school professors tend to be an anonymous breed, and their research is often denigrated as a blend of big words and small ideas.
Yet Michael E. Porter of the Harvard Business School stands out as a genuine star.
When he speaks, people in business, finance and government listen -- frequently paying handsomely to do so.
He commands up to $25,000 a lecture.
Mr.
Porter's three major books on economic and corporate competitiveness are footnote-filled doorstop tomes, but roughly a half a million copies have been sold.
His instructional videos sell like hotcakes.
Besides business clients, he has increasingly worked as a brain for hire, with clients including New Zealand, Canada and the Basque region of Spain.
He did a pro bono study of the Massachusetts economy last year that helped shape the thinking beind the cost-cutting and business development programs of the state's Republican Governor, William F. Weld.


Campbell Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Antoinette M. Kraushaar, Art Dealer, Dies at 89
Antoinette M. Kraushaar, the owner of one of New York City's oldest art galleries, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 89 years old.
She died of natural causes related to old age, said Carole Pesner, the director of Kraushaar Galleries Inc.


Nissan's Rating Might Be Lowered
In a move that could lead to increased borrowing costs for the Nissan Motor Company, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation has placed the company's debt rating on credit watch for possible downgrading.
Standard &amp; Poor's said the action affects about $8.7 billion of the debt of Nissan, the second-largest auto company in the Japanese market.
The move was prompted by a decline in automobile demand in the slumping Japanese economy, continued weakness in overseas markets and heightened competition.


Personal Health
MOVE a muscle and chances are you will be using a tendon.
Move a muscle too often, too hard or too abruptly and you may injure the tendon that connects that muscle to bone.
Few people who are athletically inclined manage to get through an active lifetime without doing damage to one tendon or another, for tendons are among the most vulnerable structural elements of the human body.


CompUSA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Outside Lawyer Appointed General Counsel at Salomon
Salomon Inc., filling its last significant management post in the aftermath of the Treasury market scandal, announced yesterday that it had selected a lawyer from outside the securities industry to serve as general counsel.
The lawyer, Robert Mundheim, will succeed Robert Denham, who was named chairman of the company earlier this year.
Mr.
Mundheim, a co-chairman of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson, the New York law firm, is also a professor and former dean at the University of Pennsylvania's law school.


Real Estate; Beverly Hills' Symbol of 80's Finds Tenant
THE sale and leasing of a long-vacant 78,000-square-foot office building has come as a welcome relief for the unaccustomedly soft office market in Beverly Hills.
It has also provided a happy ending for a building that spent years in limbo as an asset of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the bailout agency for the savings and loan industry.
The building, the former headquarters of the Columbia Savings and Loan Association on Wilshire Boulevard, had become something of a symbol of both the overconfident 1980's and the chastened 90's.
Columbia was a high-flying institution that had invested heavily in the market for high-yield junk bonds in the late 80's.


Product Placement Is Under New Attack
OPPONENTS of product placement, the sales strategy by which consumer products and services appear in movies, television programs and music videos, are seeking to reignite their stalled drive against the practice.
In connection with a news conference tomorrow in Washington, they plan to play excerpts from a Miller Brewing Company videotape in which an announcer breathlessly describes how brands "quite often become star performers" through "implied endorsements on network TV" and in films.


NCH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Glamis Gold reports earnings for Year to June 30


The Ad Campaign


How to Help the Victims of the Hurricane
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations for the hurricane relief effort:
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 9140, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y., 10256. (800) 842-2200, or for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.


G.M. Ultimatum to Parts Makers Brings Showdown With Workers
United Automobile Workers, meet Jack Smith, Inaki Lopez and G.M.'s new cost-cutting team.
The spreading strike at the General Motors Corporation, which now involves more than 30,000 workers at seven plants, is the first concerted reaction by G.M. workers to the company's campaign to cut costs and reduce its work force by 74,000 people by 1995.
The strike is threatening to affect nearly twice as many plants and workers by the end of this week.


Pollack or Cod? Fish or Foul? F.D.A. Takes a Closer Look
Beluga caviar is selling for $32 an ounce wholesale and lumpfish roe for $1 an ounce, and the Food and Drug Administration says that someone in the New York region is making a pretty penny selling the latter as the former.
The agency said that if it hadn't been for a change in its own policy, the substitutions might have continued undetected for years.
In April 1991, the agency's Commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler, told the board of the National Fisheries Institute that the F.D.A. intended to find and prosecute institute members who substituted less expensive, less desirable species of fish for more valuable ones.
His comment received a standing ovation.


QE2 Leaves Drydock for Repair in Europe
As dozens of well-wishers waved goodbye, a patched-up Queen Elizabeth 2 set sail today after three weeks in drydock here and headed for Hamburg, Germany, for permanent repairs.
Those repairs to the QE2, the Cunard Line flagship, which was badly damaged when she ran aground on Aug. 7, are expected to take another month.
That means the luxury liner will have to cancel her September cruise schedule and will not re-enter service until Oct. 4, said Priscilla Hoye, a spokeswoman for the company.


Ralphs Grocery reports earnings for Qtr to July 19


The Re-Emergence of an Elusive Director
From the mid-1970's to the early 80's, Hans Jurgen Syberberg captured the imagination of a devoted cult of film enthusiasts.
In his hours-long Teutonic fantasies, he combined cinematic esthetics unseen since the silent era with live actors, props, projections, puppet theater and sound fragments, all bound into a dreamlike flow that justified his ultra-Wagnerian credo, "Film as the music of the future."
But for the last decade, as far as Mr.
Syberberg's American admirers could tell, the director had fallen off the edge of the earth, his work almost impossible to see.
That made this summer's Edinburgh Festival, which offered a retrospective of his major films and two performances of his latest stage piece, of special interest.


Northgate Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Conquest Airlines Corp. reports earnings for Year to May 31


After Andrew, Another Unannounced Visitor: George Bush
When Ramon Rodriguez and Adela Antonini whistled at George Bush from the doorway of their windowless apartment, they never expected that the President would just drop by, unannounced.
And while they were honored, seeing that the President did not visit any other hurricane-damaged homes during his trip here, they were really hoping to see someone more important.


Cleveland Art Museum Appoints New Director
The director of the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore, Robert P. Bergman, was named director of the Cleveland Museum of Art yesterday.
On July 1, 1993, Mr.
Bergman will take over from Evan Hopkins Turner, who has been the director in Cleveland since 1983.
"I'm in the fortunate position of going to an institution that at its core is fundamentally strong, not problematical," Mr.
Bergman said yesterday.
He emphasized that continuity would be his agenda for the Cleveland museum.


Big Crop of Small Apples Is Forecast This Season
The apple-harvesting season is moving into high gear in New York State, with predictions that the McIntosh crop will be larger than usual, though the apples themselves will be smaller than normal.
The reason: favorable weather that has loaded the trees with apples, according to Warren Smith, the fruit expert of Cornell University's Cooperative Extension Service, based in Ulster County.


Harman International Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Race; Dueling Incumbents Revisit House Bank Scandal
The House bank scandal is being replayed in a fierce Congressional contest here between two incumbents who clashed in the partisan war that the scandal unleashed in Washington.
On one side is Representative Jim Nussle, a 32-year-old conservative Republican freshman who is best known for putting a paper grocery bag over his head on the House floor to dramatize his outrage over Congressional perquisites and overdrawn checking accounts.


Will the Magic's Center Make a Trade Disappear?
The proposed three-way trade involving the Knicks, the Los Angeles Clippers and the Orlando Magic was still not completed yesterday.
The question now is this: Will the trade happen this week, next week or next month, or will it ever happen at all?
Magic center Stanley Roberts continued to block the deal yesterday, exercising his contractual right to reject a trade.
The Knicks had agreed to send starting point guard Mark Jackson to the Clippers for forward Charles Smith, point guard Doc Rivers and shooting guard Bo Kimble.
The Knicks had also agreed to send a first-round draft pick (1993) and a second-round pick (1995) to Orlando.
Roberts would have gone to Los Angeles, and the Clippers would have sent a first-round draft choice to Orlando.


LecTec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Turkey Conceals Its Oppression of Kurds
To the Editor:
"Don't Shoot Down Iraqi Aircraft" (editorial, Aug. 19) states that not only Iraq but also Turkey represses its Kurdish population.
However, Turkey's repression has gone far beyond bombardment of Kurdish villages in northern Iraq.
Turkey is conducting major air strikes against Kurdish civilians within its borders.
Unfortunately, the Turkish Government has hidden its actions in the Kurdish region of Turkey, which are largely unreported in the United States.


Cold Spring Journal; The Vision That Wasn't. Or Was It?
The first clue to why this town of 2,800 people was braced for anywhere from 10,000 to 100,000 visitors Monday night came about nine miles south of Cincinnati, where a sign outside of Leisure Time Sports advertised "Lady of Light T-shirts."
Farther along Route 27, the highway that pretty much defines Cold Spring, every lawn, driveway and business parking lot was blocked off with yellow plastic police tape.
And across from St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church, a small contingent of military police from the National Guard was standing watch.


Greetings to Anderson, Now the Newest Giant
The summer turned a little brighter for the Giants yesterday.
O.
J.
Anderson, describing himself as a "New York-New Jersey guy who would have been real sad to go to another team," returned to the club.


Laurentian Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


We Can Turn Monster Schools Into Mini-Schools Right Now; Why Teachers Leave
To the Editor:
As a teacher in a "troubled" school I listened most attentively to the plan presented by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez; seldom have I been more disappointed.
To think that the promise of a summer job and a parking space will attract seasoned educators to these schools demonstrates just how out of touch he is with his teachers.


NASA Picks Cray Research Over NEC in Computer Deal
Cray Research Inc. said today that it had won a bitterly contested battle with NEC, the Japanese supercomputer maker, and had begun negotiations with the NASA Ames Research Center for the sale of a $74.5 million supercomputer.
The rivalry, which had been seen as a significant test of United States supremacy in the market for the world's fastest computers, had led to charges by the Japanese company that there is a de facto ban in the United States against purchasing foreign supercomputers.
The Japanese company had filed a protest with Washington.


Local Star May Take Rutgers a Long Way
A year ago, Bryan Fortay dropped into Doug Graber's lap, as unexpected as a found doubloon.
Soon these words were sweeping around the many Rutgers campuses: "Transfer. . . . Miami. . . . Quarterback."
Expectations regarding Rutgers's football future began to soar then, and 12 long months later, reality is at hand.
On Saturday, the Scarlet Knights will play their first game with the imposing Fortay, 6 feet 3 inches and 206 pounds, as their quarterback.


CHRONICLE
Would James Beard, who died in 1985 and who did so much to elevate American cuisine, be dismayed at the prospect of a chili cook-off in his own backyard?
"Not at all," said PETER KUMP, president of the James Beard Foundation in Manhattan.
"We tend to take American cooking for granted and forget that chili is a great American creation."


Newbridge Networks reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Special Teams Suit McMillan and Burkett
When Bruce Coslet announced the Jets' team captains for the coming season, it was no surprise to see wide receiver Al Toon and middle linebacker Kyle Clifton named for the third straight year.
What was a surprise was Coslet's decision to name six captains instead of the usual three.
There was center Jim Sweeney as co-captain on offense, defensive end Jeff Lageman as co-defensive captain and wide receiver Chris Burkett and defensive back Erik McMillan as special teams co-captains.
Last year, there was one special teams captain, kicker Pat Leahy, who has since retired.


Mary Norton, 88, Author of the 'Borrowers' Series
Mary Norton, a writer of children's books whose series about the tiny Borrowers was acclaimed by adults and devoured by legions of children, died on Saturday at her home in Hartland, England.
She was 88 years old.
She died of a stroke, said Wendy Schmalz of Harold Ober Associates, a New York literary agency.


U.N. Agencies Ordered to Continue Efforts in Iraq
The Security Council defied President Saddam Hussein tonight by ordering United Nations aid agencies to continue efforts to supply food and medicine to needy Iraqis despite the Baghdad Government's attempt to shut down an international aid program intended to help victims of the international economic embargo against Iraq.
In a statment by its President, the Council said Iraq's refusal to renew its aid agreement with the United Nations is "inconsistent" with previous resolutions demanding that Baghdad cooperate with relief organizations and stop oppressing civilians.


Industrial Training Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tax-Exempt Yields Gain but Taxables Slip
The yields offered by money market funds were mixed in the latest week, as the supply of municipal debt remained heavy and money markets regained composure after last week's decline in the dollar, according to The IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, which surveyed 857 funds.
The assets of tax-exempt money funds were down $1.3 billion for the week, to $95 billion, as the average number of days left to maturity of securities held in fund portfolios increased a day, to 65.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
President Bush put his authority over foreign policy to work on behalf of his political campaign today, handing nearly $8 billion in contracts and grants to hard-pressed farmers and arms workers.
At a General Dynamics Corporation plant here, the President appeared beneath a banner proclaiming "Thanks Mr. President" to announce that he had approved the sale of up to 150 of the company's F-16 fighters to Taiwan, reversing nearly 10 years of American policy over the stiff objections of the Chinese Government.


Bonds Countering Dollar's Plunge
When the dollar plunged to new lows against the German mark in late August, the bond market went with it, giving up much of the gains it made in July and early August.
And there was concern that a continued fall in the dollar would pull the bond market even lower.
But while that could still be the case, a look at the recent performance of the dollar and the 30-year bonds shows the opposite:


The Cartoon's Characters Squish And Twist? It Must Be a Plympton
When the cartoonist Bill Plympton looks at a face, all sorts of things cross his mind.
Weird things, like pulling both ears until they stretch a couple of feet, and then tying them in a knot.
Or winding a face up like the rubber band for a model-airplane propeller.
Or expanding the nostril until the nose inhales the entire head.
"I think the human body is the ultimate cliche, so that's why I like tearing it apart, smooshing it and kneading it like dough," Mr.
Plympton said in a recent interview in his studio in Chelsea.
By way of example, he reached for a prop, a latex-rubber model of an actor, and planted his fist right in the middle of its face, which quietly imploded.
Mr.
Plympton seemed pleased with the result.
A boyish-looking 46 years old, in big shorts, an oversize short-sleeved white shirt, Top-Siders and socks, he looked like a large version of Tintin.


Gas Losses In Storm Increased
The Federal Government today nearly tripled its estimate of the natural gas output temporarily lost to the nation in the wake of Hurricane Andrew's battering of production and pipeline equipment in the Gulf of Mexico.
The revised calculation by the Minerals Management Service, which governs oil and gas production in Federal waters, is that 2.5 billion to 2.75 billion cubic feet of daily gas output would be halted for at least two weeks.
That is equal to at least 20 percent of the region's production and 5 percent of the nation's daily output.


This Is My Room, and That's My Stuff


AN AGGRESSIVE TRADE POLICY
Agriculture specialists saw a new aggressiveness in trade policy in the expansion of the wheat-subsidy program.
Business Day, page 2.


Agency Rent-A-Car reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


The Wisdom of Africa
Black Africa has much to teach its former masters in Europe.
This may surprise those who think the only news from Africa concerns famine, war, pestilence and tyranny.
Those scourges exist, but Africa has managed to keep a fifth affliction, ethnic separatism, from shattering national boundaries.
Black Africa offers a lesson on the wisdom of respecting the territorial integrity of all states, whatever the mix of peoples.
As in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union, the borders of sub-Saharan Africa were imposed to suit the convenience of past imperial masters.
Thus Britain lumped together peoples who were historically antipathetic in creating Nigeria and the Sudan, both with a Muslim north and a Christian or animist south.


Casey's General Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Harmful Politicking in California
Despite a serious recession, California remains wealthier than many nations.
Yet for two months it has had to pay some employees and many bills with i.o.u.'s, and its credit rating has plummeted.
The episode has embarrassed California's politicians.
It also challenges them to a higher order of statesmanship the next time around.
Yesterday's $57.4 billion budget agreement may well improve the state's credit rating and its investment climate.
It may also be sufficient to finance hard-pressed schools, health clinics and other public programs.
But the margin for error is slim.
If the revenue projections are too optimistic, California will face some tough choices next year.
Budget planners assume that personal income will rise by 7.8 percent by 1993; but economists expect less.


Japan Is Tough, but Xerox Prevails
A case study in how to beat the Japanese: When the Xerox Corporation began designing its new high-speed photocopying machine, the Model 5100, it had world markets in mind, especially the Japanese.
But it took a different tack from American auto makers, which, in pursuit of Japanese markets, tried to sell cars with steering wheels on the wrong side.
Xerox took great pains to understand the needs of its foreign customers, developing a machine for the Japanese that would duplicate the delicate kanji language characters, for instance, or would handle the flimsy papers used in Japan.


COMPANY NEWS
ACCESS AMERICA TELEMANAGEMENT, acquired United Telemanagement Inc., creating the second-largest telemanagement company in the country, with more than $17 million in annual sales.
HELEN OF TROY CORP., El Paso, a personal-care products concern, declared a 3-for-2 stock split to be paid as a 50 percent stock dividend on its common stock.
The dividend is payable on Oct. 1 to shareholders of record on Sept. 15.


Simcoe Erie Investors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Investing Into the Wind: An Odd, Volatile Game
In May 1991, about 80 homeowners in the Hampshire Homes development of southern Miami filed suit against the Lennar Corporation, accusing Florida's largest home builder of shoddy construction with substandard materials.
The company fixed some decoration and trim, but said the suits were groundless and the homes structurally sound.
Then came last week's hurricane.


Barbara and Me
Barbara Bush and I have a lot in common.
We have both been married for 44 years.
We each have five children and 12 grandchildren.
We look somewhat alike, with white hair, ample hips and wrinkles from the sun and smiling.
Sometimes I, too, wear three stands of pearls.
We both left college to marry similar men: New Englanders by birth, Ivy League graduates.
Both signed up to serve in World War II the day they turned 18.
George Bush was shot down over the Pacific and rescued by a submarine.
My husband, Malcolm, flew 73 missions in his P-47 before being shot down over Germany and taken prisoner.


Rabin Strongly Criticizes Palestinian Negotiators
Saying Israel is offering Palestinians in the occupied territories the best deal for self-rule they have ever received, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin strongly criticized Palestinian peace negotiators today for raising issues that he said cannot lead to an agreement.
While his new Government has made several conciliatory gestures like prisoner releases, Mr.
Rabin said it would not continue to do so, and he warned the Palestinians against expectations of an eventual independent state or of Israeli land concessions in the present Middle East peace talks.


Hospital Workers Need Protection Against New TB Strains
To the Editor:
My union local represents some 15,000 members employed in New York City hospitals.
More than 500 members of our union have been afflicted by or tested positive for the drug-resistant tuberculosis you discuss in "Drug Resistant TB Is Seen Spreading Within Hospitals" (front page, Aug. 1).
One of our members had to have a lung removed because of this disease.


Fay's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


U.S. Wheat Subsidies Are 'Message' to Europe
In the ambitious expansion announced today in the Government's subsidy program for wheat exports, the Bush Administration is not only ingratiating itself electorally with farmers but also displaying a new, sharp-elbowed aggressiveness in trade policy, agriculture specialists said.
Today's action more than doubles, to nearly 30 million tons, the amount of wheat eligible for Federal subsidies under the Export Enhancement Program and adds some countries not previously covered.
In taking the step, the Administration is taking special aim at European competitors, whose heavier subsidies it has long sought to eliminate as part of a freer world trading system.


Design Notebook; A Ranch House Built for a Life That Used to Be
Everything looks smaller now.
The mountain on Forest Avenue scaled on the way to school is just a slight pitch in the sidewalk, the big highway that stretched from the front of the house all the way to Chicago is only a road.
Seeing an old house again after so many years is a little bit like unearthing old clothes -- a once-mod sweater that lost its shape, a newborn's teeny white shirt with built-in mittens, brought home from the maternity ward.
Rooms are like hand-me-downs, lived-in and baggy.
They bring flashes of recognition when you unfold them even though you know they no longer fit.


Dinkins to Appoint Task Force on Lead Threat in Soil
As city officials and experts differed over the dangers of high lead concentrations found in soil near the Brooklyn, Manhattan and Williamsburg bridges, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that he would form a task force to investigate the problem and recommend solutions.
Mr.
Dinkins said that forming the task force, to be headed by First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, came in response to the fear and anger among residents in Williamsburg that arose after crews sandblasting the Williamsburg Bridge rained dust, grit and lead paint chips on the roofs, yards, streets and playgrounds in the neighborhood.
Concern in Williamsburg prompted the city to test soil in Manhattan and Brooklyn near the two other bridges, although there has been no recent sandblasting there.


CHRONICLE
Every year for nearly half a century, a group of old friends has gotten together on the day before Labor Day to sing "Happy Birthday" to JEAN DALRYMPLE, the producer, director, actress and author.
This Sunday's party is special, however, because they will be celebrating Ms.
Dalrymple's 90th birthday.
The annual celebrations were held at Ms.
Dalrymple's country home in Danbury, Conn., until it was sold in 1984.
Since then, her friends have taken turns being hosts of the event.


Corrections
An article in some copies on Aug. 21 about a power failure in Hoboken, N.J., and parts of Jersey City and Union City N.J., misidentified a spokeswoman for Public Service Electric and Gas of Newark.
She is Michelle O'Neill.


Jerusalem Journal; Draft Yeshiva Boys? Parents Fire Up an Old Battle
As 17-year-old Yitzhak Fischer left the Israeli Army recruitment center, having just registered for the draft that awaits him in a few months, two young men walked in.
Both wore black hats, black coats and sidecurls that identified them as fervently Orthodox Jews, known in Hebrew as haredim, those who tremble before God.
They were about to get their draft deferments renewed, and Yitzhak Fischer, dressed in T-shirt and jeans, didn't like that one bit.


CUC International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Arbitron Ends National TV Ratings System
The Arbitron Company shut down its experimental national television ratings system yesterday, citing a lack of support from advertisers and network television.
The decision leaves the A. C. Nielsen Company without competition in the national television ratings.
The Arbitron system was known as Scan America.
Thomas Mocarsky, vice president of communications for Arbitron, said the company was unable to persuade three television networks, most large advertising agencies and many individual advertisers to back the project.


Young Finds Job Closing In On Him
Each appearance is a test for Anthony Young: of his arm, of his character, of an imagined future for the Mets that might not necessarily include John Franco in the bullpen.
To date, Young's scores as an experimental closer have been exemplary.
He is 12 for 12, and yesterday, he won marks for extra effort with diminished tools.
With his right arm tired and his fastball without pop, Young held up under the distractions and the pressure of the ninth inning to preserve a 6-5 victory for the Mets over Atlanta at Shea Stadium.


DuBose Defends Himself
Notre Dame's DEMETRIUS DuBOSE, suspended for two games by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, yesterday defended his decision to accept a $600 loan from two football boosters.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Bush handed nearly $8 billion in contracts and grants to hard-pressed farmers and arms manufacturers, putting his discretion over foreign-policy to political use.
He announced the sale of up to 150 of the company's F-16 fighters to Taiwan at a General Dynamics plant and promised farmers $1 billion to subsidize American wheat sales abroad.  [ Page A1. ]
The Bush Administration is displaying a new aggressiveness in trade policy, as well as ingratiating itself with farmers.  [ D2. ]


Gambinos Miss Court Date, Forfeiting $5 Million
Two brothers facing charges of smuggling heroin for John Gotti have disappeared, failing to appear at their arraignment in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Tuesday and thus forfeiting $5 million in bail.
Neither Federal prosecutors nor defense lawyers offered any explanation for the absence of the brothers, John and Joseph Gambino.


New Credit Card From G.E. To Offer Merchant Coupons
The GE Capital Corporation introduced a new credit card yesterday that offers discount coupons and rebates from 24 large companies, including Kmart, Macy's, Northwest Airlines, Sprint and Hertz.
At a time when competition in the credit card industry is intensifying as banks reduce interest rates and cut annual fees, GE Capital, a unit of the General Electric Company, and its merchant partners are offering a card that is not as cheap as many others, but which offers sizable benefits to those who use it.


Overwhelmed by Kindness, Louisiana Begins Rebuilding
A week after Hurricane Andrew slashed through Louisiana, plastic sheets are spread on hundreds of roofs like oversized Band-Aids, utility crews jam the streets and National Guard troops direct traffic as the storm's victims begin the painful march from recovery to rebuilding.
Some communities have been so swamped by donations of food and other supplies that they have begun turning away contributions, while other towns remain dependent on daily truck convoys for water.


I.B.M. and Canon Are Said to Plan Venture
I.B.M. and Canon are planning to team up in developing certain small computers, a Canon executive said today.
As a first product, the companies will develop an I.B.M. notebook computer with a built-in Canon ink-jet printer, the official said.
But he said the collaboration, agreed on in a meeting in July between John Akers, chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation, and Canon Inc.'s president, Keizo Yamaji, would be broader than that.


Transplanted New York Town Houses
IT took two New Yorkers to come out to L.A. and make the perfect New York town house," said Jeffrey Kalban, formerly of Long Island. He and Ivan Cohen, who was born in Brooklyn, are the architects of a 75-unit town house project in Pico Canyon, a new community in the northwest reaches of Los Angeles County.
Mr.
Kalban and Mr.
Cohen placed the houses on a slight diagonal, something unknown in the New York houses of their childhoods.
The unusual placement means that the houses are not right up against one another; round and octagonal structures encasing bathrooms stand between them.
The town houses, which are still in the planning-approval stage, have roofs of different colors, for individuality.


YELTSIN RESISTANT ON JAPAN DISPUTE
Two weeks before a visit to Japan, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia said today that politics made it untimely for him to hand over disputed Pacific islands to Japan, and he complained that Tokyo was putting inappropriate pressure on him to do so.
After Mr.
Yeltsin's meeting today with the Japanese Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, Russian officials said that the President had "12 variants" for a possible settlement to discuss in Tokyo during his Sept. 13-16 summit meeting, but that the Japanese position seemed not to have changed.


This Is My Room, And That's My Stuff
The books children like to read, the friends they cultivate and the furniture they want to relax on are not always what their parents have in mind.
In an informal survey, children 6 to 18 years old and their parents were asked about accessories for a child's bedroom, and the responses were nicely soothing: two generations can agree, when furnishings are basic, functional, well designed and whimsical but definitely not corny.
A child's room is inherently multipurpose.
Adults may have separate rooms for separate activities: a library for reading, a study for working.
But a child usually rules over only one room, humble or fancy.
In their rooms, children usually want to sleep, read (quietly) and listen to music (loudly).
They may want to stare mistily at posters of the idol of the moment (be it Madonna or Luke Perry), play or even work at a computer.


I.B.M. Spins Off PC Business Into New Company
In the clearest evidence yet of its determination to shake up its bureaucratic corporate culture, I.B.M. said yesterday that it was establishing a separate company to develop manufacture, distribute and market personal computers.
Those functions were previously handled by different divisions of the International Business Machines Corporation, the world's largest computer maker.
The creation of a personal computer company had been promised but the details had not been announced until yesterday.


Saratoga Dew Greets Belmont
New York's racing scene switched smoothly from Saratoga to Belmont Park yesterday, and the star of the show on opening day was the filly with the evocative name, Saratoga Dew, who won the Gazelle Handicap for her seventh victory in nine starts.
That is, she was the artistic star of the show.
To some people in the crowd of 10,664, the financial star was the otherwise undistinguished 3-year-old gelding named Party Talk, who won the final race of the day at 60-1 and paid $125.40 to anybody wild enough to bet $2 on him to win.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; Quayle Tries to Separate Family Values and 'Murphy Brown'
Vice President Dan Quayle sought today to rein in a political debate on family values that seems to have spun out of his control since he opened it last May with an attack on the television show "Murphy Brown."
In a speech to community leaders here, Mr.
Quayle defiantly rejected the view that the Republicans have used "family values" as an issue to inflame prejudices against homosexuals, welfare recipients and feminists.
He said he also dismissed the notion that family values is an empty subject.


Threat Only When on Crack, Homeless Man Foils System
Peering from their apartment windows, the residents of West 96th Street have watched Larry Hogue's slow descent into madness.
At first, he was just another shambling homeless man who muttered to himself, slept barefoot in the snow and ate from the garbage.
But over the years his behavior became more bizarre.
He stalked a teacher as she walked her fawn-colored Akita, and threatened to roast and eat the dog.
He dragged a raggedy chair into a busy intersection, leaned back as if he were reclining in a chaise longue and munched a bagel as cars swerved around him.


China Flunks a Freedom Test
China would like Americans to applaud its economic reforms while averting their eyes from abuses like arbitrary arrest, torture and slave labor.
But such selective vision now becomes much harder after two disturbing events.
A report was smuggled out of China documenting the harsh torture of political prisoners.
And Chinese police, striking at night, arrested a peaceful democracy campaigner, Shen Tong, and two young associates.
The disposition of their case remains unclear.


63 Days After Its Cash Ran Out, California Passes Austere Budget
California's protracted budget crisis sputtered to an unhappy end early this morning when the weary State Assembly capitulated to Gov.
Pete Wilson and approved the final elements of an austere budget 63 days after the state ran out of cash.
But the final package was so tenuous, with a pitifully small cash reserve of only $435 million in a $57.4 billion budget, that fiscal experts here warned that the State Government was likely to go broke again by spring and have to go through yet another painful round of cutting, barring an unexpectedly strong recovery from recession.


Review/Pop; Rebel Image, Sensitivity And Anger
If a carefully smoothed-out rebel image attached to a medium-size musical talent can create a pop star, then Mark Curry, a singer and songwriter from Sacramento, Calif., has a chance for big-time success.
Mr.
Curry, who performed at the Bottom Line on Tuesday evening with a four-man band, embodies the image of an angry but sensitive young tough as he might be photographed by Bruce Weber for a Calvin Klein jeans ad.
His hair is just a little too slick, his undershirt a little too white and his vocabulary too self-consciously peppered with profanities for him to be entirely believable.


Market Place; Rising Challenger In Tough Market
THE consumer electronics business in and around Manhattan is not for the faint of heart or small of ego.
The bazaar atmosphere that preys on unwary tourists, the bustling gray market of this port city and razor-thin margins have cut deeply into the ranks of companies that have tried to make it here.
Although some retailers -- the Wiz, for example -- are surviving and expanding in the market, casualties include Newmark &amp; Lewis, Lafayette and Crazy Eddie.
Even 47th Street Photo, which long appeared to have made a success of organized chaos, is operating under bankruptcy protection.


On the Campaign Trail: New Questions and More Largess


Essay; I Am a Pencil
One sign, up near the stage in the amphitheater, reads "Stills," inviting not moonshiners but still photographers.
Another, near good seats in the center, proclaims "Cameras," for the TV medium.


Aerosonic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sonora Gold reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ways to Store Delicate Items Safely
When storing delicate or sensitive items, from photographic negatives to prom gowns, good intentions are rarely enough.
"Damage can occur precisely when you think you've got something safely stored away," said Bruce Hutchison, who heads the Textile Conservation Laboratory at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Manhattan.
Some wrapping materials stain, while others trap moisture and attract dust.
Glues, paints and foams in packing materials can leak formaldehyde, which often distorts colors and corrodes metals.


Spaghetti Warehouse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 4


3 Haitians With H.I.V. Are Allowed to Enter U.S.
Waiving regulations that bar foreigners with the virus that causes AIDS from entering the United States, the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization has allowed three infected Haitians held at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to come to American hospitals for treatment.
The decision to grant the Haitians "humanitarian parole" is the first breach in a wall of rules, policies and court decisions that have combined to trap nearly 300 Haitians at Guantanamo because either they or a family member on whom they depend has tested positive for H.I.V.


De Beers May Be Losing Grip on Diamond Market
Less than a month ago De Beers Consolidated Mines, the secretive South African company that dominates the world diamond trade through a cartel that controls 80 percent of the world's uncut diamonds, seemed to have coasted miraculously through a recession that had rattled other luxury industries.
But in the last few weeks the industry has admitted that it is suffering its worst swoon in a decade, provoking speculation, once unthinkable, that the cartel is losing its grip.


Connors's Birthday Gift Is Same as Last Year's
It was a tough act to follow, but since it was his own act, he could hardly turn down the opportunity for a sequel.
With effortless charisma and infinite determination, Old Man Open, a k a Jimmy Connors, dominated a scene that was part prize fight, part Broadway opening and part sorcery late last night as he went to battle against Jaime Oncins of Brazil in their first-round match of the United States Open.
Connors celebrated his 40th birthday smack dab in the middle of the same Stadium Court that served as launching pad for an odyssey that not only took him to the semifinals of the 1991 Open but performed a jaws-of-life maneuver on his career.
And he wasn't content to celebrate without a victory party.
He came back, he saw a fresh-faced opponent just ripe for intimidating, and he conquered him, 6-1, 6-2, 6-3.


Henley International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Earthquake Rocks Utah


The Hurricane's Reshaping Of the Landscape Isn't Over
The pounding South Florida took from Hurricane Andrew reshaped the man-made and natural environments below Miami in ways that may significantly alter the beauty and sense of place of the area for years to come.
Hurricanes are part of the natural cycle, blowing away the weak and allowing their progeny to flourish.
But Andrew may have a different, less desirable outcome than previous major storms because of the way man has intruded on the environment in this century, scientists said this week.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
PAUL BURGETT recalls the excitement he felt his first few days as a freshman violin major at college.
He'd won much acclaim as a high school musician in his hometown, and was sure that college would be only a way station on his fast track to an international concert career.
Then he heard the other students practicing.
"There was the terrible moment when I feared that the admissions office had made a mistake, and I would soon receive a second letter asking me to leave under the cover of darkness to spare everyone the embarrassment," said Dr.
Burgett, who is now the vice president and university dean of students at the University of Rochester, the school where he had been a freshman.
"My notions of talent were radically redefined."


Lawmaker's Foe Says She's a New Broom
As Gary L. Ackerman, the four-term Representative described in "The Almanac of American Politics 1992" as "an authentic New York character," sweeps across his new Congressional district, seeking votes and raising money, he faces an unlikely challenge from Rita Morris, a plain-talking 68-year-old librarian who seems to have sprung straight out of a Frank Capra movie to ride the crest of voter discontent.
With the shrinking of New York's Congressional delegation to 31 from 34 to reflect population declines, the representative from Jamaica, Queens, is running in a new district, stretching from the bustling streets and elevated trains of Flushing, across the manor houses and horse farms of Long Island's North Shore, to middle-class Smithtown in Suffolk County.
Only 15 percent of Mr.
Ackerman's former district is included in the new Fifth District.


Jimbo and New York: In Perfect Harmony
In the Open cockpit, Jimbo is our boy, never more than now that he is too old to have a future and too worn to thrill us to climax, the championship.
He is everything that's skewed and wonderful about this city, greedy and needy and bold and begging and gifted and mean.
Watching Jimbo play, the crowd tries to channel his spirit, bottle it and take it home, like air or sunshine from somewhere nice.
Then sniff it as needed.
Anything is possible with the spirit of Jimbo; you could imagine yourself hot-wiring a parked car to move it and steal its space.
Drop a buck in a homely's paper cup, then drive him off your block.
Nupe the whales.
Jimbo has, in rare perfect chemical harmony, the twin elements of New York that in most other people are either disproportionate or in conflict.


Civil War Survivor At Ole Miss
WHEN Union troops rode into Oxford, Miss., in 1864 and burned buildings in the town square, the observatory of the University of Mississippi was one of the few structures they spared.
The Barnard Observatory, as it is known, was used as a hospital by both Union and Confederate troops during the Civil War.
Since 1989, the elegant historic structure, built by Chancellor Frederick A. P. Barnard and now a state and national landmark, has been undergoing a $3 million restoration.
Yesterday it became the new home of the university's Center for the Study of Southern Culture.
Eudora Welty is scheduled to speak at the official dedication next month.


Raytech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


Ascii of Japan Says It Has Lined Up Lenders
Kazuhiko Nishi, the entrepreneur who helped create Japan's personal computer industry, has rescued his company from the threat of bankruptcy.
Mr.
Nishi, 36 years old, announced Tuesday that six banks had agreed in principle to lend his company, the Ascii Corporation, 16.4 billion yen, or about $130 million, which will allow Ascii to pay off a huge bond that must be redeemed next March.


Have A Seat On The Bird
BRUCE NEWMAN has been called the Cecil B. De Mille of antiques dealers.
His appreciation of the flamboyant has made him a natural collector of fantasy furniture, an extravagant and eccentric genre whose pieces often have animal shapes and were produced in exotic materials, mainly in Europe, from 1800 to World War I. He and his wife, Judith, have donated 14 prize examples to the Brooklyn Museum.
They will go on view Sept. 24.


New Concern On Number Of Officers Near Slaying
Police officials are concerned that more off-duty officers than they originally believed were socializing along a strip of bars in Queens when an off-duty housing officer was killed and that the officers did not come forward to tell what they knew, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
Acting Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said on Tuesday that 6 to 10 officers were in the vicinity when the housing officer, Paul Heidelberger, was shot to death, and that they had broken departmental regulations by not telling that to the police.
But an official who spoke on condition of anonymity said yesterday that in the last few days, the department had received anonymous calls identifying at least three more off-duty officers who were at the scene.


Seeking Sponsors For AIDS Program
A television production company that has created a syndicated special aimed at educating teen-agers about the virus that causes AIDS is disappointed: only about half the commercial time on the program has been sold so far.
Jeff Pryor, a spokesman for GGP in San Francisco, said that advertiser concern over the program's subject matter had limited the sponsorships.
He added that GGP stood to lose $100,000 if more advertisers did not participate in the one-hour special, called "Understanding H.I.V.: Does Teen America Know the Facts?"


Metall Mining reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rights Agency Accuses Times and Pressmen's Union of Job Discrimination
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission charged the pressmen's union and The New York Times with discrimination yesterday in the hiring of substitute workers in the newspaper's press room.
The commission, in a civil complaint filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, contended that the membership practices of the New York Newspaper Printing Pressmen's Union No. 2 resulted "in excluding women, blacks, Hispanics and Asians from employment as casuals in the press room, limiting their opportunities to obtain such employment because of their race and color, sex or national origin."


Chairman of Bethlehem Steel Is Retiring
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the nation's second-largest steel producer, announced yesterday that Walter F. Williams, who has been the company's chairman since 1986, will retire at the end of October.
Curtis H. Barnette, Bethlehem's senior vice president and general counsel, will become the company's chairman and chief executive.
The resignation of Mr.
Williams, who is 63 years old, came as a surprise to many in the industry.
He had been expected to remain at the helm until he turned 65.
But Mr.
Williams said yesterday that he had planned for some time to retire, to devote more time to his family.
But he said he had decided to wait for several events, principally the company's unsuccessful negotiations to establish a joint venture with British Steel, before retiring.


WALL STREET PLACES ITS BETS
The swings taken by a home builder's stock after the hurricane show Wall Street's odd ways of betting on disaster.
Business Day, page D1.


No Headline
"M.I.T.'s attempt to disassociate the Overlap process from the commercial aspects of higher education is pure sophistry. No reasonable person could conclude that the Ivy Overlap agreements did not suppress competition." -- Federal District Judge LOUIS C. BECHTLE.  [ A1:5. ]


Assembly Speaker Pressed To Help Stop Car Thefts
The Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly told a group of black clergymen today that the Legislature must respond to the increasingly violent car-theft problem in the Newark area, but he said an effective response requires more discussion between community leaders and lawmakers.
"We're not at a point yet for legislation," said the Speaker, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, a Republican, "although it will not be delayed forever. It can't be."


Coleman Is Planning to Strike Back
Vince Coleman, convinced that his suspension for his confrontation with Manager Jeff Torborg was unwarranted, has asked the Players Association to file a grievance against the Mets with baseball's arbitrator.
Coleman, suspended without pay for two days by the Mets for his on-field shoving match and subsequent profane clubhouse exchange with Torborg Tuesday night, will seek to have the suspension overturned and his salary of $32,222 restored.


Yamaguchi to Turn Pro
KRISTI YAMAGUCHI, an Olympic gold medalist, is turning pro, but she may still defend her figure skating title at the 1994 Lillehammer Games.
Yamaguchi has until next Feb. 19 to apply for reinstatement as an amateur to the United States Figure Skating Association, according to an International Skating Union rule passed in June. (AP)


Partisan Air Clouds a Trenton Hearing on the Loss of Medicaid Funds
Despite the vow of its chairman that no "witch hunt" is in store, a legislative committee began hearings today on the apparent loss of nearly a half-billion dollars in Medicaid money, with Republicans pointing fingers directly at Gov.
Jim Florio.
The lone Democrat on the committee responded in kind, blaming Republicans for both a downgrade of the state's bond rating and a budget that will require sharp cutbacks in services and layoffs of some 2,700 state employees.


A Fischer Display of Power, Logic and Coolness
Bobby Fischer has taken up where he left off 20 years ago.
In defeating Boris Spassky yesterday, the maverick grandmaster was as relentlessly logical over the chessboard as ever.
He put his finger on a weakness in Spassky's position and bore down on it with the massive force of two rooks, a queen and a knight.
Mr.
Spassky judged that he could not hold him off by routine defense and thus put his faith in a desperate sacrifice of a bishop.
But Mr.
Fischer showed his old coolness and his indomitable technique in suppressing the wild Spassky bid to fight back.


Dinkins to Appoint Task Force on Lead Threat in Soil
As city officials and experts differed over the dangers of high lead concentrations found in soil near the Brooklyn, Manhattan and Williamsburg bridges, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that he would form a task force to investigate the problem and recommend solutions.
Mr.
Dinkins said that forming the task force, to be headed by First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, came in response to the fear and anger among residents in Williamsburg that arose after crews sandblasting the Williamsburg Bridge rained dust, grit and lead paint chips on the roofs, yards, streets and playgrounds in the neighborhood.
Concern in Williamsburg prompted the city to test soil in Manhattan and Brooklyn near the two other bridges, although there has been no recent sandblasting there.


Hospital Workers Need Protection Against New TB Strains; Quarantine Now
To the Editor:
"Drug-Resistant TB Is Seen Spreading Within Hospitals" (front page, Aug. 1) describes recent outbreaks of tuberculosis in New York and other cities.
You discuss AIDS, homelessness and neglect of TB control programs as reasons for the problem, and such proposed solutions for hospitals as ultraviolet lights, improved ventilation and isolation rooms for patients with TB.
These efforts are necessary, but not sufficient, to prevent future outbreaks.
An overdue response is involuntary quarantine of recalcitrant patients with tuberculosis.


Falcon Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


The Ferraro Marathon: 24-Hour Campaigning
If there was anything surreal about being in an almost-deserted greenhouse on the eastern tip of Suffolk County chatting about mutant tomatoes at 4:30 A.M., it was lost on Geraldine A. Ferraro.
Nearing the final leg of a round-the-clock, 24-hour campaign swing across New York State, Ms.
Ferraro remained about as lucid as she had been 19 hours earlier, asking rapid-fire questions befitting her training as a schoolteacher and prosecutor.


Mrs. Bush's Red Ribbon
To the Editor:
Re "Teaching Mercy to the Republicans" (editorial, Aug. 22): When Mary Fisher looked out at the Republicans she was addressing, she was heartened to see Betty Ford wearing the red ribbon of compassion and solidarity for AIDS victims.


As Quake Wreaks Havoc, Chamorro Appeals to U.S.
A natural disaster added to the pressures facing President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro today as she struggled to deal with demands from Washington that she rid her Government of the influence of the opposition Sandinista Front.
On Tuesday night, giant waves set off by an earthquake lashed most of the Nicaraguan coast.
Estimates of the disaster's toll, given today as 40 or more, were significantly increased late tonight.
The Civil Defense chief, Lieut.
Guillermo Guevara, was quoted in news agency reports as saying there were about 100 dead, 150 missing, 4,200 evacuated and 16,000 homeless.


High Schools For Students Who Disrupt
To deal with the persistent problem of the disruptive, even violent, student, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has ordered the creation this fall of four small, alternative high schools to be attended by youngsters facing long-term suspension from their regular schools.
The alternative schools will be for students over 15 years old who have been suspended by district superintendents for at least five school days, and up to a year.


Don't Pity Japan's Part-Time Rice Farmers
To the Editor:
"Import Rice? Japan Thinks the Unthinkable" (Business Day, Aug. 18) states that, despite generous assistance to rice producers by the Japanese Government, "Many farmers cannot support themselves and are forced to take other jobs in factories and stores." This is an anachronistic perception.
Farmers in Japan have long been classified as full-timers and part-timers, with the full-timers accounting for no more than 20 percent of the total.
The origins of Japan's official rice pricing go back to the Food Control Law enacted in 1942, intended to guarantee rice and other staples to the consumer at affordable levels.
As Japan achieved prosperity, the law became the basis for fixing prices and protecting the producer.
In addition, the agricultural land-reform program initiated by United States occupation forces after World War II made owners of often small plots out of former tenants.


Books of The Times; Two Whodunits Set in a Dreary, Cynical Russia
Two Leaps Across a Chasm A Russian Mystery By Nikolai Aleksandrov Translated by Anthony Olcott. 322 pages.
Charles Scribner's Sons. $20.
Rough Beast An Ivan Duvakin Novel By Anthony Olcott 243 pages.
Charles Scribner's Sons. $20.
Moscow's apparatchiks continue to be an implacable foe all over the former Soviet Union; the police habit hasn't been broken and the midnight knock on the door is still a reality; in the republics, ethnicity is all; come glasnost or perestroika, cynicism is the single unifying attitude of people everywhere.


Doctor in Brooklyn Held In Sex Abuse
A Brooklyn pediatrician was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing three teen-age patients at his office over the last 15 months, the police said.
Dr.
Gerald Levinson, whose office is at 1098 Bushwick Avenue in Bushwick, was charged with five counts of sexual abuse, two counts of attempted sodomy, five counts of endangering the welfare of a child and one count of promoting the sexual performance of a child, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.
The last charge "relates to photos of one of the patients" believed to have been taken by Dr.
Levinson, who lives at 135 Post Avenue in Westbury, L.I., Officer Bloch said.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Biennial Confusion
Q.
I am confused about the life span of biennials.
Can you clarify? -- Doris Weingarten, Hancock, N.Y.
A.
A biennial is a plant that requires most of two growing seasons to complete its life cycle; that is, to develop to the point of producing flowers and seeds, and then die.
During the first year, the plant builds in its roots the food reserves needed to nourish the following year's flowers.
Examples include celery, onions and beets.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  HOMELESS, ADDICTED AND MENTALLY ILL
At first, Larry Hogue was just another shambling homeless man on the Upper West Side, but over the years his behavior became more bizarre.
He vandalized cars, heaved rocks through the stained glass windows of a landmark church and knocked a schoolgirl in front of a truck.
Mr.
Hogue is among the growing ranks of mentally ill people who are also addicted to drugs, and his collision with the Upper West Side has offered a detailed look at the failure of the mental health system to help people like Mr.
Hogue or protect the public from their depredations.
A1.
TASK FORCE TO EXAMINE LEAD PROBLEM
As city officials and experts differed over the potential hazards of high lead concentrations in soil near the Brooklyn, Manhattan and Williamsburg bridges, Mayor Dinkins announced yesterday that he would form a task force to investigate and recommend solutions.
B3.
MORE POLICE OFFICERS IN VICINITY?
Police officials are concerned that more off-duty officers may have been socializing along a strip of bars in Queens when an off-duty housing officer was killed and did not come forward to tell investigators what they knew, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
B3.
NO CHARGES AGAINST OFFICER
A Queens grand jury yesterday found no criminal liability on the part of the police officer who killed a hostage by firing five bullets into him during a shootout with gunmen.
No charges will be filed against the officer.
B3.
GAMBINOS MISS COURT DATE
Two Gambino brothers facing charges of smuggling heroin for John Gotti have disappeared, failing to appear at their arraignment in Federal District Court in Manhattan and thus forfeiting $5 million in bail.
Neither Federal prosecutors nor defense lawyers offered any explanation for the absence of the brothers.
B2.
REGION  BUDGET DIRECTOR IN NASSAU QUITS
Palmina Grella, who has worked in the Nassau County budget office for 23 years, is resigning as budget director in the midst of the worst financial crisis in the county's history.
And she offers this warning: Layoffs alone will not be enough to solve the county's problems and a complete bureaucratic overhaul is needed to cut costs.
B7.
GIMMICKS THAT MIGHT WOO VOTERS
With less than two weeks before the Democratic primary to pick a candidate to run against Senator D'Amato, the candidates are searching for ways to grab voters' attention.
B6.
A VOW FROM TRENTON ON CAR THEFT
The Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly told a group of black clergymen that the Legislature must respond to the increasingly violent car-theft problem in the Newark area.
But he said an effective response requires more discussion between community leaders and lawmakers, rather than just a rush to pass legislation.
B7.
FINGER-POINTING ON FISCAL WOES
Despite the vow of its chairman that no "witch hunt" is in store, a New Jersey legislative committee began hearings today on the apparent loss of nearly a half-billion dollars in Medicaid money with Republicans pointing fingers directly at Governor Florio.
B7.
Insurance company stops issuing policies in New York State because of new regulations.
B6.
Scarsdale Journal B7  Chronicle B8


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Days After 'Final' Word on Draft, Clinton Faces Renewed Questions
A week after Bill Clinton issued what he declared was his final statement "to set the record straight" on how he stayed out of the military during the Vietnam War, the Democratic Presidential nominee today found himself again facing questions about how he managed to avoid the draft.
The Los Angeles Times reported today that the Democratic candidate's late uncle, Raymond Clinton, had led a successful lobbying effort to provide special protection for the young Mr.
Clinton from being inducted during a 10-month period in 1968 when he was classified as 1-A, prime draft material.


McEnroe Sees A New Order
John McEnroe, after marveling at Jimmy Connors's eagerness to celebrate his 40th birthday on the Stadium Court rather than in the tranquillity of retirement, says he knows he will not be around for 20 Opens.
"There's a changing of the guard taking place, and I'm part of the guard that's being shipped out," he said.
McEnroe got through the first round in straight sets despite being unusually anxious about its outcome.


Jaroszewicz, a Polish Ex-Premier, And His Wife Are Killed at Home
Piotr Jaroszewicz, a former Prime Minister of Poland, and his wife were found dead in their home in a suburb of Warsaw, Polish officials said yesterday, describing the deaths as homicides.
Mr.
Jaroszewicz was 82 years old; the age of his wife, Alicja Solska, could not be learned yesterday.
Mr.
Jaroszewicz, who was forced to resign in 1980 after 10 years in office, was an architect of the policies that hastened economic collapse and led to the August 1980 strikes that resulted in the creation of the Solidarity trade union movement.


Amelia Lobsenz; Executive, 70
Amelia Lobsenz, a public-relations executive who ran her own firm in Manhattan for the last 36 years, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 70 years old and lived in Old Brookville, L.I., and Manhattan.
She died of cancer, said her daughter, Kay Abrahams.


Sears Will Pay $8 Million To Settle Repair Complaints
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company has agreed to pay $8 million to settle civil charges that its auto repair shops systematically overcharged customers for routine repairs in California.
Attorney General Daniel E. Lungren of California, who announced the settlement yesterday, said it would avert years of costly trials and would speed a change in auto repair practices at Sears, where California's undercover agents were charged an average of $288 a visit for unnecessary repairs during an 18-month investigation.


A CANCER LEGACY FROM CHERNOBYL
Children who were exposed to radiation from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant disaster are developing thyroid cancer sooner and in larger numbers than expected, researchers report.
The results are the first reliable data in the population downwind of the Chernobyl accident in 1986, said Dr.
Marvin Goldman, a radiation biologist at the University of California at Irvine who was not involved in the new study.


Budget Chief For Nassau Steps Down
Palmina Grella has worked in the Nassau County budget office for 23 years and knows as much about county finances as anyone in government, friends and officials agree.
So her sudden resignation on Tuesday as budget director, amid the worst financial crisis in the county's history, came as a shock.
She said she was leaving for personal reasons, which she declined to discuss.
But she said she would miss her $80,000-a-year job and the challenge of helping the county resolve its $130 million budget gap.


Leonard W. Mayo Is Dead at 92; Educator Who Helped Disabled
Leonard Withington Mayo, an educator who spent a lifetime helping people with disabilities and who was an adviser on their needs to five Presidents, died on Tuesday at his home in Chagrin Falls, Ohio, a suburb of Cleveland.
He died in his sleep three days before his 93d birthday, said Case Western Reserve University, with which he had been associated since 1941.


Felix Guattari, a Psychoanalyst And Philospher, Is Dead at 62
Felix Guattari, a  psychoanalyst and philosopher who influenced the post-1968 generation of French intellectuals, died on Saturday at La Borde, the clinic 100 miles south of Paris where he had worked for four decades.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his publisher said.


INSIDE
Growing Fears on Europe
Reflecting the rising anxiety over the referendum in France on Sept. 20, a senior British official said a no vote would effectively kill the treaty on European union.
Page A14.
Hard Times in Nicaragua
As ties with Washington worsen, death and destruction spawned by an earthquake add to the pressures on President Chamorro.
Page A3.
Schools for the Disruptive
To deal with troublemakers, four New York City high schools will be created this fall for youngsters facing long-term suspensions.
Page B1.
Fischer Wins First Game
Bobby Fischer, playing forcefully and recalling the champion of old, defeated Boris Spassky handily in the first game of their chess match.
Page C22.


Engle Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Norman Frenkiel, 87, Authority on Geriatrics
Dr.
Norman N. Frenkiel, an authority on geriatrics, died on Saturday at the Hebrew Home at Riverdale in the Bronx.
He was 87 years old and had lived at the home since 1989.
Dr.
Frenkiel died of heart and lung failure, said Angela Sullivan, a spokeswoman for the home.


Vanbiesbrouck Reaches Pact To Remain With the Rangers
JOHN VANBIESBROUCK and the Rangers have agreed to a new contract.
Terms were not disclosed, but it was learned that Vanbiesbrouck will earn an average of about $1 million per year.
The contract is for two years plus an option season.
Last season, Vaniesbrouck earned $375,000.
LLOYD FRIEDLAND, Vanbiesbrouck's agent, said Vanbiesbrouck received no offers from other teams, although he was technically considered a free agent.
"John is now among the top-paid goaltenders in the league," Friedland said.


Fischer Wins First Game of Match With Spassky
With verve and vigor, Bobby Fischer returned to competitive chess today after a 20-year absence as a recluse and crushed his old rival Boris Spassky in the opening game of an exhibition series.
Playing with the initiative of the white pieces, Mr.
Fischer dominated Mr.
Spassky through six hours of play, reminding several grandmasters of the champion of old.
Mr.
Spassky resigned on the 49th move, having played rather colorlessly, in the view of experts here, without the esprit he showed two decades ago when the two men played for the world championship.


Royal Bank Canada reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Don't Pity Japan's Part-Time Rice Farmers; 'Open Your Ports'
To the Editor:
Michael Crichton (Op-Ed, Aug. 10) says the critics of his novel "Rising Sun" ignore the book's core, America's economic decline.
But "Rising Sun" is a polemic in the guise of a murder mystery, with an afterword and bibliography.
The characters say that the "Japanese are the most racist people on earth," mounting a "planned attack" on America through a "new kind of invasion." Sympathizers with the Japanese are compared to Nazi collaborators.
The book begins with a disturbing metaphor.
A beautiful young woman is found murdered after having been roughed up sexually in the Los Angeles headquarters of a giant Japanese corporation.
She was a call girl bought by the wealthy, like the book's America.
"In no other country in the world," says the omniscient detective, "would you hear people calmly discussing the fact that their cities and states were sold to foreigners."


Melvin L. Rosen, 42, Organizer Of Programs to Fight AIDS Crisis
Melvin L. Rosen, a prominent battler against AIDS and the immediate past chairman of Beth Simchat Torah synagogue in Manhattan, died on Monday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 42 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Rosen died from H.I.V.-related lung cancer, said Howard M. Forman, a family spokesman.


Growing
Perhaps nowhere on earth is the gardening spirit more alive than in Dade County.
The shade houses -- sturdy structures covered with gauzy cloth -- that once sheltered acres of bromeliads, hibiscus, cocoplum and towering palm trees collapsed like matchsticks last week when Hurricane Andrew blew through the nurseries, leaving in its wake hundreds of thousands of overturned pots, miles of tattered shade cloth and broken irrigation lines.


Rabbi Eliezer Berkovits; Jewish Theologian, 84
Rabbi Eliezer Berkovits, an authority on Jewish theology and philosophy, died Aug. 20 at his home in Jerusalem.
He was 84 years old and had lived in Jerusalem since 1973.
Rabbi Berkovits died of heart failure, said a niece, Leah Berkovits.


British Privacy Debate Swayed U.S. Decisions
To the Editor:
Your obituary of Lord Patrick Devlin (Aug. 11) omitted what he will certainly be best remembered for.
In 1957, the Wolfenden Committee, which had been commissioned by Parliament to review the criminal law of Britain, published a report recommending the repeal of statutes penalizing any type of consensual sexual acts between adults, including homosexual acts and acts of prostitution.
The report based its recommendation on the proposition that "there must remain a realm of private morality . . . which is, in brief and crude terms, not the law's business."


Corrections
The diagram in the bridge column yesterday showed North's hearts incorrectly.
North held K-Q-9-6.


Seagram Co. Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Accounts
*
The French Government Tourist Office, New York, to Ketchum Advertising New York, which retains the tourism advertising account, with billings estimated at $4 million.
The agency has had the account since 1989.
Ketchum bested three other New York agencies in a mandated review: Bloom FCA, Della Femina McNamee Inc. and Wells Rich Greene BDDP. *
Federal Express Corp., Memphis, to TFB/BBDO, Palo Alto, Calif., to manage a new communications program for the automated systems marketing division.
TFB/BBDO bested Tallant LaPointe &amp; Partners, San Francisco, in a review on the account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Don't Like That Brick Wall? How About the Seine?
Karen Loew has figured out how to do for the claustrophobic Manhattan apartment what Michelangelo did for the Sistine Chapel: Turn it into a room with a view.
Not by putting a corner-to-corner fresco on the ceiling.
Not by putting top-to-bottom mirrors on the walls.
But by painting window shades.
Yes, plain old-fashioned pull-down window shades.
"I thought, 'If you can paint the room your favorite color, why not paint the window?' " said Ms.
Loew, a 40-year-old computer-graphics designer.
"If you can put in a sofa you like, why not put in the view you like? It's all portable."


Critic's Notebook; Air-Conditioner: Century's Instrument Of Musical Change
The 18th century had its clarinet, the 19th its saxophone, but our time has invented and nurtured a wind instrument of its own, the air-conditioner.
It has changed our musical lives and not always for the better.
If by summer's end the music-loving ear now finds itself only vaguely curious about the new season only a few weeks away, thank in part this 20th-century machine.
The culture of the air-conditioner reproduces the seamlessness of subtropical life, where changes in season are noticed barely if at all.
Before its advent, concert halls and opera houses, having protected music from the elements for three-quarters of the year, approached the month of June with only heat and stifling discomfort to offer their listeners.


Ernest A. Jones, 77; Directed the Growth Of a Top Ad Agency
Ernest Albin Jones, for many years one of the country's foremost advertising executives, died on Monday at St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Pontiac, Mich.
He was 77 years old and lived in another Detroit suburb, Bloomfield Hills.
He died of complications of a stroke, said the Vasu, Rodgers &amp; Connell funeral chapel in nearby Royal Oak.


Normal Economic Existence Is Years Away in Storm Area
Despite the vast scale of Federal aid to hurricane victims that President Bush has announced, southern Dade County will take years to rebuild the houses and businesses it needs, say economists, business owners and local officials.
The President, who visited here on Tuesday, took a large first step toward reviving the local economy when he pledged to reconstruct one of its sturdiest props, Homestead Air Force Base, which employed almost 5,000 military personnel.
Most roads have been cleared of debris, though not of horrendous traffic, and the battered telephone, electricity and water systems are expected to be strung back together in weeks or a couple of months.


Review/Television; Boomers Entering Middle Age In a Series
So what happens to the thirtysomethings when they become forty almosts?
That is the question explored, not to say tortured, by "Middle Ages," the new series that has its two-hour premiere tonight and will take its place in the CBS schedule next Thursday at 10 P.M.
The opener introduces three baby boomers who played together in a rock group during their heady teens and have since been reduced to wearing suits and ties, earning their livings and commuting between downtown Chicago and the burbs.
At stage center is Walter Cooper, an appliance salesman whose old-fashioned company has just been bought by a high-powered maker of electronic gadgetry.
The pressure is turned up.


Standard Logic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


In Queens, the Little Garden That Could
THE accent is very British.
The design is very British.
Only the locale is very New York backyard.
But then, Prof.
Roger Hart is a transplant from Nottingham, England.
He is also the owner, designer, builder and head gardener of this densely landscaped site tucked behind a 19th-century brownstone.
The tiny garden is hardly typical of Long Island City, Queens.


HOW DOES FLORIDA'S GARDEN GROW?
The gardening spirit is battered but very much alive in Dade County, Fla.
Growing, page C2.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  THREAT TO DIAMOND CARTEL
De Beers of South Africa may be losing its tight grip on the world diamond trade, partly because of a flood of Angolan diamonds that have begun to pour onto the normally orderly world market.
A1  PRESSING AHEAD ON IRAQ AID
Despite Baghdad's attempts to end an international relief program, the United Nations Security Council ordered aid agencies to continue supply efforts intended to help victims of the economic embargo.
A10  MORE TROUBLE FOR NICARAGUA
Death and destruction from huge waves caused by an earthquake have added to the pressures facing President Chamorro, who is struggling to deal with demands from Washington that she rid her Government of influence of the leftist Sandinista Front.
A3
Managua's ties with Washington have badly deteriorated.  A3  THE TOLL OF CHERNOBYL
Researchers reported children exposed to radiation from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster are developing thyroid cancer sooner and in larger numbers than expected.
A9  YELTSIN BALKS ON JAPAN ISSUE
The Russian President, two weeks before a visit to Japan, said that politics made it untimely for him to hand over disputed Pacific islands to the Japanese.
He also said that Tokyo was putting inappropriate pressure on him.
A8  SERBIAN LEADERS BACK OFF
Serbia's governing party abandoned an effort to remove Yugoslavia's Prime Minister, who is seen as more willing to make concessions than the hard-line Serbian leadership.
A14  BRITAIN WAITS FOR FRANCE
A senior British official said Britain would consider the treaty on European union dead if France rejects it in a referendum this month.
The comment showed growing apprehension over the French vote.
A14  BEHIND GERMAN ATTACKS
Long before the first firebomb exploded in anti-refugee attacks in Rostock, economic and social trauma wrought by the transition from Communism to capitalism had made the city a powder keg.
A14  The Prime Minister of Poland talks tough on strikers.
A15  Israel's Prime Minister criticizes Palestinian negotiators.
A5  U.S. admits three Haitians with the virus that causes AIDS.
A6  Indonesia's leader still has things firmly in hand.
A12  A plea for peace in Cambodia with or without the Khmer Rouge.
A13  Jerusalem Journal: Should yeshiva students be drafted?
A4  National A16-20, B10  FROM BUSH, NEW LARGESS
Using his sway over foreign policy to good political advantage, the President helped arms workers by approving the sale of F-16's to Taiwan and lent farmers a hand by pledging $1.7 billion in wheat-sale subsidies and crop-failure relief.
A1
News analysis: Military decisions and electoral imperatives.  A20
Quayle tried to regain control of the family-values debate.  A20
Once again, Clinton was confronted with draft questions.
A20  CALIFORNIA GETS A BUDGET AT LAST
More than two months after the state had run out of cash, the California Legislature capitulated to Governor Wilson and approved the final elements of an austere budget.
But fiscal experts said another round of painful cost-cutting was likely by spring.
A1  CITICORP UNIT CRITICIZED
Anonymously disclosed documents show that Federal bank examiners have found at Citicorp's home mortage subsidiary, one of the largest in the country, sloppy practices that have exposed the company to excessive risk and resulted in the overcharging of many customers.
A1  ANTITRUST RULING AGAINST M.I.T.
A Federal judge found that M.I.T. had participated in a decades-long conspiracy with other elite universities to fix the level of student financial aid packages.
A1  THE LONG ROAD BACK
Economists and local officials say it will take years before southern Dade County can fully rebound from Hurricane Andrew and restore to the community the businesses and houses it needs.
A1
Storm victims began moving into a tent village in Homestead.  A18
A big disaster loan program has a history of frustration.  A19
The hurricane took a lasting environmental toll.  A19
A Federal official said a South Florida epidemic was unlikely.  A19
In Louisiana, a painful march from recovery to rebuilding.
A18  'IT IS SOMETHING THAT WILL LAST'
A 12-acre farm at a jail south of San Francisco bears metaphors for what went wrong in a prisoner's troubled past, lessons about how to live a healthy and honorable life, and proof that love and work make a garden flourish.
A16  A KILLER AT AGE 9
A rare kind of homicide case was brought to a close in Pennsylvania when a boy pleaded no contest in the death of a 7-year-old playmate and was placed on probation until he turns 21.
A16  Metro Digest B1  LOST IN THE SYSTEM
Larry Hogue, a homeless man who until recently terrorized the Upper West Side neighborhood that he made his home, is among the growing ranks of mentally ill people who are also addicted to drugs.
Although his is an extreme case, Mr.
Hogue represents the sometimes dangerous fusion of two trends: the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill and the rise of cheap crack cocaine.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-13  Child's-room decorating that parents can live with.
C1  Off camera with Edd Hall.
C1  Design Notebook C1  Growing C2  Where to Find It C2  Currents C3  Home Improvement C4  Garden Q.&amp; A.  C5  City Gardener C8  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C17-24  Bill Plympton's surreal cartoons.
C19  Fischer wins first match game.
C22  A Fischer display of power and logic.
C22  Music: From Mark Curry.
C17  Critic's Notebook C19  Tommy Flanagan's jazz.
C19  Word and Image: 1930's into 40's in a TV series.
C19  Two Russian whodunits.
C21  Home Video C22  Sports B11-16  Baseball: Young gets another save for Mets.
B11  Coleman will file grievance.
B13  Perez is weary but winning.
B13  Columns: Vecsey on Torborg.
B11  Chass on baseball.
B13  Lipsyte on Jimbo.
B15  Football: Hostetler wobbly in practice.
B11  Montana wonders about his future with 49ers .
B11  McMillan gets salute from Jets.
B16  Local star buoys Rutgers.
B16  Horse Racing: There's Saratoga Dew at Belmont.
B14  Tennis: Connors triumphs.
B11  Open notebook.
B15  Obituaries D18-19  Felix Guattari, a psychoanalyst and philosopher.
D18  Piotr Jaroszewicz, a former Prime Minister of Poland.
D18  Leonard W. Mayo; educator who helped the disabled.
D19  Melvin L. Rosen, an organizer of programs to fight AIDS crisis.
D19  Mary Norton, author of "Borrowers" books.
D19  Ernest Albin Jones, an advertising executive.
D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  China flunks a freedom test.
Harmful politicking in California.
Home, sick home.
The wisdom of Africa.
Letters  William Safire: I am a pencil.
Michelangelo Signorile: Behind the hate in Oregon.
Amin Gemayel: Don't sell out Lebanon.
Susan McLane: Barbara and me.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is offering $158 million of 5.74 percent notes due 1997 at a price of 100 through Merrill Lynch.
The notes have a yield spread of 25 basis points over the Treasury's five-year note.
*
Luzerne County Industrial Development Authority, Pa., is tentatively offering $50 million of tax-exempt refunding revenue bonds at a price to yield 7.20 percent for an issue due in 2017 through Butcher &amp; Singer.
The financing is rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P.
*
New York State Thruway is tentatively offering $168.4 million of revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.45 percent for issues due 2010 and 2012 through Merrill Lynch.
Yields on serial bonds range from 4.25 percent in 1994 to 6.40 percent in 2007.
The financing is rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB by both S.&amp; P. and Fitch.
*
Ohio Water and Development Authority is tentatively offering $60.1 million of collateralized water and air-quality-development refunding revenue bonds for the Dayton Power and Light Co. project through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The tax-exempt bonds are priced to yield 6.40 percent for bonds due in 2027 and are rated A-2 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.
*
SafewayInc. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $240 million of debt securities.
*
TKR Cable IInc., Englewood, Colo., a cable television operator, has filed for up to $350 million of senior notes due 1999 and $400 million of senior debentures due 2012 through Merrill Lynch.
Preferred  *
Storage Equities Inc. filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a proposed public offering of three million shares of $25 preferred stock through Salomon Brothers Inc.
Ratings  *
General MillsInc.'s commercial paper rating has been lowered to A-1, from A-1+ by S.&amp; P.


Polish Premier Sticking to Tough Line on Strikers
She has been vilified by strikers and criticized by members of her own political party for her unyielding stance toward workers, but Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka shows no signs of backing down.
Ms.
Suchocka rose from back-bench obscurity three months ago to head a coalition Government that was immediately tested by a wave of strikes.
As Poland's fourth Prime Minister in three years, she was conciliatory in some instances.


Polymerix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Insurer Limits New York Policies
Beginning Sept. 15, Nationwide Insurance Company will stop issuing individual and small-group health insurance policies in New York State, in response to a sweeping measure, adopted by the State Legislature in July, that dictates that insurance companies charge uniform rates, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The company said its current policyholders would not be affected by the decision, but it did not rule out making changes that would affect those policyholders in the future, saying it was awaiting regulations, to be issued by the Insurance Department in the fall, that will enforce the legislation.
Nationwide is believed to be among the first companies to stop selling insurance since the measure was passed.


It's Time to Meet: What's the Agenda?
A lawyer not directly involved in the ownership dispute involving Commissioner Fay Vincent was wondering the other day if the anti-Vincent faction really had a majority of clubs supporting its position.
"Maybe they count more clubs than they have because the Chicago clubs plan to vote twice each," the lawyer said.
"That's how they do things in Chicago."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
3.39
5.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.14
5.33
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.21
5.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.03
6.04
7.63
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.37
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.47
8.47
9.07
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.33
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


British Say Europe Pact Dies if French Vote No
Britain would consider the treaty on European union a dead letter and withdraw it from ratification if voters in France reject the accord in a nationwide referendum later this month, a senior British official said today.
With public-opinion polls in France suggesting that opinion is evenly divided on the issue, the British statement underscored growing apprehension in Europe over the French referendum on Sept. 20, which is increasingly being viewed as a make-or-break ballot on the future of European integration.


Money, and Gripes, in Loan Program
When a natural disaster strikes, many businessmen and uninsured homeowners turn to the Federal Government for help in rebuilding, and in the 39 years of its existence the Government's main disaster loan program has distributed more than $15 billion.
Along with that record of accomplishment, however, is red tape that frustrates many applicants and and an overall loss rate of 9 percent.


FOOTBALL: Pass-Fail Tests: Montana Is Unhappy and Hostetler Is Wobbly; Simms Sharper In Split Practice
A subpar Jeff Hostetler, returning 11 days after a back and pelvic injury, took the starter's snaps today as the Giants began the heavy work for the season opener.
In theory, at least according to Coach Ray Handley, Hostetler shared the quarterbacking with Phil Simms.
And with both taking an equal number of plays even though Hostetler is clearly not 100 percent, it appears that Handley is determined to get Hostetler ready for the 49ers on Sunday.


A Jail Garden's Harvest: Hope and Redemption
The leeks, raspberries, swiss chard and rose fir potatoes that Cathrine Sneed and her inmate gardeners coax from the soil are not merely fruits and vegetables.
Rather they are metaphors for what went wrong in a prisoner's troubled past, lessons about how to live a healthy and honorable life, and proof that love and work make a garden flourish.


N.H.L. and ESPN Together Again
For the last four years, the National Hockey League has been a sports television version of "Nothin' Exposure." Pro hockey became almost invisible for the majority of viewers in the United States when it left the more widely available ESPN cable network and moved to SportsChannel America.
But last night, the N.H.L. took a major step toward resurfacing as a major league when it announced a new agreement with ESPN for a game of the week package in the regular season and extensive coverage of the Stanley Cup playoffs for up to five years.
In addition, ESPN and the N.H.L. will have the right to place some games on ABC, CBS or NBC.


R-2000 Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Don't Pity Japan's Part-Time Rice Farmers; 'Comfort Women'
To the Editor:
The so-called "comfort women" that the Japanese Imperial Army forcibly inducted into sexual service in World War II did not come only from Korea (news article, Aug. 8).
Of the 200,000 women estimated to have been in sexual slavery, a sizable number were from China, Taiwan, the Philippines and Singapore.
The comfort women constitute one of the darkest aspects of Japan's 1931-45 war against its Asian neighbors.
Last Feb. 21, two hitherto secret documents unearthed in Tokyo point squarely at the Japanese Government's complicity in this sordid affair.
Thus far, the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa has made vague apology to the surviving Korean comfort women yet avoided taking full responsibility.
Japanese right-wingers have persistently tried to suppress and distort the facts of Japan's wartime atrocities.


Seek Peace Without Khmer Rouge, Sihanouk Says
Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia said today that the United Nations peace plan for his shattered nation should go forward with or without the Khmer Rouge, who have refused to disarm their forces in the countryside.
The Prince, who was restored as Cambodia's head of state last year and is attending the summit meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement this week, said that because of Khmer Rouge intransigence, "I think that the only solution is to set aside the Khmer Rouge and to attack the problems of rehabilitation, construction and elections in the rest of the country."


Don't Pity Japan's Part-Time Rice Farmers; Rejecting Profligacy
To the Editor:
Re "Japan's Broken Pledge of Change Comes Back to Haunt Its Economy" (front page, Aug. 15): From the 1970's, the United States has admonished Germany and Japan to jump-start a lagging world economy by importing and consuming with American abandon.
In the early 1980's, the Reagan Administration showed the way with munificent tax cuts and military expenditures, turning the country into the world's largest debtor nation.
The demise of the cold war nullified most of the investment in military hardware, and research and development programs like "Star Wars"; massive deficits also prolong the recession.


Bridge
All but one of the matches at the NEC World Championships here today were close affairs.
The exception was the match in which the American open team overwhelmed Egypt, the first African country ever to advance to the playoff stage of a world event.
The Egyptians were handicapped by illness, and lost 71 imps in the second quarter of 16 deals.
They trailed by the huge margin of 97 with 16 deals remaining.
In other matches, going into the final quarter, Sweden led Poland by 46, Denmark led France by 7, and Netherlands led Israel by 8.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Luis Mercedes, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Billy Spiers, shortstop, from the 60-day disabled list.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Activated Paul Abbott, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Purchased the contract of Randy St.
Claire, pitcher, from Durham of the Carolina League.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Named Jerry McMorris, chairman and chief executive officer; Paul Jacobs, general counsel for the team; and Kevin Jordan, acting chief financial officer.
Announced resignation of Steve Ehrhart, general partner.
ST. LOUIS CARDINALS -- Activated Frank DiPino, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Called up Kevin Rogers and Francisco Oliveras, pitchers; John Patterson, infielder-outfielder; and Steve Decker, catcher, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Larry Carter, pitcher, from Phoenix.
Southern League  CHATTANOOGA LOOKOUTS -- Placed Rusty Kilgo, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
KNOXVILLE BLUE JAYS -- Announced the team nickname has been changed to the Smokies.
Basketball National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Signed Mike Sanders, forward.
Continental Basketball Association  GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Herb Jones, guard, and Eric Taylor, forward.
QUAD CITY THUNDER -- Signed Reggie Fox, guard.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Acquired the rights to Ron Ellis, forward, to complete an earlier trade involving Jarvis Basnight, forward.
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Agreed to terms with Keith McKeller, tight end, and Kirby Jackson, cornerback, on two-year contracts.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed William Perry, defensive tackle, to a two-year contract.
Placed Shaun Gayle, safety; Jim Thornton, tight end; and Anthony Morgan, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Recalled Glen Kozlowski, wide receiver, and Maurice Douglass, defensive back, from waivers.
Claimed Jay Leeuwenburg, center, off waivers from the Kansas City Chiefs.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Joe Walter, offensive lineman.
Recalled Elston Ridgle, defensive lineman, from waivers.
Claimed Tom Rayam, offensive lineman, off waivers from the Washington Redskins, and Mike Frier, defensive lineman, off waivers from the Seattle Seahawks.
Placed Roosevelt Nix, defensive lineman; Jeff Thomason, tight end; Mike Dingle, running back; and Mike Barber, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Recalled Dale Hellestrae, center, from waivers.
Placed Jimmy Smith, wide receiver, and Tony Hill, defensive end, on injured reserve.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Chris Holder, wide receiver; Sebastian Barrie, defensive end; and Brent Griffith, offensive tackle, to their developmental squad.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Craig Veasey, defensive lineman.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Claimed Tony Stargell, cornerback, off waivers from the New York Jets.
Released Ed Toner, fullback.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Kani Kauahi, center.
Placed Dino Hackett, linebacker, on injured reserve.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Recalled Vince Evans, quarterback, from waivers.
Waived Derrick Gainer, running back.
Signed Daryl Hobbs and Ty Montgomery, wide receivers; Ferric Collons, defensive lineman; Kevin Smith, tight end-running back; and Rich Stephens, offensive lineman, to the developmental squad.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Claimed Troy Stradford, running back, on waivers from the Kansas City Chiefs and John Stephen, linebacker, on waivers from the Green Bay Packers.
Signed Brian Townsend and Thomas Homco, linebackers; Kelvin Harris, center; and Courtney Griffin, cornerback, to the developmental squad.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Brian Allred and Michael Wright, cornerbacks; Ted Popson, tight end; Stacey Dillard, defensive lineman; and Jeff Novak offensive tackle, to the developmental squad.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed James Brown, tackle; Matt Willit, defensive tackle; Keo Coleman, linebacker; and Reggie Moore and Patrick Nelson, wide receivers, to the developmental squad.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Eric Allen, cornerback.
Signed Ephresians Bartley, linebacker; Bill Hess, wide receiver; Brandon Houston; Curtis Mayfield, and Robert Presbury, offensive linemen, to the developmental squad.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Relinquished the rights to Bill Lewis, center, making him a free agent.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Traded Huey Richardson, linebacker, to the Washington Redskins for an undisclosed draft choice.
Signed Michael Procter, quarterback, to the developmental squad.
Claimed Solomon Wilcots, safety, on waivers from the Minnesota Vikings.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Johnnie Barnes and Robert Claiborne, wide receivers; Peter Tuipulotu, running back; Terry Beauford, offensive lineman; and Arthur Paul, defensive tackle, to the developmental squad.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Brian Blades, wide receiver, to two one-year contracts.
Claimed Brian Hunter, offensive lineman, on waivers from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Recalled Brain Treggs, wide receiver, and Nesby Glasgow and Malcolm Frank, defensive backs, off waivers.
Placed Bryan Millard, guard; Jacob Green and Michael Sinclair, defensive ends; and James Jefferson, defensive back, on injured reserve.
Hockey National Hockey League  NHL -- Signed a five-year television contract with ESPN.
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Traded David Shaw, defenseman, to the Boston Bruins for future considerations.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with John Vanbiesbrouck, goaltender.
International Hockey League  PEORIA RIVERMEN -- Signed Peter Kasowski, Darren Colbourne and Doug Wickenheiser, forwards.
College  BOSTON COLLEGE -- Promoted Tim Cohane to men's associate basketball coach.
BROCKPORT STATE -- Named Ed Gonzalez women's tennis coach.
CENTRE -- Named Jo Lay field hockey coach and Steve Cherry, Mike Jackson, Tim McDaniel and David Robinson men's assistant football coaches.
COLGATE -- Named Rich Sutter men's assistant basketball coach.
DUQUESNE -- Announced the resignation of Joe DeSantis, men's assistant basketball coach.
FAIRFIELD -- Named James Giachino women's tennis coach.
MONTCLAIR STATE -- Named Ellen Brown field hockey coach.
MOUNT ST.
VINCENT -- Named Corey Smith women's tennis coach and Lorre Snyder women's assistant basketball coach.
PACE -- Named Carrie Seymour women's basketball coach.
PIKEVILLE -- Named Larry Judd men's assistant basketball coach.
ST.
FRANCIS, PA. -- Named Thomas McConnell men's basketball coach.
Announced that Leo Nadal, basketball forward, has left the team to transfer to Gannon.
SAN DIEGO -- Named Mike Haupt men's assistant basketball coach.
STETSON -- Named Michael Garriques assistant cross-country coach.


In Election Year, Politics Greases Arms Decisions
The sale of F-16's to Taiwan announced by President Bush today is the latest in a series of arms decisions that experts say appear to be based as much on political considerations as on military ones.
In trying to fend off Congressional pork-barrel programs, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has argued that the Pentagon is not a social welfare agency and that decisions on new weapons program and arms sales should be made strictly on national security grounds.


In Fight Over Tennis Courts, a Village Examines Its Priorities
THE opinions are flying as fast here as the tennis balls at Flushing Meadows.
Would it be unseemly for this village to build more tennis courts, given the tough economic climate?
The question has bounced around the village this summer, becoming a rallying point for a debate about values and local priorities.


Russian Coach Leaves
VIKTOR TIKHONOV is out as coach of the Russian national hockey team after nearly 15 years running the squad that represented the former Soviet Union, the weekly Moscow News reported.
It said that BORIS MIKHAILOV, who had been Tikhonov's chief assistant, was named to replace him.


Review/Jazz; Tommy Flanagan, Surprises at His Finger Tips
Tommy Flanagan's trio is death to bass players.
Mr.
Flanagan, a preternaturally graceful pianist and one of jazz's finest improvisers, arranges his material to extract the fullest meaning from accents, breaks, unison bass and piano lines and metrical changes.
Each piece is filled with tricky tempo changes, written passages and rhythmic undulations that have to be memorized.
But even tougher, Mr.
Flanagan is fearless, easily moving away from the basic harmonic contours of a composition, all done with the expectation that the bassist can hear his improvisations and follow them.
At Condon's on Tuesday night, there were moments when Peter Washington, who was filling in for the trio's regular bassist, George Mraz, looked as if he'd stepped into a void.


Whiling Away the Day Under the Willow Trees


Earthquake Rocks Utah


ETS International reports earnings for Year to May 31


Executive Changes
ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY LABORATORIES INC., Bothell, Wash., a maker of diagnostic ultrasound systems, appointed Harvey N. Gillis senior vice president of finance and administration, and chief financial officer of the company.
COMPUTONE CORP., Roswell, Ga., a maker of circuit boards, appointed Edward L. Marinaro chairman and chief executive, and Robert J. Niehaus president and chief operating officer.


Republic Goldfields reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


HOME IMPROVEMENT
EXPERIENCE may be the best teacher, but for house and apartment owners with little spare time, learning home maintenance by doing is often difficult.
Following are some tricks of the trade that can make repairs and other projects a bit easier.
Measuring
Place the edge of a ruler or tape measure against a surface being measured to obtain the most accurate reading.
Mark the surface with a "V" at the desired point.
This mark is more accurate than a single line.


Municipal Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Final Text of Trade Pact May Be Behind Schedule
American, Canadian and Mexican negotiators have run into trouble in reaching agreement on the final text of the North American Free Trade Agreement announced by President Bush on Aug. 12.
With a self-imposed deadline of Tuesday, the day Congress returns and Administration officials are scheduled to brief the lawmakers on the pact, the negotiators may have only an incomplete text, people involved in the talks said yesterday.


Events: Landscape Overview
Landscape Legacy
Arthur A. Houghton Jr.
Gallery at Cooper Union, 41 Cooper Square (Astor Place); (212) 353-4157.
An exhibition of photographs by the landscape architect A. E. Bye, documenting his work along with images of landscapes that inspired him, starts Tuesday and runs through Sept. 30.


Police Held Not Liable In Shooting
A Queens grand jury yesterday found no criminal liability on the part of the police officer who killed a hostage by firing five bullets into him during a shootout with gunmen.
No charges will be filed against the officer.
The grand jury also retained murder charges against two of the men involved in the botched robbery at a social club in Corona on Aug. 11 that preceded the shootout.
One of the men is accused of taking part in the robbery and then using the hostage as a shield during the shootout; the other is accused of participating in the robbery but not the shootout.


Nelson Vending Tech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Parthenons of a Sort
ONCE upon a time, Manny Lepowski, alias Ellery Queen, wrote a letter to his childhood friend Morris Lapidus, the Miami architect: "It's like my boyhood dreams of being a modern Shakespeare. You want to build Parthenons and out comes a Miami hotel."
But what hotels!
Mr.
Lapidus, best known as the designer of shrines of 1950's taste like the Fontainebleau (built in 1953 and once described by its owner as "the world's most pretentious hotel") is now the subject of a book, "Morris Lapidus: The Architect of the American Dream" by Martina Duttmann and Friederike Schneider, recently released by the German publisher Birkhauser Verlag ($79).


POLISH EX-PREMIER KILLED
Piotr Jaroszewicz, a former Polish Communist Prime Minister, and his wife were found dead in their home.
Polish officials said Mr.
Jaroszewicz was tortured and strangled.
Page D18.


U.S. Cooling Toward Sandinistas' Successors
Nicaragua's relations with Washington have badly deteriorated over accusations that President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has ceded too much authority to the leftist Sandinista Front.
A little more than a year ago, President Bush welcomed Mrs.
Chamorro to the White House with promises of loans and trade concessions.
But today, as Managua attempted to deal with a powerful earthquake unleashing giant waves that smothered several towns on the Pacific coast, Washington's preliminary offer of $25,000 worth of tents, water and food was viewed by Nicaraguan officials as inadequate.


Partisan Points of Light
THOSE wanting to shed light on this year's political campaigns may want to check out these "Party Animal" lamps ($48 each), made by Form Farm Inc. of New York.
They are being sold at the Cooper Hewitt Museum Shop in Manhattan and several stores in other cities.
In addition to the donkey and elephant lamps, the company makes Hot Dog, Cool Cat and "Shleep" lamps (also $48) and the Nighty Mouse night light ($15.95).


NEW HOME HUMBLE, BUT IS WELCOMED
Late this afternoon, with the harsh Florida sun pushing temperatures into the 90's, Moises Flores and his family got a look at their new home: Tent D-2 in the olive-drab canvas village that now rises from the municipal sports field across the Dixie Highway from City Hall.
D-2 was not as appealing as their house trailer, which was reduced to splinters nine days ago by Hurricane Andrew, they said.
But it was better than the dusty 1987 Mercury station wagon that Mr.
Flores, his wife, their three teen-agers and their 10-year-old son had been living in for the last week.


Ruling Near in California on TV in the Classroom
A judge in San Jose today heard final arguments in a lawsuit the State Superintendent of Public Instruction hopes will shut down the California operation of Channel One, the Whittle Communications television program of news and commercials aimed at high school students.
The judge, Jeremy Fogel of Santa Clara County Superior Court, declined to rule immediately on the suit, although he said he would issue a ruling as quickly as possible.
He said he might employ a monitor to assess the program.


FOOTBALL: Pass-Fail Tests: Montana Is Unhappy and Hostetler Is Wobbly; 49ers' Legend May Want Out
He hasn't formally asked to be traded, but Joe Montana, apparently upset that he was put on the injured-reserve list this week and cannot return to the team until October, is wondering about his future with the San Francisco 49ers.
Carmen Policy, the 49er team president, today denied a published report that said Montana had asked to be released from his contract at the end of this season.
Policy said the team has no intention of trading or releasing the 36-year-old quarterback, although the 49ers' owner, Eddie DeBartolo Jr., indicated that he would honor such a request if it came.


Loewen, Ondaatje, McCutcheon reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; Torborg Finally Gets Mad
THE fans can burn their tickets or stomp all over the expensive little Mr.
Met doll they bought in a moment of temporary insanity.
What can the manager do?
He can get hot, which Jeff Torborg did Tuesday night after Vince Coleman was thrown out of a game and then turned his anger on the manager.
The Mets have suspended Coleman for two games, and they could suspend him for two years and probably never notice, except that $6 million of Doubleday and Wilpon money would be written off.
Still, it's a thought.


Economic Scene; One Currency: Pain or Gain?
THE fall of the dollar is yesterday's news in America, a mere digression from enduring issues like witchcraft and family values.
But the rise of the German mark -- the flip side of the dollar's humbling -- is not about to be brushed aside in Europe.
Even in ordinary times, currency turmoil would be greater cause for alarm in relatively small, open economies that live or die by trade.
And with France poised to vote this month on monetary union with the rest of the European Community, these are hardly ordinary times.


Yankees Come Up Cold As Brewer Rookie Sizzles
The tiny crowds at County Stadium do not make it feel like pennant fever has afflicted this city.
But Cal Eldred's sparkling pitching has been the stuff that October dreams are made.
The impressive rookie did not join the Brewers until July 15, but he has provided them with several stellar outings and has kept alive their hopes of winning the American League East


Serbian Party Fails to Remove Yugoslav Premier
Clearly embarrassed, Serbia's governing party abandoned an attempt tonight to remove Yugoslavia's concession-minded Prime Minister after Yugoslavia's President called the ouster attempt "ill considered and politically damaging."
The party's terse announcement that its members would not support their own motion for a parliamentary vote of no confidence in Prime Minister Milan Panic clearly added new impetus to the peace process begun at last week's London conference on Yugoslavia and the conciliatory stands the Prime Minister took there.


Prediction of a Heart Attack May Prevent Trial of Clifford
A heart specialist's prediction that Clark M. Clifford might suffer a fatal heart attack if he is forced to stand trial has raised the distinct possibility that the 85-year-old lawyer-lobbyist may avoid prosecution on state and Federal bank fraud charges.
Justice Department officials said in a brief filed on Tuesday that they would take Mr.
Clifford's health "heavily into account" in deciding whether to go forward with their case.
The same sentiment was repeated today by a senior official in the Manhattan District Attorney's office, which is prosecuting Mr.
Clifford on state charges.


Home Video
In this election year, when family values have become a point of contention, the video business is particularly wary of attack.
Since the early 1980's some people have regarded video stores as primarily purveyors of pornography and violence, and that viewpoint found fresh expression last month on "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
As reported this week in the newsletter of the Video Software Dealers Association, the show's co-hosts, Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford, were discussing a murder suspect's assertion that the methods he used to kill were taken from the movie "Robocop."


Experts Discount Threat of Typhoid and Cholera
The chances of an epidemic of typhoid or cholera in the areas struck by Hurricane Andrew are remote, but disease prevention experts are on the scene to track down any cases of potentially communicable intestinal or respiratory illness, said a specialist in disaster epidemiology at the Federal Centers for Disease Control.
Another possible but longer-range threat is insect-borne diseases like encephalitis, a brain inflammation.


Citicorp Criticized on Mortgages That Expose It to Too Much Risk
A highly unusual unauthorized release of a document that sums up a Federal examination of Citicorp's mortgage business paints a critical picture of the way that subsidiary is run.
In the report, bank examiners criticized Citicorp's home-mortgage subsidiary, one of the largest in the country, for sloppy practices that exposed the banking company to excessive risk and overcharged many customers.


M.I.T. RULED GUILTY IN ANTITRUST CASE
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology had violated antitrust laws by participating in a decades-long conspiracy with other elite universities to fix the amount of student financial aid packages.
Louis C. Bechtle, Chief Judge of the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, clearly and pointedly rejected M.I.T.'s argument that it was engaged in charity, not conspiracy, when it shared confidential financial information on students with other universities.


Work, Work, Work, But Lendl Triumphs
Call it a state of suspended animation, but the United States Open seemed to hold its breath yesterday in anticipation of the second coming of the birthday boy, Jimmy Connors, this event's resident demi-octogenarian.
Connors did not disappoint, putting away Jaime Oncins, 6-1, 6-2, 6-3, and moving into tomorrow night's second round.


TechKnits Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Indonesia's Puppeteer May Seek a New Term
Indonesian politics are often compared to the ancient shadow puppetry known as wayang, with the role of the mysterious, all-controlling puppeteer assigned to the nation's leader for more than 25 years, President Suharto.
President Suharto's performance, which even his critics concede has been that of a masterful political tactician gifted with the common touch, seems likely to go on.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Awarding Cash Prizes to Stamp Out Boredom in Billboards
THE idea is simple, yet ingenious.
A poster shows a mighty dam holding back a Niagara-sized amount of water, and across the top of the dam is a single word -- "Huggies."
This unexpectedly imaginative way of advertising one of the most mundane products imaginable has won a hefty prize in a contest intended to help persuade agencies that creativity in outdoor ads is no oxymoronic concept.


Calendar: Art Deco Revisited
New York Icons
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672, ext. 206.
Two architectural historians will lead walking tours in Manhattan.
On Sept. 13, Barry Lewis will examine Art Deco buildings in the Grand Central area, including the Chanin (1929), Chrysler (1930) and General Electric (1931) buildings.


Tee-Comm Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Home, Sick Home
Those who'd like to know more about "family values" would be well advised to turn on the television set tomorrow night.
There, in a documentary called "Scared Silent: Exposing and Ending Child Abuse," they'll learn a terrible truth about the American home -- that it can sometimes be lethal to children.
The program is easy to find -- CBS, NBC and PBS are airing it simultaneously, and ABC will show it Sunday night.
The show will be hard to forget.
There is, for instance, the young woman confronting the father who sexually abused her and her sister from childhood.
He has known a jail sentence and several years of therapy.
She has known hell.


Scheib (Earl) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sewer Districts Are Faulted on Pollution
Warning that rising levels of nitrogen are killing marine life in Long Island Sound, environmentalists gathered here this morning and accused shoreline sewer districts of stalling on an agreement with Connecticut to reduce nitrogen pollution from sewage-treatment plants.
While praising Connecticut for meeting the standards set in a pact with New York State a year ago, the environmentalists said sewer districts in New York, from Westchester to Suffolk County, were dragging their feet by calling for more hearings and more costly studies.


Presenting the King: A Serendipitous Route
Wednesday: Craig Silver and Cathy Barreto expect Jimmy Connors to toy with their evening.
Silver, the producer, and Baretto, the director, respectively, of CBS's weeknight United States Open highlights show, assume that the Connors-Jaime Oncins match will tread well past the program's 11:30 P.M. air time, requiring a slick triage of their half-hour format of taped segments.
At 6:10 P.M., Silver is calm, sitting in the CBS production office.
But he expects a storm.
The last two nights, he jettisoned segments to go live.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Murphy Brown; Get Ready, America: Murphy Responds
This fall the nation will witness the comeback of the 1990's.
Murphy Brown gets her say.
The first episode of the television situation comedy, in which Candice Bergen plays the news anchorwoman, takes Vice President Dan Quayle's life-imitates-art oratory one step further, according to a script marked "final draft" that was provided by a Republican strategist here who said he got it from a friend in Hollywood.


At Third, Yankees' Hayes Is a New-Era Old Reliable
Even during an often agonizing season that has seen the Yankees dance near last place, there have been some pleasant surprises.
From the unexpected consistency of Melido Perez to the mere presence of Andy Stankiewicz to the bullish efforts of Rich Monteleone to the encouraging starts by rookies Sam Militello and Bob Wickman, the Yanks have received enough splendid performances to talk longingly about next season.


Dr. Barbara McClintock, 90, Gene Research Pioneer, Dies
Dr.
Barbara McClintock, one of the most influential geneticists of the century, died on Wednesday night at Huntington Hospital on Long Island.
She was 90 years old and lived nearby at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, where she had conducted research for more than 50 years.
She died of natural causes, said Lisa Gentry, a spokeswoman for the lab.


FHP International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


California Gets Back in the Market Quickly
With California's new $57.4 billion budget now signed, the state quickly entered the debt market yesterday to price $3.3 billion of one-month notes that will be used to pay bills and i.o.u.'s to its employees, businesses and local governments not paid since July 1.
The budget crisis lasted 63 days, the longest period ever that the state had been without a budget.


A District That May Not Be Forever
A few years ago, the scent of cheese blintzes and the buzz of shop talk and schmoozing filled Berger's Delicatessen and Restaurant long before the first rays of sunlight glinted down West 47th Street.
No more.
Now, only during normal Manhattan breakfast hours do the counter stools and stackable chairs begin to fill up at this narrow hangout in the diamond district.
This block, the prime distribution center for a nation that buys more diamonds than any other, has suffered its sharpest decline since the trade migrated from Canal Street to midtown after World War II.





Fighter vs. Peacemaker As 2 Blacks Seek Seat
On paper, Diane E. Watson and Yvonne Brathwaite Burke have a lot in common.
Born two blocks and less than a year apart in South-Central Los Angeles, both graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles, where they were sorority sisters.
Both are black, both are liberal Democrats and both are political fixtures in Los Angeles.
This year, the two longtime friends have become adversaries.
In what is viewed as an epochal contest for the region's black voters, Ms.
Watson, a 58-year-old state Senator, and Ms.
Burke, 59, who was a member of Congress in the mid-1970's, are opponents in a November runoff election for a seat on the powerful Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors.


If Government Protected Us, We'd Sue Less
To the Editor:
The latest demonstration of the unfortunate popular practice of lawyer-bashing came from both President Bush and Vice President Quayle in accepting their party's renominations on the last night of the Republican National Convention (speech transcripts, Aug. 21).


Wall of Post Office Being Razed Collapses
The front wall of an empty post office on the West Side of Manhattan collapsed yesterday as it was being demolished to make way for a 47-story tower.
A 54-year-old pedestrian walking on Broadway was slightly injured when falling bricks sliced into her scalp.
Another section of the wall tumbled in about an hour later.


Layne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15


Navratilova, Feeling Old, Loses to Youngest Maleeva
Martina Navratilova was at her most strident yesterday as she race-walked, speechless and stony-faced, from the Stadium Court after being upset, 6-4, 0-6, 6-3, by 17-year-old Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria.
With too much elbow, too many backhand errors and too little self-assurance, something her teen-age opponent possessed in abundance, the third-seeded Navratilova had suffered her earliest Open exit since 1976, when she lost in the first round.


DISNEY IS SAID TO PLAN $500 MILLION PRIVATE BOND ISSUE
The Walt Disney Company plans to raise $500 million in a private bond sale to help pay production costs of 15 to 30 films, according to an executive who has seen the offering prospectus.
"It is a financing vehicle that is offering a low rate of interest and an upside formula if the films do well," the executive said.
"The basic structure is that they guarantee a low level of interest and a cap at about 10 percent interest, depending on how the films perform. The recoupment period is about seven years." A company spokesman said he could not comment.
Disney's chairman, Michael D. Eisner, was traveling late yesterday and could not be reached for comment.


G.M.'s Cuts to Extend Beyond Union Ranks
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that 95,000 white-collar workers would not receive bonuses this year and has agreed that jobs at a plant in Mexico will be sacrificed before cutbacks affect a similar plant in Lordstown, Ohio.
The two separate developments suggest that G.M. is trying to emphasize that not only unionized plant workers in the United States will suffer as the company reduces its production capacity.


49ers' Rice Has Quick Strikes in Mind to Make Giants Yield Ground
There were no secrets from Jerry Rice.
Not today.
He shook his head and smiled when someone asked him about attacking the Giants' defense.
He was not going to give away anything, not in the last few days before the season opener.
But Rice knows this: The San Francisco 49ers might have to strike quickly on Sunday at Giants Stadium, just to get their offense moving against an opponent that has given them little the last two seasons.


Cabby and Passenger, 77, Are Killed in Robbery
The driver of a livery cab and an elderly passenger sitting in the front seat were both fatally shot minutes before midnight Wednesday by three men who had been picked up as second fares near Co-op City in the Bronx, the police said.
The slain passenger was a 77-year-old retired baker who had been called back to work for the night by his boss.
The driver was a young man from Long Island who "looked like he belonged on Wall Street," according to a dispatcher for the company where he had worked for only a month.


On My Mind; The European Danger
The question about Europe now is what is more dangerous the eruptions of the same old murderous hatreds or the eruptions of the same old attempts to explain, rationalize or excuse them.
Sooner or later, Americans will have to pay attention.
European nastinesses have a way of involving the U.S. and so do European evasions of the truth.
Sooner would be better -- say before Election Day.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Sales rose 9.2 percent for domestically built cars and light trucks in late August.
Analysts said demand for cars was flat, but purchases of mini-vans, sport utility vehicles and other light trucks for personal transportation sent that category up 24.2 percent.  [ D1. ]
Small businesses were the hardest hit by Hurricane Andrew, said I.B.M.'s general manager in South Florida, whose own home was devastated.
But the damage will take weeks to assess.  [ D1. ]


His Thrust Parried, Spassky Manages to Survive
In the second game of their exhibition chess match, Boris Spassky tried to trip up Bobby Fischer with an aggressive sacrifice, but his best efforts came to nothing.
Indeed, the whole end of the game featured very clever play by Mr.
Spassky just to draw.
Considering that he had White and the advantage of the first move, this had to be a disappointment.
Mr.
Fischer had started with an extremely conservative defense, letting his king be caught in the center of the board.
Was he trying to provoke his opponent to overreach himself and blunder?
It nearly happened.
At least one grandmaster, Maxim Dlugy of Englewood, N.J., thought that Mr.
Spassky's idea was quite correct, that it was his followup that was faulty.
But either way, Mr.
Spassky's play was not impressive.
Mr.
Dlugy, the president of the United States Chess Federation, said, "I don't think Boris will give Fischer a real fight in this match."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"MARVIN'S ROOM," Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village.
A drama by Scott McPherson about two sisters who are reunited after a long estrangement; directed by David Petrarca and starring Laura Esterman.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Tauziat Bows Out Quietly
Nathalie Tauziat, famous for her sensitive ears and anti-grunting crusade, made the wrong sort of noise yesterday at the National Tennis Center.
It was the sound of zeros, during a 6-0, 6-0 upset loss in the second round of the United States Open to Amanda Coetzer of South Africa.
Tauziat, of France, was seeded No. 12, which made her the first seeded player in the history of the Open era to be shut out by an unseeded opponent.
Few people will remember Tauziat for this 57-minute match.
But her complaints to an umpire at Wimbledon about the grunting of Monica Seles began a series of debates on etiquette in women's tennis.
For that, Tauziat is unrepentant.


Crime in Schools Is Said to Rise by 29%
Reported crimes and other serious incidents in New York City schools rose nearly 29 percent in the last school year from a year earlier, school officials said yesterday.
But they attributed much of the increase to better monitoring and reporting and said it did not necessarily represent a dramatic surge in student criminality.
The number of reported incidents in the city's 991 schools rose to 4,952 in the 1991-92 academic year from 3,843 a year earlier, an increase of 28.9 percent, school officials said.
Most of the incidents were concentrated in about 40 of the 124 high schools.


Corrections
An article yesterday about thyroid cancer among children exposed to radiation from the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident misidentified the campus where Dr.
Marvin Goldman is employed.
He is a professor at the University of California at Davis.
It also misstated part of his professional experience.
He did not take part in the International Atomic Energy Agency's study of the health effects of the accident last year.


THE LAWYER AND THE HURRICANE
A lawyer left homeless by Andrew obeys a judge's order to appear in court, but he shows up in a soggy suit.
Outrage did the rest.
Law, page B16.


Kevin Maxwell Is Declared Bankrupt by a British Court
Kevin Maxwell, the younger son of the late Robert Maxwell, was formally declared bankrupt by a British court today as part of an effort to recover hundreds of millions of dollars that he is accused of helping his father loot from the Maxwell media empire's pension funds.
The decision was made by the High Court in London after a request from the liquidators of the investment firm that managed most of the pension funds for the various Maxwell companies.


Who's a Cross-Dresser?
Delegates to the Republican Convention in Houston chortled when Patrick Buchanan, onetime challenger for the Presidential nomination and full-time polemicist, painted a vivid picture of the people who had attended the Democratic Convention in New York City the month before.
They were, he said, 20,000 liberals and radicals "dressed up as moderates and centrists in the greatest single exhibition of cross-dressing in American political history."
Mr.
Buchanan's remark was promptly read as homophobic.
He may have intended it to be that.
But it was, in any case, a thoughtless and reckless swipe at the largest group of cross-dressers in the United States: women.


Seven Oaks International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Odd's-N-End's reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Arrow Automotive Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Andrew Fiske Is Dead; An Island Patriarch, 80
Andrew Fiske, a prominent Long Island figure, died on Sunday at his home on Shelter Island.
He was 80 years old.
Mr. Fiske died after a prolonged illness, said Andrew Tansey, a family spokesman.


Natural Gas Prices Surge On Storm Damage Reports
Natural gas prices rose sharply today as traders reacted to Government reports late Wednesday that hurricane damage to gas-producing fields in the Gulf of Mexico was worse than expected.
Gas futures contracts for October delivery settled at $2.131 per million British thermal units, or approximately 1,000 cubic feet, up 8 cents.
It was the highest level of the year for gas prices, which traded below $1 last February.


Post-Soviet Unrest: 1 Truce, 1 Deadlock
Georgian and Russian leaders met today to try to resolve ethnic violence in the Abkhazia region of Georgia, agreeing to another cease-fire to take effect on Saturday.
In unrest in another part of the former Soviet Union, the fate of Tajikistan's resilient President, Rakhmon Nabiyev, was unclear after yet another effort to oust him.


Review/Film; An Early Technical Triumph
"Limite" was shown as part of the 1979 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 21, 1979.
This
silent film opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street in Manhattan.
"Limite," first released in 1931, was directed by a Brazilian, Mario Peixoto.
Though relatively obscure, the film received praise from Sergei Eisenstein.
"Limite" is feverishly beautiful and desperately ambitious, even when it isn't clear.


Chrysler's 'Silent' Auto Recall Made Public
Recalls have become common events in the auto industry -- except when the survival of an individual auto maker is at stake.
The Chrysler Corporation, which has been making a comeback after two years of shaky finances, acknowledged yesterday that two weeks ago it quietly recalled its first 4,000 L/H midsize sedans to replace a defective washer in the car's steering system.
Chrysler executives have described the L/H as a "make or break" car.


RANKS OF U.S. POOR REACH 35.7 MILLION, THE MOST SINCE '64
The number of Americans living in poverty soared last year by 2.1 million, to a total of 35.7 million, and the poverty rate rose for the second consecutive year, to 14.2 percent, the Government reported today.
The new rate is the highest since the peak caused by the recession of the early 1980's.
The actual number of poor people is the highest since 1964, when President Lyndon B. Johnson declared his war on poverty.


Review/Film; A Songwriter Tosses Out His Rhyming Dictionary
Del, the nerdy carrot-topped songwriter who is the protagonist of Bill Plympton's delightful animated feature "The Tune," is shown in the movie's opening sequence trying desperately to come up with a rhyme for the line "My love for you is equal to." Dozens of possibilities present themselves, from "a worn-out shoe" to "day-old stew" to "a big cow moo." It's no wonder that Mr.
Mega, the ferocious music publishing honcho for whom Del toils, threatens to fire him if he doesn't come up with a hit in 47 minutes.
"The Tune," which opens today at the Quad Cinema, follows Del's adventures after he takes the wrong exit from a cloverleaf and finds himself stranded in Flooby Nooby, a strange farming town he has never heard of.
It is there that Del, gently shepherded around by the town's folksy mayor, begins learning how to write songs that come from people's lives instead of a rhyming dictionary.


Sounds Around Town
An Exploratory Group
Mal Waldron, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
Mal Waldron's are some of the more exploratory groups out there; this one, featuring two hard-swinging tenor saxophonists, Ricky Ford and Chico Freeman, along with a rhythm section of Reggie Workman on bass and Pete LaRoca on drums, is better than most.
Mr.
Waldron himself is a nicely convoluted improviser and a real original.
Shows tonight through Sunday are at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.
The cover is $15, and there is a $6 minimum.


CHRONICLE
Tributes to women and the fight against breast cancer will take place in New York in the coming days.
Dance for the Cure, an end-of-summer gala, will be held on Wednesday, to be followed by Race for the Cure in Central Park on the following Sunday.
Proceeds from both events will go to the Benita Feurey Fund, the New York chapter of the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation.
"We wanted to celebrate women who are battling breast cancer and make people aware that by spending money on information about early detection, they can have an immediate effect on the survival rate," said JOHN MACK CARTER, editor in chief of Good Housekeeping and the organizing chairman of the events, sponsored by Hearst Magazines.


U.S. Sends Aid to Nicaragua as Death Toll Rises
Foreign governments, including the United States, responded with immediate help today for the survivors of giant waves that swamped Nicaragua's Pacific Coast, pulling toddlers from their mothers' arms and burying the old and weak in sand.
Updating casualty figures for the Tuesday night disaster, the Government said 116 people were known dead, 153 were still missing, 350 were injured, 700 houses had been destroyed, and 16,000 people were homeless.


The Rebirth Of a Sideshow At Coney Island


Sales Gains Are Lackluster For Most Big U.S. Retailers
For yet another month, retail sales in August meandered up ever so slightly, frustrating attempts to anticipate retailers' prospects for the looming holiday sales season in November and December.
The nations' chain stores reported a mixed bag of results with -- surprise, surprise -- discounters and merchants selling goods at moderate prices winning the greatest portion of shoppers' budgets.


Fierce Storm Leaves a Trail of Damage
As thunderstorms dumped heavy rains throughout the region, winds of up to 100 miles an hour tore through a shopping center in Stamford, Conn., and part of Scarsdale, N.Y., last night, ripping roofs off buildings, snapping trees in two, downing power lines and injuring at least two people, one critically.
The winds may have been from tornadoes, said officials from the National Weather Service, but they said they would not be able to confirm reported sightings until today.


Sports of The Times; Coming To the Aid Of Teachers
GALE SAYERS looked good, heavier than the 180 pounds he weighed as a halfback for the Chicago Bears, but good.
Sayers celebrated his 49th birthday in May and it was startling to realize that 21 years had passed since he retired from professional football.
He left the University of Kansas in 1965, left after four years without a degree and, by his own admission, without the requisite educational skills to compete and prosper in the world.


Sounds Around Town
Brazilian and Universal
Caetano Veloso, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, mid-Manhattan, (212) 244-3005 for information and tickets.
A soft-voiced Brazilian singer, songwriter and guitarist, Caetano Veloso is an artist of extraordinary musical range and poetic depth.
His tougher songs look hard and compassionately at social afflictions that know no borders, like poverty and environmental peril, while his best ballads interfuse nature and eroticism with a grace unmatched by English-speaking songwriters.
The music runs a stylistic gamut, from light pop-funk to delicate bossa nova.
For this engagement, the singer is appearing with a 10-piece band.
Shows are tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets are $20 to $30.
On Tuesday Mr.
Veloso moves to the Ballroom for five days.
A Baritone's Tribute
Phillip Officer, Eighty-Eight's, 228 West 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-0088.
This young baritone's celebration of the lyricist E. Y. (Yip) Harburg is a model tribute to a well-known songwriter: intelligent, restrained and beautifully conceptualized.
Among other accomplishments, Phillip Officer takes back "Over the Rainbow" from pop divas who have turned it into an overblown expression of romantic self-pity and treats it as a simple Depression-era assertion of hope in hard times.
Show time is tonight at 8:30.
There is a $10 cover charge and a two-drink minimum.
A Scary Portrait
"Lypsinka! Now It Can Be Lipsynched," the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
John Epperson's drag alter ego, Lypsinka, who mouths the lyrics to obscure recordings by obscure nightclub divas, is the ultimate brassy Delores Gray or Shirley Bassey wannabe.
Interwoven with snatches of melodramatic B-movie dialogue and punctuated by a ringing telephone, the songs are the backbone of a show that creates a hilarious, slightly scary portrait of show business as viewed from beyond the valley of the dolls.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15 P.M.
Tickets are $15 to $25, and there is a two-drink minimum.


The Art Market
Behind the summer lull, it's been a tense, tumultuous few months for contemporary-art galleries in New York City.
As if enduring its own version of the London blitz, the art world seems to be holding its breath, waiting to see which galleries will still be operating when the dust settles and Labor Day is past.
Although some dealers say they think the art market is stabilizing and perhaps beginning a slow recovery, others are less optimistic.
But all of the nearly dozen people interviewed tend to agree that galleries are having widespread difficulties as they struggle to bring 1980's overhead -- especially rents -- into line with the contracted art market of the 90's.


For Children
Central Park Trolley  Central Park Entrance at 60th Street and Fifth Avenue Manhattan (212) 360-2766 Recommended ages: 6 and up Through Oct. 28
A new green, red and beige trolley that sounds more like a bus has been making the rounds of Central Park this summer for people who want to know every cobweb and outcrop in the 843-acre park.
What might New Yorkers and their children see that they don't already know about?
Maybe Balto, the only dog statue in New York.
Balto, a Siberian husky, led a team of sleigh dogs and drivers to Nome, Alaska, in 1925 to deliver medicine during an emergency, and died upon arrival.
Then there's a bronze panther, hiding on a rock, just past the Lake.


Corrections
In the diagram that accompanied yesterday's game, the white pawn at g2 should have been at f2 and a white king should have been at g2.


Bio-Vascular Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Police Chief Withdraws His Resignation
A month after he announced he was leaving the New York City Police Department, Chief David W. Scott, the city's highest ranking uniformed officer, withdrew his resignation yesterday hours before it was to take effect.
The 57-year-old career officer, who said in August he would step down for health reasons, said yesterday that several health concerns, including a possible heart ailment, had been allayed by his doctors and he was in fit condition to return to lead the largest department in the country.


Mitchell Energy/ Development reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


New York Risks Losing Lucrative Film and TV Production
To the Editor:
More than a year ago the Directors Guild suggested to the New York City Council that the film, television and commercial production business -- the business that creates and depicts New York's reputation to the rest of the world -- was leaving the city and taking with it the pool of talent that drives New York's cultural and creative community.
The Directors Guild represents the directors, assistant directors and unit production managers who create American theatrical motion pictures.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
A RESIGNATION  IS WITHDRAWN
After announcing only a month ago that he was leaving the department for health reasons, David Scott, the city's highest-ranking uniformed officer, withdrew his resignation, just hours before it was to take effect.
B3.
New head of police internal affairs. B3.  NO BRACELETS, NO PRISONERS
Electronic monitoring bracelets intended to keep track of defendants on bail were removed with the approval of the Government from two reputed mob figures who have now apparently fled New York, Federal prosecutors said.
B3.
REPORTS OF CRIMES IN SCHOOLS RISE
Reported crimes and other serious incidents in New York City schools rose almost 29 percent in the last school year from a year earlier, school officials said.
But they attributed much of the increase to better monitoring and reporting.
B2.  2 IN LIVERY CAB ARE KILLED
The driver of a livery cab and an elderly passenger were both fatally shot minutes before midnight Wednesday by three men who had been picked up as second fares near Co-op City in the Bronx, the police said.
B2.
FROM "PAN AM" TO "METLIFE"
Like a giant beacon of the Jet Age, heralding the sleek white-and-silver clippers that could breach the oceans in hours, the words "Pan Am" have hung high above Park Avenue for a generation.
Now, a year after Pan American World Airways left its namesake tower in mid-Manhattan and collapsed in bankruptcy, the Pan Am Building is to lose its familiar skyline signature in favor of something a little more stolid, but considerably more solid: "MetLife." B3.
REGION
FIERCE STORM HURTS AT LEAST 2
Sudden, ferocious winds up of to 100 miles per hour tore through a Stamford, Conn., shopping center and part of Scarsdale in Westchester County, ripping roofs off buildings, snapping trees in two, downing power lines and injuring at least two people, one critically.
B4.
A THREAT TO THE SOUND
Warning that rising levels of nitrogen are killing marine life in Long Island Sound, environmentalists gathered in Oyster Bay, L.I., and accused shoreline sewer districts in New York State of stalling on an agreement with Connecticut to reduce nitrogen pollution from sewage plants.
B4.
A FAMILIAR FACE IN THE SENATE
With no political experience but one of the most recognizable faces in New Jersey, Dick LaRossa left a part-time job as the television host of the State Lottery Commission's weekend drawings and ran for the State Senate last year and won.
Since then, he has worked 14-hour days to solidify his grasp on a district that even fellow Republicans thought he had no chance of winning.
B4.
TAKING A LOAN TO STAY IN THE RACE
As the race for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York comes down to the wire, State Attorney General Robert Abrams has taken out a $200,000 loan on his Manhattan co-operative apartment to help finance his final television advertising push, campaign finance reports released yesterday show.
B5.
In Israel, Cuomo offers fiscal advice.
B2.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B4
Chronicle B6


Lancaster Colony reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Holiday on Monday
Labor Day will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
PARADE Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickup, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Transit Authority buses and subways on Sunday schedules; L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit on Sunday schedule. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule. Traffic Alert SUNDAY
CHELSEA STREET FAIR Eighth Avenue will be closed between 15th and 23d Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
EL FIESTON Broadway and Seventh Avenues will be closed between 35th and 42d Streets from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
BRAZILIAN-AMERICAN STREET FAIR 46th Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Madison Avenue will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


A Labor Day Weekend of Music, Parades and Fireworks
Here is a sampling of Labor Day weekend activities in the New York metropolitan area: NEW YORK CITY Today
ANNUAL WEST INDIAN CARNIVAL, all weekend in Brooklyn.
Events include STAY-IN-SCHOOL CONCERT, today, 1 to 4 P.M.; free.
WEST INDIAN-AMERICAN DAY CARNIVAL ASSOCIATION REGGAE NIGHT, with Buju Banton, Super Cat, Cocoa Tea, Frankie Paul, Shelley Thunder, Trevor Sparks, Shaggy, Capt.
Remo, Super C, Screechie Dan, Red Foxx, Worl-a-Girls and Pac Man, all accompanied by the A-Team Band.
Tonight at 8; tickets are $25.
STEEL-BAND PANORAMA AND CALYPSO NIGHT, with Lady Wonder, Iwer George, Flying Turkey, and Lambert and the Matadors.
Also with the Queen of the Bands competition.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $20.
DIMANCHE GRAS, with Sparrow, Swallow, Duke, Crazy, Super Blue, Designer, Shadow, Imagi, Alrounder, Soca Kid, Taxi, Imagination Brass, L'Orchestre Tropicana d'Haiti, Exodus.
Also King of the Bands and Queen of the Bands competitions.
Sunday at 8 P.M.; tickets are $25.
All concerts are at the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, (718) 638-5000.
Doors open at 7 P.M.
KIDDIES' CARNIVAL PARADE, starting on St.
John's Place, ending at Brooklyn Museum.
Tomorrow, 10 A.M.; free.
KIDDIES' CARNIVAL COMPETITION, at Brooklyn Museum.
Sunday 1 to 4 P.M.; free.
CARNIVAL PARADE, Monday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., beginning at Utica Avenue and moving west on Eastern Parkway (with reviewing stand at Brooklyn Museum).
Floats, carnival bands, steel bands, West Indian food.
Information for all events: (718) 773-4052 or (718) 774-8807.
Tomorrow
WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBIT, streets surrounding Washington Square Park, Greenwich Village.
More than 350 artists are to show their work.
Tomorrow through Monday (also Sept. 12 and 13), noon to sundown.
Free.
Information: (212) 982-6255.
Sunday
BRAZILIAN INDEPENDENCE DAY FESTIVAL, 46th Street between Madison Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas, mid-Manhattan.
Music, dancing, art, crafts, food. 9 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 382-1630.
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT FOLK FESTIVAL, with Leo Kottke, Horseflies, Jeff Buckley, tomorrow, 6 P.M.; Beausoleil, Chubby Carrier, Sunday, 8 P.M.; Tom Rush, Bitchin' Babes, Steve Packenham, Monday, 5 P.M.
Pier 16 at the South Street Seaport, South Street and Fulton Street, lower Manhattan.
Information: (212) 669-9400.
GRUCCI FIREWORKS, Pier 16 at the South Street Seaport, lower Manhattan.
Fireworks over the East River, at 9:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 669-9400.
Monday
LABOR DAY PARADE, sponsored by the New York City Labor Council/A.F.L.-C.I.O.
More than 150,000 people are expected to march up Fifth Avenue from 44th to 72d Street; the reviewing stand will be at 69th Street. 11 A.M. to about 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 685-9552.
INTERNATIONAL FESTIVAL OF PUPPET THEATER, Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Greenwich Village.
The inaugural festival opens with Peter Schumann, company founder, leading the Bread and Puppet company in a two-part production, followed by an outdoor parade and performance, at 1 P.M.
The festival will continue through Sept. 20.
Tickets are $17.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
LONG ISLAND Today
LONG ISLAND CLASSIC HORSE SHOW, Old Westbury Gardens, Old Westbury.
The fifth annual competition will have riders competing in classes for hunters and jumpers and will feature the KLM Classic, the Grand Prix for jumpers on Sunday at 3 P.M.
Show hours are today, tomorrow and Sunday from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.; admission today is included with the regular garden admission of $5; tomorrow and Sunday admission is $6 ($4 for the elderly, $2.50 for children, free under age 6).
Information: (516) 333-0048.
Tomorrow
FRIENDS OF THE ARTS BEETHOVEN FESTIVAL, Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay.
Music of Beethoven from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Sunday and Monday.
Tickets are $15.
Opening concert tomorrow night at 8: Overture to "The Creatures of Prometheus," Piano Concerto No. 3 and Symphony No. 6 with Grant Johannsen as the soloist and Julius Rudel conducting the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
Tickets are $20 to $30 for reserved seats and $15 for lawn space.
Information: (516) 922-0061.
Sunday
INTERNATIONAL JEWISH ARTS FESTIVAL, Suffolk Y, 74 Hauppauge Road, Commack.
The festival, sponsored by the United Jewish Y's of Long Island, will feature more than 150 performers on seven stages, Bookfest '92, crafts, food and folk dancing.
Sunday and Monday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $14; $12 for students and the elderly; free for those under 12.
Information: (516) 938-4600.
UPSTATE NEW YORK Today
COLUMBIA COUNTY FAIR, Chatham Fairgrounds, Routes 66 and 203, Chatham.
Entertainment, petting zoo, displays of farm machinery, art, food.
Entertainment includes harness racing, today at 1 P.M.; a circus, today at 3 P.M. and 7 P.M., and the singer Brenda Lee on Monday at 3:30 and 7 P.M.
All entertainment free with admission. 10 A.M. to 11 P.M., today through Monday.
Admission: $4 (free for children under 13; free for the elderly today).
Information: (518) 758-1811.
Tomorrow
CIVIL WAR WEEKEND, Museum Village, Monroe.
Civil War battle re-enactments, fashion show, storytelling, lectures, food.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $8; $6 for the elderly; $5 for ages 6 to 15; free under age 6.
Information: (914) 782-8247.
NEW YORK RENAISSANCE FESTIVAL, Sterling Forest, Tuxedo.
Re-creation of a 16th-century English country fair, including theater, music, dance, crafts, games, food, drink.
Tomorrow through Monday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Tickets are $13; $11 for the elderly; $5 for children; free under age 3.
Information: (914) 351-5171.
NEW JERSEY Tomorrow
BONFIRE CONCERT, Wick House Orchard, in the Jockey Hollow section of Morristown National Historical Park, Morristown.
Popular music from the American Revolution, performed on the dulcimer and other 18th-century instruments, with Linda Russell, balladeer. 7 P.M.
Tickets are $5; children under 16, $2.50.
Reservations are recommended.
Information: (201) 539-2085.
Sunday
HAWORTH SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL, at Haworth by the Pond, Haworth, presents "Jonah," a musical concert with narration, featuring the Men's Chorus of Calvary Baptist Church and the Urban Community Unity Ensemble.
Sunday at 3 P.M. and Monday at 5 P.M.
Suggested admission is $5 a family.
Information: (201) 387-7421.
Monday
RUTHERFORD LABOR DAY STREET FAIR, Park Avenue from Ames Avenue to Lincoln Park, Rutherford.
Music, clowns, puppets, art, crafts, antiques, collectibles, food. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (201) 384-0010.
CONNECTICUT Today
BMW VINTAGE FESTIVAL, Lime Rock Park, Lakeville.
Racing and displays of classic cars, auction and auto memorabilia swap meet.
Today through Monday; gates open at 7:30 A.M. and close at dusk.
Full-event tickets are $45; single day prices vary.
Information: (800) 722-3577.
Tomorrow
GOSHEN COUNTRY FAIR, Route 63, south of Goshen center.
Oxen, pony and horse pulls; horse shows; wood-chopping contest; state adult and junior baking contest; poultry, sheep, rabbits, goats and cattle judging; flowers; produce; crafts.
Tomorrow through Monday, 8 A.M. to dusk.
Admission: $4 for adults, free for children.
Information: (203) 491-3655.
ELI WHITNEY FOLK FESTIVAL, Edgerton Park, New Haven; with Judy Collins and McDonnell and Tane. 6:30 P.M.
Tickets are $12 in advance and $15 at the gate.
Information: (203) 248-6582.


Few Are Choosing to Forsake Their Demolished Homes to Move Into a Tent City
When the building inspectors arrived, Genelle Little was sleepy, sweaty and miserable, with no relief in sight.
Fifteen children in diapers and underpants were running around her three-room house, which was hot, wet, windowless and filled with mosquitoes.
Teams of inspectors, accompanied by psychologists, were sweeping through this city's collapsing homes today to evaluate their damage and try to persuade families to leave unsafe dwellings for the Army's tent city.


Peter B. Sheridan, 66, Computer Researcher
Peter Bernard Sheridan, a mathematical logician and I.B.M. researcher in computer sciences for the last 40 years, died Aug. 25 at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 66 years old and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y.
He died of pancreatic cancer after a brief illness, said Peggy Frye, a family friend.


The Townsfolk of Llaruggub Live Again
All the unruly, mischievous, lying, lusting and bemused denizens of Dylan Thomas's Welsh fishing village of Llaruggub are back in the Jean Cocteau Repertory Company's production of "Under Milk Wood" at the Bouwerie Lane Theater.
And 39 years after they first appeared with Thomas himself in the cast at the 92d Street Y, they remain as lively and diverting a bunch of rascals as one can find onstage.
Eight members of the Cocteau company, directed by Robert Hupp, take on the 55 voices in the play.
In devising scenes to illustrate what Thomas called a "play for voices," Mr.
Hupp occasionally produces distraction, especially in the children's episodes. (Since there are no real children in this company, it would be far better for the children in the play to be heard and not seen.)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Predicts Bush Will Trim Social Security
Pushing his new class-oriented attack that President Bush secretly plans to "devastate America's middle class and its workers" to pay for tax cuts favoring the rich, Bill Clinton today accused the President of pursuing economic policies that would force him to gut Social Security.
The accusation was not based on any known plans by the Bush Administration but rather on an edifice of inductive and political reasoning: a series of mathematical assumptions worked out by the Democratic Presidential nominee's advisers, based in turn on Mr.
Bush's promise to cut taxes while also achieving a savings in Federal spending.
Clinton Tours Dade County
"Two weeks ago at the Republican convention Mr. Bush addressed an anxious people who looked for real answers to our economic problems," Mr.
Clinton told leaders of an A.F.L.-C.I.O. meeting in Washington.
"But instead of a credible plan, he gave us more incredible promises. In the face of a $400 billion deficit this year he made a promise of another tax cut for the wealthy, then promised everybody else an across-the-board tax cut. He said 'We're going to pay for it with spending cuts and I'll tell you about it later.' "


Final Pan Am Departure
Like a giant beacon of the Jet Age, heralding the sleek white-and-silver clippers that could breach the oceans in a matter of hours, the words "Pan Am" have hung high above Park Avenue for a generation.
Now, a year after Pan American World Airways left its namesake tower in mid-Manhattan and collapsed in bankruptcy, the Pan Am Building is to lose its familiar skyline signature in favor of something a little more stolid, but considerably more solid: "MetLife."


Credit Markets; New Process For Auctions To Be Tested
The Treasury announced yesterday that it would begin a yearlong test of a new auction technique that would award its securities at a single price and yield.
The new process, to begin later this month, is one of the changes proposed in the wake of the Treasury bidding scandal at Salomon Brothers a year ago.
The purpose is to try to encourage more participation in the auctions and more aggressive bidding.


Reviews/Theater; One Foot in Motown, The Other in Suburbia
In one of the wittiest moments of "Back to Bacharach," an irresistibly ebullient new revue of the songs of Burt Bacharach and Hal David, the show's four singers don sunglasses, begin snapping their fingers and slink about the stage of Steve McGraw's singing a super-cool harmonization of "(They Long to Be) Close to You."
At once musically impeccable and slyly satiric, the performance distills the spirit of the show, which was conceived and arranged by Steve Gunderson, one of its four performers, and produced and directed by the comic actress Kathy Najimy.
The revue, which plays at the club on Thursday and Friday evenings, manages the difficult feat of simultaneously honoring one of the most durable songwriting catalogues in American pop history and sending up a 1960's Las Vegas concept of hipness as it might have influenced a group of suburban teen-agers.


French Leader Presses a Drive For Unity Vote
Ignoring warnings that his participation might be counter-productive, President Francois Mitterrand threw his full weight today behind the campaign to persuade wavering French voters to ratify a crucial treaty on European union in a referendum this month.
In a televised debate with a dozen ordinary citizens, three journalists and a leading opponent of the treaty, Mr.
Mitterrand warned that a French no vote on Sept. 20 would "cause severe harm to France and French history and the French people."


CHRONICLE
The Inner Circle of Advocates, known as the most exclusive bar association in the country, has accepted a woman as a member for the first time.
She is JUDITH A. LIVINGSTON, a medical-malpractice and negligence specialist with the New York firm of Kramer, Dillof, Tessel, Duffy &amp; Moore.
To join this closed circle, limited to 100 members, a lawyer must have pursued at least 25 cases to a verdict and won at least one jury award of $1 million or more.
The members of the organization, which was founded 20 years ago, are among the shrewdest legal brains in civil justice.
They meet once a year to exchange information about their profession and their cases.


Bush Rejects Debate Proposal
The President is not willing to join Governor Clinton in debates led by a single moderator, and his campaign did not offer an alternative.
Page A13.


Vincent Will Not Go Without a Struggle
Baseball's second coup attempt of the summer appears to be a bigger hit than the first, or so the 18 major league owners who voted yesterday to request the resignation of Fay Vincent believe.
But just as the adage properly fit baseball's first coup attempt against Commissioner Fay Vincent earlier this summer, so does it here: If you're going to try to kill the king, you'd better be sure he's dead.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; Bush Rejects Panel's Plan for 3 Debates
The Bush campaign said today that the President was not willing to debate Gov.
Bill Clinton this fall under a proposal put forth by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
Campaign officials did not flatly rule out debates.
But they said the commission's proposal for three debates, with a single moderator running each, was unacceptable.


Young's Miscalculations End Up Costing the Mets
The baseball was in Anthony Young's hands and suddenly there was an overload of data in his brain.
What to do?
Where to go?
How fast was the man racing for first?
How far off third was Paul O'Neill?
Young's personal computer froze, and the Mets' right-hander retreated to formula.
He'd try to turn the tough ninth-inning play with Reds on first and third and none out in a tie game.
Wrong choice.
Wrong result.
The breakdown for the Mets, having begun with Young's instincts, was flashed for the night on the scoreboard: Reds 4, Mets 3.


Bridge
Three hard-fought matches were in progress here today at the NEC World Championships.
In one of them, the World Women's Team final, British players had some advantage, leading by 36 imps at the midpoint of their match against Austria, with 48 deals to be played.
In the world open teams, the United States and France seemed headed for the final on Friday.
With 16 deals remaining tonight, the Americans led against Sweden by 32 and France was 31 ahead of Netherlands.


Executive Changes
THE E. W. SCRIPPS CO., Cincinnati, a diversified media company, named F. Steven Crawford senior vice president of cable television.
GIGATREND INC., Carlsbad, Calif., a manufacturer and integrator of tape storage solutions, promoted Amir Moussavian, president, to chief executive of the company.


Uniquest Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


A Vote Against Vincent


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Agreed to terms with Andre Rison, wide receiver.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Agreed to terms with Joe Walter, offensive tackle.
Waived David Grant, defensive end.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Waived Tim Lester, running back.
Placed Shawn Harper and Darryl Ashmore, offensive linemen, on injured reserve.
Hockey National Hockey League  BUFFALO SABRES -- Signed Doug Macdonald, center; Richard Smehlik, defenseman; and Yuri Khymlev and Viktor Gordijuk, left wings.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Acquired Pat Conacher, left wing, from the New Jersey Devils for future considerations.
MINNESOTA NORTH STARS -- Signed Darcy Wakaluk, goaltender, and Todd Elik, center, to multiyear contracts.
Named Paul Jerrard player-coach of the Kalamazoo Wings of the International Hockey League.
Assigned Mike Torchia, goaltender, to the Canadian Olympic team.
Acquired James Black, center, from the Hartford Whalers for Mark Janssens, center.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Traded Neil Brady, center, to the Ottawa Senators for future considerations.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Named Dan Maloney assistant coach.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Tom Barrasso, goaltender, to a five-year contract.


Boeing to Reduce Output of Mid-Size Jets
The Boeing Company said today that it would scale back production of its mid-size 757 jetliner from eight and a half planes a month to seven, beginning in September 1993.
Taking into account a routine two-week shutdown in the later part of the year, the cut will reduce production of the 757 by four airplanes in 1993, lowering the company's revenue by at least $200 million.


Besicorp Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


9.2% Rise In Sales Of Vehicles
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose 9.2 percent in late August.
Analysts said automotive demand, although still on the sluggish side, was influenced more than ever by consumers who chose mini-vans, sport utility vehicles and other light trucks instead of cars for personal use.
In late August car sales were flat, while light-truck sales rose 24.2 percent.
The seasonally adjusted annual rate of car sales was 5.9 million for the Aug. 21-31 period, compared with 6.2 million last year and 6.2 million in the middle of August.


Ship Hits Construction Work on the Brooklyn Bridge


Ground Rule: Don't Ask Thomas if He Has Arrived
Even though he has been the Jets' leading rusher since he joined the team as a first-round draft pick in 1990, people still ask: "When is Blair Thomas going to arrive?"
Approached with that very question after practice today, Thomas had the look of somebody whose last frayed nerve was being tampered with.
"Why does everybody keep on saying that?" he said.
"You all just want it to be like that."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; For Gay G.O.P. Members, a 2d Closet
Paul von Wupperfeld calls it "the second closet," an added dimension of difficulty in coming out into society not just as a gay person but as a gay Republican, a hybrid that even some gay Democrats cannot abide.
Since both inclinations strike him as personal birthrights, he is well out of both closets now.
"I'm a Republican," Mr. von Wupperfeld, the son of a Goldwater conservative Texan, said in a recent interview.
"It would be unnatural for me to vote as a Democrat."


Abrams Borrows on His Co-op to Finance Campaign
As the race for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York comes down to the wire, State Attorney General Robert Abrams has taken out a $200,000 loan on his Manhattan co-operative apartment to help finance his final television advertising push, campaign finance reports released yesterday show.
Mr.
Abrams's loan is hardly extraordinary.
But it shows the importance of every penny in the final days of a volatile four-way race, with some recent polls putting former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro about 10 points ahead of Mr.
Abrams, with City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and the Rev.
Al Sharpton trailing and one-third of voters undecided.
Ferraro's Fund-Raising
The finance records show that Ms.
Ferraro continued to outpace her rivals' fund-raising, taking in $718,460 in the eight weeks ended Aug. 26, compared with $505,894 for Mr.
Abrams, $167,289 for Ms.
Holtzman and $24,556 for Mr.
Sharpton.


Prison Journalist Made Legal History
To the Editor:
"Two Killers Separated at Last by Freedom" (front page, Aug. 18) reports on Ron Wikberg, who has won release from the Louisiana State Penitentiary at Angola, and Wilbert Rideau, his fellow editor of the Angolite, a magazine that for 15 years has published exposes of prison conditions.
They have been encouraged in their muckraking by what you term "one of the more progressive prison administrations in the nation."


Ames Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Kreisler Manufacturing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Al Gore; Gore Lashes Out at Bush On His Iran-Contra Role
In his sharpest and most personal attack on President Bush since being selected as the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, Senator Al Gore today questioned the President's explanation of his role in the Iran-contra affair, stopping just short of calling him a liar.
In remarks inserted into his basic campaign speech, Mr.
Gore repeatedly referred to the President's "credibility canyon" in his handling of the economy and foreign affairs.
More significantly, Mr.
Gore, for the first time, used the phrase to belittle Mr.
Bush's oft-repeated explanation about his part in the Iran-contra affair.


Rethinking College Aid; M.I.T. Case Likely To Speed Changes
Students who apply for financial aid from universities in the Northeast in the next few years are not likely to have a tougher time of it, and in fact may have gained some bargaining power, because of Wednesday's Federal court ruling that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology had violated antitrust laws.
In the long run, however, the court action could accelerate some changes already under way in the concept of financial aid: who should get it and how much it should be.


Reviews/Film; Daddy's Little Girl And How She Grew
Everything about "Woman Demon Human" is odd and perhaps unnecessarily opaque.
Its meanings appear fitfully, like the flashes of color that indicate the presence of carp in a murky pond, the depth of which is anybody's guess.
The 1987 Chinese film, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, has barely adequate English subtitles.
"Woman Demon Human" is the story of Qiu Yun, the daughter of two traveling actors, who grows up to be a star in a national theater company.


SMALL BUSINESSES IN DANGER
Unless emergency funds arrive soon, small businesses are in danger of going under.
Business Day, page D1.


Winged Hunters Follow A Silent Path to the South
THEY come in from the North, these winged creatures of beauty with the sharp eyes and the hooked beaks of feathered killers.
Something in their programmed brain has announced that early September is time to follow the mental map they inherited from their parents and fly to the South.
Actually, these hawks fly as little as possible.
Mostly, they coast.
They find a warm air current rising here, another over there, another back this way and by the thousands these wary woodland creatures bank and turn around one of the largest metropolitan area in North America, as if cruising aloft on an invisible interstate of air.


Greenman Bros. Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 1


INSIDE
Bush Plan Angers China
Beijing threatened to withdraw from international arms-control talks if the United States proceeds with the sale of 150 fighter jets to Taiwan.
Page A3.
Winds Leave Trail of Damage
Ferocious winds that may have come from a tornado tore through Stamford, Conn., and nearby areas, injuring at least two people.
Page B4.
A Draw on the Chessboard
Bobby Fischer, continuing his forceful play, battled to a draw with his old rival Boris Spassky in the second game of their match.
Page C19.
Pan Am Building Farewell
A year after Pan American World Airways left its namesake tower in Manhattan, the building will lose its familiar skyline signature.
Page B3.


For the First Time, Dawson Finds Heart Isn't With Team
Soiled and mildewed carpeting is piled up four feet high next to the mailbox at Andre Dawson's $750,000 South Dade home.
A solitary palm tree lays in the driveway, where smaller pieces of carpeting are spread out to dry.
Around back, the pool is mud-colored, and what is left of a screened patio is mangled and lying awkwardly on pool's edge.
On Wednesday, several workers assisted in the cleanup as Dawson, the Chicago Cubs outfielder, and his wife, Vanessa, sorted through an estimated $120,000 in damages from Hurricane Andrew.


Vicorp Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


Ex-Broker Pleads Not Guilty To Perjury Charge by S.E.C.
What had been widely anticipated as a second plea bargain in the so-called Southampton insider securities trading scandal was aborted yesterday when the prosecutor and defense lawyer arrived at a Manhattan Federal courtroom to find that the judge was on vacation.
And so Milton Weinger, a former securities broker for Oppenheimer &amp; Company, could take only the first step: pleading not guilty to perjury charges yesterday before another court official, Magistrate Judge Barbara Lee.
Mr.
Weinger is charged with having lied to the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with its suit against him and five others on insider trading charges.


Television's 'Lottery Guy' Strives to Stay in Senate
According to a tale making the rounds of the State House, the first time Donald T. DiFrancesco, the Senate President, saw Dick LaRossa striding through the corridors he exclaimed, "Hey, there goes the lottery guy."
Mr.
DiFrancesco was told, so the story goes, that Mr.
LaRossa was not only a Senator but also a fellow Republican.


Another P.L.O. Official Slain in Lebanon
Another senior officer of the Palestine Liberation Organization has been assassinated here in what is seen as a continuing campaign of settling scores between rival guerrilla groups.
Security officials said today that unknown gunmen fired 17 bullets into Lieut.
Col.
Hani Al Debeiky Wednesday night as he drove in the mainly Muslim part of Beirut.
Colonel Debeiky, a member of the Fatah movement of Yasir Arafat, was dead on arrival at the American University Hospital.


Sanderson Farms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sandoz and Caremark in Suit Settlement
The Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation and the Caremark unit of Baxter International said yesterday that they had agreed to pay $21 million to settle a lawsuit brought by 33 states accusing them of operating an illegal tie-in under which they charged $8,944 a year for a schizophrenia treatment.
Under the arrangement, Sandoz's clozapine became one of the world's most expensive drugs.
Until May 1991, clozapine purchasers were required to buy a Caremark blood-monitoring service to guard against the drug's potentially lethal side effects.


What Lies Behind U.S. Move in Iraq
To the Editor:
"U.S. Said to Plan Raids on Baghdad Over Inspections," your Aug. 16 front page reports.
"Bush Is Asking Allies to Support Air Action to Protect Iraqi Shiites," your Aug. 17 front page tells us.
What is happening here?
There appear to be two contradictory versions of the same set of events, which at any rate led to the subsequent American-British-French flight ban over southern Iraq (front page, Aug. 27).
The key to understanding what is going on can be found at the end of the Aug. 17 article.


China Warns U.S. on Taiwan Jet Deal
China threatened today to withdraw from international arms-control talks if President Bush goes through with his decision to sell 150 fighter jets worth $6 billion to Taiwan, but the White House brushed off the warning.
China's Deputy Foreign Minister, Liu Huaqiu, summoned the American Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, to the Chinese Foreign Ministry and told him that if the United States proceeded with the sale, "China would find it difficult to stay in the meeting of the five on arms-control issues," the state-run New China News Agency reported.


Cable Network Drops Its Gloves and Sues the N.H.L.
SportsChannel America sued the National Hockey League yesterday in an attempt to overturn the league's new contract with ESPN.
In a civil suit filed in New York State Supreme Court, SportsChannel America charged that it was treated unfairly when the N.H.L. moved back to ESPN after four years on SportsChannel America.
The essence of the complaint is that SportsChannel says it had a right to match ESPN's bid, which could provide the league with up to $80 million over five years.


Few Israelis Buying Homes in Occupied Areas
Israelis have virtually stopped buying homes in the occupied territories since the Government announced cutbacks in construction and subsidies for settlers there, the Housing Ministry said today.
Settlers disputed the ministry's statement but conceded that there had been a significant drop in sales in the West Bank and Gaza Strip since the curbs were announced in late July.


New York Risks Losing Lucrative Film and TV Production; Burr Died on S.I.
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 14 report on walking around Staten Island is correct in stating that one of the protagonists in the Alexander Hamilton-Aaron Burr duel died on the island and in stating that your reporter "must have passed the building," except that it was Burr who died on Staten Island, not Hamilton.


Owners, in an 18-9 Vote, Ask Vincent to Resign
Major league club owners, by a vote of 18 to 9, said today they did not have confidence in Fay Vincent as a commissioner who could move baseball forward "effectively and constructively" and asked him to resign immediately.
Vincent, who did not attend the meeting at which he and his performance as commissioner were debated, was informed of the owners' resolution by Bill White, the National League president.
Shortly afterward, he issued a statement from New York saying he would not resign.


Handley Bars the Press From Giants' Workout
Maybe it wasn't a big deal, or maybe it indicated some deep concern for the state of the Giants.
Not really explaining why he did it, Coach Ray Handley barred the news media from his team's workout today, apparently trying to stop speculation about who the starting quarterback will be Sunday in the regular-season opener against the San Francisco 49ers.
When asked the reason for the reporters ban, the coach, who is fond of polysyllables, responded this way: "It's a little bit of a situation. I got a few things I want to be a little bit different. I want complete concentration. Anything that happens there I really don't want to get out."


Combating Racism, After Rostock
Neither grievances over unemployment in Germany nor resentment over a generous asylum policy can excuse the mob attacks against a refugee hostel in the former East German port of Rostock last week -- or later violence elsewhere.
German political leaders are sensibly moving to tighten the screening of refugees.
But they need to go further and confront the racist attitudes so shamelessly displayed -- by the youthful attackers, the adults who cheered them on and the network of neo-Nazis who rushed to their side.


An Old Scamp's Fire Is Lighted by Passion
By the time Ivan Lendl opened his mouth, it was too late to change his image; he'd been stamped the Blank Czech, an android with a cyber-serve and the personality of a frozen turkey.
By the time we found out that Ivan Lendl waited to open his mouth until his teeth were fixed and he could speak English, he was beyond approach, a golf fanatic, a Republican market Darwinist with a walled estate and pedigreed dogs.
He didn't get our love when he wanted it, so he doesn't need it now, at 32, an American citizen, a pleasant, wry, private man who should be honored as one of the world's best instead of the villain in tonight's Open epic, "Jimbo Part IV: The Payback."
Having said that, let's forget Lendl and move right on to the hero, who is continually thanking his fans for lighting his fire.
"Those people are there to be a part of what I do," Jimmy Connors says with a certain appreciation but not much wonder.
"Over the years, that is one reason I have broken my back to do what I do so well."


Guard Against Dumping-Ground Schools
As late as the 1970's, violent and disruptive students were removed from New York City's regular public schools and placed in so-called "600 schools," where teachers were paid an extra $600 a year for hazardous duty.
The schools became dumping grounds for troubled children and were wisely phased out.
Now Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez is determined to try again by opening four small "Borough Academies" for disruptive teen-agers.
If he delivers as promised, the academies will be real schools with vital special services that troubled children need.
But only diligent follow-through will keep the Borough Academies from becoming dumping grounds like their predecessors.


Tampa Bay Is Ready for the Zamboni
Outside Expo Hall, the temperature was in the low 80's and so was the humidity.
Palm trees shaded the bright morning sun.
Inside the dark arena, the air felt much cooler and drier as a few players glided across the playing surface in an unofficial workout before training camp.
Doug Smith, in charge of air-conditioning and ice for the only National Hockey League team in the subtropics, stood next to the glass and boards and promised suitable playing conditions in the temporary home of the Tampa Bay Lightning.


Charles L. Hudson, 88, President Of A.M.A. at Dawn of Medicare
Dr.
Charles L. Hudson, who as president of the American Medical Association in 1966 urged its members to accept the law establishing Medicare rather than maintain the organization's strong opposition to it, died on Sunday in a nursing home in Aurora, Ohio.
He was 88 years old.
He died of complications from Alzheimer's disease, his wife, Ruth, said.


COMPANY NEWS
CALIFORNIA MICROWAVE INC., Sunnyvale, Calif., a communications systems concern, said it had received a $30 million contract from the Federal Government for a systems integration program.
COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP., El Segundo, Calif., said it would participate in a $39.7 million, three-year contract from the Resolution Trust Corp. to provide data processing and asset management services for assets of failed savings and loan associations.


New York City Will Add Chemical to Water to Lower Lead Levels
Because drinking water in some older New York City buildings has been found to contain lead exceeding a new Federal standard, the city plans in two weeks to put a chemical in the water supply to prevent lead in pipes from seeping into the water.
In disclosing the plan yesterday afternoon, city officials said the chemical, calcium orthophosphate, a relative of baking soda, would bond with metal pipes and fixtures, thinly coating the inside of pipes to seal in the lead.


Reviews/Art; The Psychologically Revealing Etchings of Lucian Freud
The British artist Lucian Freud has received belated but fascinated attention in America in the past five years, thanks to successive traveling shows of his paintings and works on paper.
Now the Mary Ryan Gallery is offering an absorbing survey of the artist's complete etchings, a body of work never shown before in the United States, and one that helps round out the picture of a half-centurylong career.
Mr.
Freud is a figurative painter who works in the vein of highly stylized realism that became a British specialty after World War II.
Most of his subjects are portraits and studio nudes, male and female, rendered with both an Expressionist's feel for his materials and an attention to intimate naturalistic details.
In Mr.
Freud's hands the figure is neither idealized nor truly objectified; it looks like a product of well-schooled academic painting turned slightly freakish, as if filtered through the distorting lens of an intense disquietude.


Fischer Battles to a Draw in the 2d Match Game
Bobby Fischer and his old rival Boris Spassky today battled to a draw in the second game of their exhibition chess series.
Fortune swung both ways during the grueling, seven-hour game before Mr.
Fischer offered a draw on the 59th move.
As in the first game on Wednesday, which he won, the American former champion played forcefully, and several chess experts said they believed he had obtained a winning position through masterly positional play in the middle game.


LDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Donald Dryfoos; Rare-Book Collector, 78
Donald Dryfoos, a rare-book collector and former stockbroker, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 78.
Mr.
Dryfoos had suffered from a degenerative heart condition and died of heart failure, said a nephew, Jeffrey Dryfoos.


WTD Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Market Place; A Bet on Europe's Monetary Union
IN just over two weeks, French voters will decide whether the dream of European monetary union remains alive or dies.
Yesterday, bargain hunters in European bond markets decided to bet that it would survive.
That bet sent the prices of bonds denominated in European currency units, known as ECU's, up sharply for the first time in months.
That market, into which investors were piling as recently as this spring, had almost collapsed.


Consolidated Fibres Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 28


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 610 retail money market mutual funds decreased $4.24 billion, to $385.74 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The institute recently changed its reporting form to include a further breakdown for taxable and tax-exempt funds, including total assets, changes in assets and the number of funds.


After Run-Ins, Torborg Defends His Style
For some, it is the most remarkable statistic in a thoroughly unremarkable year for the Mets.
Manager Jeff Torborg, in a season of bad baseball, questionable calls, nonstop injuries, great frustration and only the scarcest of satisfactions, hasn't been ejected from a game in 1992.
He has had a spontaneous shoving match with Vince Coleman.
He has given an impromptu lecture to Bobby Bonilla.
He has seen innings inflamed by dubious calls and had pitchers undermined by an umpire's strike zone.
His club has won 61 games and lost 70.
And yet he hasn't ever been ordered to exit the dugout.


Hurricane Haunts Children Long After Winds Have Died
When Hurricane Andrew cut through Donna Melvin's apartment here, and the windows broke and the water rushed in and it felt as if the world was ending, Quentin, the 3-year-old son quivering in her arms, turned to her and cried: "Mommy, make the lion stop. I don't want us to die."
She held him tighter and told him, "God is bowling." Nine days later, Quentin will not let her out of his sight.
He grabs her by the legs when darkness falls or when the wind kicks up again.
He refuses to sleep by himself as he used to.
He starts to cry when it rains.


Good Taste Survives the Storm in Print and TV Messages
THERE is one casualty of Hurricane Andrew that few would mourn: the warmly emotional advertising by insurance companies, utilities, banks and local businesses that usually follows natural disasters is nowhere to be found.
That means, at least for now, that the survivors of America's costliest natural disaster have been spared the usual spectacle of television commercials and print advertisements featuring weary yet smiling claims adjusters, cashiers, tellers and telephone and power-line repairers nobly performing their duties despite overwhelming odds.


No Headline
I'm so worried.
Where are we going to live?
What are we going to eat?
TYIE SERRANO, a 12-year-old victim of the Florida hurricane.  [ A10:3. ]


Fluor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


TV Weekend; America's Pint-Size Philosophers
As appealing a cast as you are likely to come across in this or any other television season is on show tonight in "Age 7 in America." Nineteen children from New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Lincoln, Neb., and Dublin, Ga., offer their thoughts on life as they know it and would like to know it.
The hourlong documentary, directed by Phil Joanou, is an American version of "7 Up." That 1963 program opened a notable British series directed by Michael Apted, who is producing "Age 7 in America." Every seven years after that, the British team revisited its 14 subjects to ask how life was living up to their expectations.
At the most recent encounter, shown this year, the group had turned 35.


Plan to Allow Cuts n Investment Taxes Is Dropped by Bush
The White House today abandoned a proposal, popular among conservative Republicans, to reduce the taxes on profits from investments without consulting Congress.
Government lawyers said the plan was unconstitutional.
President Bush had been considering the proposal, which was favored by his new chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d, as part of his search for ways to fill out his economic-policy portfolio for the November election.


If Government Protected Us, We'd Sue Less; A Noble Calling
To the Editor:
As a lifelong conservative Republican who also happens to be a plaintiffs' lawyer, I am compelled to respond to the attacks on trial lawyers by both President Bush and Vice President Quayle in their acceptance speeches at the Republican National Convention.


Sirica's Legacy
To the Editor:
The role of Judge John Sirica (obituary article, Aug. 15) in the drama surrounding the 1972 break-in at Democratic national headquarters in Washington's Watergate complex was critical to bringing former President Richard M. Nixon and his top lieutenants to account.


TURKEY SAYS BUSH REJECTS KURDISTAN
Concerned that recent American and allied actions in Iraq would embolden Kurdish separatists in southeastern Turkey, Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel said tonight that he had sought and received assurances from President Bush that the United States would continue to oppose creation of an independent Kurdish nation in the region.
But in an interview, the Turkish leader also said he was concerned that recent efforts to create zones of protection for Kurdish and Shiite dissidents in northern and southern Iraq had weakened Iraq's territorial integrity.


In Israel, Cuomo Stresses Economics Over Defense
Taking his first look at Israel, both on the ground and from the air, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that although no one doubts the legitimacy of Israel's security concerns, Israeli leaders may find that solving their economic problems is a more formidable task than protecting themselves from military threat.
To underline that point, the Governor flew by helicopter to the Golan Heights, captured from Syria in the 1967 Middle East War, to see a highly fortified territory that Israel annexed 11 years ago and that most Israelis say they cannot return without undermining their safety.


Gianyar Journal; In Flames Of a Pyre, A Glimpse Of Old Bali
When the Raja of the Balinese kingdom of Gianyar set to work planning a royal cremation ceremony for his late wife and mother, the idea was not to mourn their deaths.
The idea, in fact, was to celebrate.
For the 71-year-old Raja, indeed for most Balinese, the ancient Hindu cremation ceremony is a time to rejoice over the liberation of the soul and its ascent into the heavens -- a destination that is thought by the Balinese to look like their idyllic island home.


GTE Plans a Big Sale of New Stock
In an unsettled market for stocks, the GTE Corporation, the nation's largest local-telephone company and one of the most widely held equities in the country, said yesterday that it planned to sell nearly $1 billion worth of newly issued shares to the public.
GTE said that it had registered a planned sale of 30 million common shares with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
An additional three million could be sold if the first group is oversubscribed.


Acting Head of Police Shifts Internal Affairs Commander
Citing a need to infuse "fresh blood" into the New York City Police Department's methods of rooting out corruption, Acting Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday that he was removing the commanding officer of the Internal Affairs Division.
While asserting that the change did not represent a shakeup, Mr.
Kelly said he was concerned that too many Internal Affairs officials stayed in their jobs for many years.
He also said he would likely make further "adjustments," if not in personnel, then in the internal safeguards used by the department.


IFR Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Secret Night Life of Wall St.; After Hours, a Surprising Mix of Work, Noise and Solitude
From the portals of Trinity Church on lower Broadway, you can look down the grand alley of Wall Street and see across the East River to the rooftops in Brooklyn.
That's the high sightline, a lovely slice of New York.
But at 5 P.M. no one is looking down Wall Street because everyone is walking up, thousands of people and briefcases, two sidewalks' worth, a purposeful, slightly bedraggled mass of bankers and brokers and lawyers sending as single-minded a message as New Yorkers ever send: Let's get out of here.
Let's go home.


Whittaker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Holtzman's Strategy: "Ms. Clean"


What Makes a Home Not Fit to Live In
A house or apartment building is uninhabitable if the repairs will cost more than half of the current value of the structure, as assessed for tax purposes, according to the Dade County Department of Building and Zoning's guidelines.
The department's director, Carlos Bonzon, said today that after the agency condemns a structure the owner can appeal to the Unsafe Structures Board, a 13-member panel appointed by the county's Board of Commissioners.
Under normal circumstances, the board must schedule a hearing within 90 days to consider the appeal.


Restaurants
Restaurateurs, like race horse owners, often go through many thoroughbreds before finding a winner.
Such is the case with Jean DeNoyer and Francois Marchand, owners of Le Comptoir, the fashionable Upper East Side bistro.
In their case, the payoff number was four.
Since the restaurant opened two years ago, it has had four chefs in the saddle, and only the latest, French-born Bertrand Vernejoul, has given the kitchen the momentum it needs to be an all-around winner.
Mr.
DeNoyer owns the Supper Club on West 47th Street, and Mr.
Marchand owns Le Relais on Madison Avenue.


Lucky Homeowners Facing Long Limbo Before Repairs
If Homestead was Ground Zero, the place where Hurricane Andrew flattened entire neighborhoods, many other parts of Dade County were left in a frustrating limbo between total wreckage and livable housing.
Throughout South Florida, people who were lucky enough to have survived the hurricane with four walls and a semblance of a roof now wonder how they will make it through the coming weeks with their belongings soaked by frequent rains, home-repair contractors impossibly backlogged and a return to work looming.


The Beat, The Feet: Viva! Viva!
LA CABANA, a tiny Dominican restaurant and nightclub on 162d Street and Broadway, starts jumping at around 1 A.M. when Fefita La Grande, the wiry queen of merengue, hoists her rhinestone-encrusted accordion over her shoulders and begins squeezing out feverish rhythms.
Instantly, the dance floor turns into a steam bath of sweat and cologne.
Pressed body to body, dancers undulate from the waist down in a manner that certainly would draw stares in broad daylight, in another part of town.
But not at La Cabana, one of the dozen or so glittery Manhattan clubs -- from hideaways to warehouse-sized discos -- that dot upper Broadway in Washington Heights.
Here, hips are expected to get out of hand, at least while the music is playing.
Afterward is a different story.
Partners disengage immediately from their frontal lock.
Women fluff their organdy ruffles, and men readjust the drape of double-breasted suit jackets, murmuring polite thanks for the dance.


Newark Man Held in Theft of a Police Car
A Newark man was arrested yesterday in the theft of a state police cruiser on Tuesday.
Members of the Violent Crimes Fugitive Task Force arrested the suspect, Anthony (Bullet) Green, 19 years old, without incident about 10:30 A.M. at an apartment on First Street in Newark, the state police said yesterday.
The task force consists of Federal, state and county personnel.


Good Taste Survives the Storm in Print and TV Messages
THERE is one casualty of Hurricane Andrew that few would mourn: the warmly emotional advertising by insurance companies, utilities, banks and local businesses that usually follows natural disasters is nowhere to be found.
That means, at least for now, that the survivors of America's costliest natural disaster have been spared the usual spectacle of television commercials and print advertisements featuring weary yet smiling claims adjusters, cashiers, tellers and telephone and power-line repairers nobly performing their duties despite overwhelming odds.


News Summary
International A2-6  U.N.
PLANE DOWNED IN BOSNIA  A U.N. plane carrying aid to Sarajevo was shot down, officials said, and two American rescue helicopters turned back after encountering small-arms fire in the area.
The U.S. helicopters were not hit.
A1  MITTERRAND ON THE OFFENSIVE  Warning that a no vote on the European union treaty could "cause severe harm to France," President Mitterrand appeared in a long televised debate to voice support for the treaty.
France will hold a referendum on it this month.
A1  STEALING FROM THE STARVING  In the port of Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, merchants are doing a thriving business in the sale of stolen relief food.
The organized theft and sale of the food is taking place in a country where an estimated 1.5 million people face starvation.
A1  CHINA SNAPS AT U.S.
Angered by President Bush's plan to sell 150 fighter jets to Taiwan, China threatened to withdraw from international arms control talks if the sale goes through.
A3  THE POST-SOVIET CHAOS  As leaders of Georgia and Russia met to try to work out a solution to the ethnic violence in western Georgia, the fate of the President of Tajikistan was unclear after another attempt to oust him.
A3  ALLIES' IRAQ EFFORTS WORRY TURKS  The Turkish Prime Minister said he was concerned that efforts to create zones of protection for Kurds and Shiite Muslims in Iraq had weakened Iraq's territorial integrity.
Turkish leaders fears that the zones will encourage Kurds in Turkey to carry out their fight for a nation.
A2  HELP FOR NICARAGUA  Foreign governments provided aid for the survivors of the giant waves, spawned by an earthquake, that swamped Nicaragua's Pacific coast Tuesday night.
The United States announced that it was making $5 million immediately available.
A6  SETTLEMENT HOUSING SLUMP  The Israeli Housing Ministry said that Israelis have virtually stopped buying homes in the occupied territories since the Government announced cuts in construction and subsidies for settlers there.
A5  Bali Journal: Fears that development will destroy a culture.
A4  National A8-14  MORE LIVE IN POVERTY  The proportion of Americans living in poverty soared last year to 14.2 percent, the highest level since the early 1980's, the Government reported.
And in what may be a worse political omen for President Bush, the purchasing power of the typical American household shrank last year.
A1  STORM'S YOUNGEST VICTIMS  Hurricane Andrew, frightening enough to rational adults, was the bogyman come to life for the thousands of children who survived it and lost their life's possessions to it.
Now they worry about when they will eat again and talk of their fears of death and losing their parents.
A1  Survivors wonder how they will survive the reconstruction.
A10  Urging families to abandon ruined homes for tent cities.A11  CLINTON'S NEW PUSH  Gov.
Clinton accused the President of pursuing economic policies that would lead to the evisceration of Social Security, part of a new Democratic strategy asserting that the Republican Party plans to help the rich at the expense of the poor and middle class.
A1  One effort for a capital gains tax change is abandoned.
A13  Gay Republicans find a benefit in criticism of homosexuality.
A12  Presidential debates?
Mr.
Bush has reservations.
A13  A HISTORIC ELECTION  Two longtime friends find themselves in an odd position: they are now opponents in a runoff election for a seat on the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors.
The winner will become the first elected black supervisor in county history.
A8  A GEYSER'S ODD BEHAVIOR  Researchers say a geyser in California varied its eruptions a few days before three major earthquakes, and could provide warnings about future temblors.
A8  ANTITRUST RULING'S EFFECT  News analysis: College students may have gained some bargaining power because of a court ruling that M.I.T. violated antitrust laws.
And the decision could change the way colleges and universities allocate financial aid.
A8  Law Page B16  U.S. courts take a new look at a way to settle complex cases before trial.
At the Bar  Obituaries D16 NOTED GENETICIST IS DEAD  Dr.
Barbara McClintock, a 90-year-old Nobel laureate, died Wednesday after a long career in science.
She is best known for her discovery that fragments of genetic material move among chromosomes, regulating the way genes control the processes of life.
A1  Dr.
Charles L. Hudson, ex-head of the American Medical Association.
Weekend C1-22  Latin dance clubs.
C1  Rebirth of a sideshow at Coney Island.
C1  American Ballet Theater planning to continue tours.
C3  A draw on the chessboard.
C19  For Children C16  Theater: "Under Milk Wood." C2  "Back to Bacharach." C2  Film: "Bob Roberts." C1  "The Tune." C3  "Woman Demon Human." C11  "Limite." C11  Music: Sounds Around Town C11  Restaurants C16  Art: The Art Market C3  Lucian Freud's etchings.
C17  Of romantic outsiders.
C17  Word and Image: "The Secret History," by Donna Tartt.
C18  TV Weekend C20  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Sports B7-15  Baseball: In 18-9 vote, owners ask for Vincent's resignation.
B7  Hayes is Yanks' old reliable of a new era.
B9  Mets lose in ninth.
B9  Dawson returns to Florida to survey damage.
B8  Columns: Rhoden on Sayers.
B7  Lipsyte on a passionate old scamp.
B13  Football: Handley bars press from Giants workout.
B7  Rice has quick strikes in mind against Giants.
B14  Thomas ready to dodge tacklers and tackle doubters.
B15  N.F.L. matchups B14  Hockey: Tampa Bay is ready for the Zamboni.
B10  Sports People B8  Tennis: Navratilova loses.
B7  Another miss for Shriver.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  Worse than a lie.
Combating racism, after Rostock.
Prevent dumping-ground schools.
Who's a cross-dresser?
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: European danger.
Self-Portrait: Photographs by homeless children.


O'Connor Faults Dinkins Plan To Expand Board of Education
John Cardinal O'Connor yesterday criticized Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to expand the city Board of Education, likening it to President Franklin D. Roosevelt's ill-fated attempt to "pack" the Supreme Court.
The Cardinal's comments, in his weekly column in Catholic New York, came as he expressed his support for a school board policy that requires AIDS educators to sign a pledge promising to emphasize abstinence in classroom presentations.


Monitoring Had Been Stopped On Two Mob Suspects Who Fled
Electronic monitoring bracelets intended to keep track of defendants on bail were removed with the approval of the Government in July from two reputed mob figures who have now apparently fled New York, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.
The two defendants, John and Joseph Gambino, reputed heroin smugglers in an organized-crime family controlled by John Gotti, failed to appear on Tuesday for arraignment in Federal court in Manhattan on murder and racketeering charges.
They forfeited $5 million in bail.


U.N. RELIEF PLANE REPORTED DOWNED ON BOSNIA MISSION
A United Nations plane carrying aid to Sarajevo was shot down today, officials said, and two American rescue helicopters left the crash site after encountering small-arms fire.
A diplomat, who insisted on not being identified, said he was convinced from reports from the area that the plane had been shot down, probably by a missile.
He said that a United Nations team had reached the site of the wreckage and that a full report was expected on Friday.


Diner's Journal
Chop Suey Looey's Litchi Lounge
If your tastes run to shiny red banquettes, synthetic topiary, Astroturf rugs and tropical drinks served in 32-ounce vases that are decorated with peacock feathers and colored balloons, then hurry over to Chop Suey Looey's Litchi Lounge on West 55th Street in midtown Manhattan.
Under the same ownership as Fishin' Eddie on West 71st Street and Vince and Eddie's on West 68th Street, this wacky Oriental newcomer serves a wide selection of Chinese fare at moderate (for midtown) prices.
One of the best offerings sampled recently (the most expensive) was meaty slices of raw geoduck clam over ice with a hot mustard dipping sauce ($19.95).
Another winner was wonderful giant steamed scallops with their orange roe and a black-bean sauce ($5.50 each).
Also good were dense, coriander-laced, steamed dumplings filled with shrimp and scallops ($5.25 for four) and a conch shell stuffed with its own curried meat ($5.50).


Theft of Food Aid Is a Business in Starving Somalia
A man called Muhadin sat inside a darkened store in this city's bustling marketplace, fingering his turquoise prayer beads and keeping watch on stacks of bagged rice.
A freshly painted red, white and blue sign in Somali read: American grain for sale.
On the sunlit streets outside, bare-backed men unloaded trucks brimming with food sacks and young boys jostled through the crowds, pushing wheelbarrows piled with bags marked with the Red Cross emblem.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.21
5.67
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.13
5.34
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.20
5.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.02
6.03
7.65
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.37
8.09
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.47
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.30
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Businesses Reeling From Storm
For Tony Romero, the general manager of I.B.M.'s operations in South Florida, Hurricane Andrew was as much a personal hardship as a business challenge.
His spacious white-stucco house overlooking Biscayne Bay, several miles south of I.B.M.'s regional office here, is now a battered, mud-caked wreck.
The surge from the storm shattered the bolts on his front door.
The living room furniture lies broken like kindling against one wall.
The hurricane ripped down his ceilings, toppled walls and spread a thick layer of mud everywhere.
"As you can see, I've lost everything here," Mr.
Romero said.


Alger L. Adams, 82, Clergyman and Editor
The Rev.
Alger L. Adams, a retired Episcopal clergyman and former editor and publisher of The Westchester County Press, died on Wednesday at his home in Hastings-on-Hudson.
He was 82 years old.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Despite Financial Woes, Ballet Theater to Tour
American Ballet Theater, without an artistic director since Tuesday, continues to face "serious financial challenges" but will not cancel its planned national and international tours, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The spokesman, Robert Pontarelli, denied a report in The Washington Post yesterday that Ballet Theater "appears to be facing a Federal court bankruptcy filing" and might cancel its planned United States tour.


Officials Seek More Ferries To Manhattan
In a vision of hydrofoils and catamarans whisking commuters across New York's waterways, officials said yesterday that they were asking private companies to provide new high-speed commuter ferry lines between Manhattan and eight terminals across the city and suburbs.
Under the plan, announced jointly by the Dinkins and Cuomo administrations, the ferries would provide commuter service to communities including Oyster Bay, L.I., Nyack in Rockland County and Yonkers and Rye in Westchester.


No Changes In I.B.M. Agencies
A spokeswoman for the International Business Machines Corporation in White Plains said yesterday that I.B.M. would not change its advertising strategies following the formation of a separate unit for its personal computer operations called the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company.
There had been speculation in trade publications that the move would lead I.B.M. to initiate changes in its agency roster.


Review/Film: Bob Roberts; A Singing Candidate, A Happy Trail of Hait
"BOB ROBERTS," written and directed by Tim Robbins, who also plays the title role, is a very funny, sometimes prescient satire of American politics, and of the comparatively small, voting portion of the electorate that makes a Bob Roberts phenomenon possible.
Recent events haven't completely overtaken the movie, but they do indicate just how wild a satire must be these days to remain on the cutting edge of the outrageous.
In the person of Mr.
Robbins, whose performance is a career-defining achievement, Bob Roberts is a smoothly ingratiating, guitar-playing businessman, a self-made millionaire who wants to be the next United States Senator from Pennsylvania.
He's good-looking, but in the way of a familiar television personality, not of a major movie star.
His charisma doesn't intimidate.


JLG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Christiana Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


At the Bar
The final week of August was not an easy one for Philip Horowitz, a lawyer in South Miami.
First, he ran directly into Andrew.
Then he ran into Norman.
When Hurricane Andrew roared through South Florida on Aug. 24, Mr.
Horowitz's home, in an unincorporated part of Dade County 15 miles north of Homestead, was demolished.
So, too, was his law office.
Under the circumstances, he thought it reasonable to ask Judge Norman C. Roettger Jr., chief judge of the Federal District Court in Southern Florida, to postpone for a day a trial in which he was one of 10 lawyers in a defense team.


Books of The Times; Students Indulging In Course of Destruction
The Secret History  By Donna Tartt  524 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
How best to describe Donna Tartt's enthralling first novel?
Imagine the plot of Dostoyevsky's "Crime and Punishment" crossed with the story of Euripides' "Bacchae" set against the backdrop of Bret Easton Ellis's "Rules of Attraction" and told in the elegant, ruminative voice of Evelyn Waugh's "Brideshead Revisited." The product, surprisingly enough, isn't a derivative jumble, but a remarkably powerful novel that seems sure to win a lengthy stay on the best-seller lists.


Shriver Rushes to Net But Can't Move Ahead
There were some lost chances yesterday for Pam Shriver, as there have been for the last 14 years and 41 Grand Slam tournaments.
Her forehand passing shot slipped wide on break point in the fifth game.
A rain delay and two double-faults stopped her second-set momentum.
Shriver, still clomping at age 30, was out of another major tournament, a 7-5, 6-3 loser to Steffi Graf in the second round of the United States Open.


Images (and Realities) of Romantic Outsiders
The image of the romantic rebel was probably never more popular in America than in the 1950's and 60's, when a plethora of books, movies, plays and songs, from "Rebel Without a Cause" to "On the Road" to "West Side Story," celebrated the phenomenon.
"The Young Rebel in American Photography, 1950-1970," a provocative show at the Museum of Modern Art, examines how this theme was played out in the work of photographers like Robert Frank, Diane Arbus and Danny Lyon, who depicted social outcasts and outsiders of various sorts.
As might be expected, given the importance of the artists involved, the show includes a fair number of classic images from the period.
But what makes this show particularly intriguing is the thesis advanced by Edward Robinson, its organizer and the Newhall Fellow in the museum's department of photography.
He argues that these photographers were attracted to the outsiders not simply as colorful subjects, but because of their own feelings of alienation from American culture.


Worse Than a Lie
When President Bush keeps insisting that Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has raised taxes and fees 128 times, he knows he is falsifying the record.
He seems so eager to smear his opponent as a big taxer that he's willing to trash the truth over trivia.
But he jeopardizes more than credibility.
In a time of economic pain newly documented by the Census Bureau's report of soaring poverty, one would think the President would wish to ask voters for a mandate endorsing a sensible economic program.
But his program so far remains incoherent, and meanwhile he keeps flailing at his opponent with this silly list.
When will Mr.
Bush get serious?


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Trenton Court May Force Spending on Legal Aid
Alarmed by the impact of recent budget cuts on legal representation for the poor, the New Jersey Supreme Court said today that it was prepared to order the state or the counties to come up with the millions of dollars needed to prevent more than 3,000 court cases from being dropped during the coming year.
The court's decision places it on another collision course with the Republican-controlled Legislature.
The Legislature has criticized the court's most recent school financing decision, which ordered the state to increase aid for the state's poorest districts to bring them up to spending parity with the most affluent suburban districts.


INSIDE
Ousted Bulgarian Convicted
Todor Zhivkov, the ousted Communist leader of Bulgaria, was convicted of embezzlement and sentenced to seven years in prison.
Page 2.
Legal Aid and Tight Budgets
Worried about budget cuts, the New Jersey Supreme Court said it might order governments to spend millions on lawyers for the poor.
Page 21.
The Forging of a Campaign
With discipline and luck, the Clinton camp has transformed a referendum on the Governor's character into one on the Bush Presidency.
Page 7.
Joseph Rauh Dies at 81
Joseph L. Rauh Jr., long one of the nation's leading champions of civil rights and liberal causes, died of a heart attack in Washington.
Page 10.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Says He Was Told of Draft Aid
In an apparent contradiction of previous remarks, Gov.
Bill Clinton today acknowledged that he was told in March that efforts to secure a Naval Reserve assignment had been made on his behalf in 1968.
Dogged by questions about his draft record for the second time this week, the Democratic Presidential nominee issued a terse written statement in response to a news article in today's Arkansas Democrat-Gazette.


Murray Says Goodbye To Hank and the Babe
There wasn't a second of doubt, and so Eddie Murray got to enjoy the moment in its exquisite entirety.
He swung the bat and opened the record books.
The drive was a home run.
The home run was a grand slam.
The ensuing trot, the 17th such of his career, was one only four other men in the history of the game had ever taken.


Part of Free-Trade Pact Sent Congress by White House
The Bush Administration today released part of the free-trade pact struck by the United States, Mexico and Canada on Aug. 12 -- a three-inch-thick computer printout -- and said it would release the rest next Tuesday.
The material, sent to Congress and made available to reporters today, listed each country's import taxes on 9,000 product categories along with schedules for the immediate or gradual elimination of these taxes.


The Questions Are Lingering for Canseco
It didn't really look like Jose Canseco.
The uniform shirt was bright blue, "Rangers" was in red and white script across his chest.
The pants were gray, the stirrups blue.
Even Canseco looked confused.
After spending more than six years in that green, gray and gold uniform, after being the symbol of Oakland's success and power, Canseco seemed lost yesterday at Yankee Stadium.


Baking Under the Stars With an Oven in Camp
The sweet smell of a cake baking is a treat seldom experienced by hikers in the wilderness.
On a camp stove, food is usually boiled in a pot or fried in a skillet.
But now there is a way to bake, too.
Robert and Diane Lerner of Seattle came up with a technique for baking while on a mountain bike trip five years ago.
The couple, who spent 20 months traveling 12,000 miles through 24 countries in 1987 and 1988, created a small convection oven with bits and pieces they gleaned from a Turkish bazaar.


Lloyd's Burned 'Names' Still in Game
John D. Incledon is one of the 22,000 individuals whose wealth provides the financing for Lloyd's of London, the venerable insurer.
Like most of his fellow "names," as they are known, Mr.
Incledon is taking a beating from the heavy losses Lloyd's has suffered in recent years and is angry about the way the institution is being run.
But despite having lost hundreds of thousands of dollars in the most recent fiscal year alone, Mr.
Incledon said that he planned to keep investing his money in Lloyd's and that he might even increase the amount of insurance he is willing to underwrite in the next few years.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about an Immigration and Naturalization Service decision to grant visas to three Haitian refugees with the virus that causes AIDS misstated the reason why a recent international conference on the disease was moved from Boston to Amsterdam.
It was because the United States had rejected a blanket request from conference organizers to change its policy barring H.I.V.-positive people from entering the country, not because some conference participants were denied visas.


Bronx Fab Four Clings to Yesterday
As leader of the Ghetto Brothers street gang, Benjy Melendez battled many a foe, but few as tough as Shirley Temple.
You see, some members of the denim-clad clan were not only street fighters, but a band devoted to Beatles songs who kept harmonizing long after the gang retired its colors and the Fab Four disbanded.
Their showdown with Shirley came at a Halloween concert seven years ago where 36 bands competed as their favorite artists.
She was a three-time champion, but that only made Benjy and his boys all the more eager to take the curl out of her locks.
When they finished their set, they let her down and left her flat.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  SHINING PATH IN BOLIVIA
The Shining Path, the fierce and elusive guerrilla group that holds sway in Peru, has expanded across Peru's borders for the first time and is making inroads in Bolivia.  1


Joseph Rauh Jr., Groundbreaking Civil Liberties Lawyer, Dies at 81
Joseph L. Rauh Jr., for decades one of the nation's leading champions of civil rights and liberal causes, died Thursday night at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 81 years old.
Americans for Democratic Action, which Mr.
Rauh helped found 45 years ago, said he died soon after suffering a heart attack at his Washington home.


Huge Development Wrong for Upper West Side
To the Editor:
The mixed-use building envisioned for New York's Upper West Side at Broadway and 68th Street, Lincoln Square, is inappropriate.
Such commercial use belongs south of 59th Street, not in a dense residential neighborhood.
If a developer or planner sees a need for 10 movies and a sports center, the Coliseum at Columbus Circle is a good space for them.


Letter: On Disasters; Beyond Emergency Relief
To the Editor:
There is no difference in the way a hurricane destroys a rich person's home and a poor person's home.
Unfortunately in this country there is still a big difference in the opportunities each will have to rebuild that home and a stable life.
The second tragedy of Hurricane Andrew is that when the emergency is over and the long-term recovery gets under way, many of those who lost their homes so swiftly, those with no insurance, no savings and no health care, will find themselves abandoned by a system that provides little opportunity to re-enter the mainstream.


FED CUTS INTEREST
In a stunningly grim portrayal of the midsummer economy, Government figures showed today that American business and industry lost 167,000 jobs in August as factory employment skidded to its lowest level since April 1983.
The job losses shown in today's labor-market report, the next to last reading before Election Day, were almost completely unexpected by private analysts.
The release of the figures promptly led to another cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board.
The action was intended to spur economic growth, but it could also help push the already weak dollar lower against foreign currencies.


Democracy's Pitchman
The life story of Joseph Rauh, who died on Thursday at 81, had many histories.
The most famous, perhaps, were his strenuous lobbying in behalf of every major civil rights bill from 1957 on, his battle against McCarthyism and his struggles over the conscience and membership of the U.S.
Supreme Court.
He was also the proud partner of Clarence Mitchell when the two served as co-chairmen of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights.
He treasured the day when Senator Harry Byrd Sr., the Virginia segregationist, gestured toward the gallery and cried, "There they are, the Gold Dust twins."


Observer; Kris Kringle Mode
Everybody at our house was excited about President Bush roaming the country granting boons.
He had been seen in North Dakota giving big money to wheat people.
Then he had turned up in Texas where a lot of people who make high-tech warplanes for a living were about to be jobless on account of high-tech war becoming such a slow business.
"Not to worry," the President told those Texans, or words to that effect.
He had changed his foreign policy, whether China liked it or not, so Taiwan could buy billions of dollars worth of high-tech warplanes.
Oh, what joy in Texas!


U.S. and Dutch Agree on a Pact To Aid Airlines
The United States and the Netherlands agreed yesterday to an aviation pact that ends most restrictions on flights between the two countries and will allow KLM Royal Dutch Airlines to fly anywhere in the United States.
The pact, the first with such wide rights, is expected to have a broad impact on international travel and the airline industry.
The United States hopes that the arrangement, by giving KLM broader access to the huge American market, will put pressure on larger European countries to negotiate similar deals.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; 'COVETED ENDORSEMENT' IN A VERDANT SETTING
In a suitably green setting -- a pasture at the foot of Pinnacle Mountain, not far from Little Rock -- the Democratic Presidential nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton, and his running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, accepted what Mr.
Clinton called the "coveted endorsement" of the Sierra Club, the nation's oldest environmental group.


Holiday on Monday
Labor Day will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
PARADE Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickup, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Transit Authority buses and subways on Sunday schedules; L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule. Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
CHELSEA STREET FAIR Eighth Avenue will be closed between 15th and 23d Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
EL FIESTON Broadway and Seventh Avenues will be closed between 35th and 42d Streets from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
BRAZILIAN-AMERICAN STREET FAIR 46th Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Madison Avenue will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
MONDAY
WEST INDIAN DAY PARADE
Eastern Parkway from Utica Avenue to the Grand Army Plaza. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Patents; New Lawsuit On Magnetic Resonance
RAYMOND V. DAMADIAN, the man generally credited with inventing the revolutionary medical diagnostic technology known as magnetic resonance imaging, this week began a second attempt to obtain patent royalties from an industry that has overshadowed him.
It has been 15 years since the white-haired, pugnacious physician-turned-entrepreneur tested the first M.R.I. machine, a development that paved the way for doctors to get vivid color images of the interior of a person's body.
Since then, M.R.I. has become a $2 billion industry, with most large cities having imaging centers where the million-dollar machines are used.
But while Dr.
Damadian has been honored repeatedly for his invention, and his original machine is enshrined at the Smithsonian Institution, he has not succeeded in efforts to get others in the M.R.I. industry to pay him royalties.


Corrections
An article on July 24 about a robbery of $400,000 in gems from a jewelry store owner and seven employees described the victims incorrectly.
They were in New York City from Los Angeles to attend the International Jewelry Show, but they were not registered exhibitors at the event.
The Times received a letter in July explaining the situation.
Improper handling of the letter caused the delay in this correction.


As Night Wears On, Lendl Wears Connors Out
What began with Jimmy Connors trying to drag Ivan Lendl all the way back to 1983 ended with Lendl making it painfully clear to Connors the consequences of its being 1992.
For a set and half, Connors and 20,000 of his "closest friends" in the Stadium Court of the National Tennis Center at the United States Open wished to believe that he was more than a 40-year-old who refused to act his age.
Then Lendl began to dismantle Connors, stroke by stroke, piece by piece, until all that remained was an old-timer unable to win a single game in the final set, falling, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-0, in the second round last night.


Rumors Abound Of Storm Deaths Going Untallied
The stories are heard everywhere: About 25 people dead in a trailer park.
Forty-nine dead in a migrant labor camp.
Corpses floating in the Everglades.
A collapsed apartment building that left 80 dead.
Officially, the death toll in Dade County from Hurricane Andrew is 38, with 14 of the deaths attributed directly to the storm.
But many South Florida residents refuse to accept that figure, preferring to believe rumors of hundreds of unreported deaths.
In the absence of proof, they accuse the Government agencies in charge of the hurricane relief effort of participating in a vast cover-up.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Courts Small Businesses by Offering Loans
Campaigning as a skeptical outsider while behaving as a Washington insider, President Bush today sharply attacked Congress for rejecting most of his legislation and then praised and signed a bill promoting small business loans.
In a street-corner campaign speech here that was billed as an endorsement of small business, Mr.
Bush described himself as a former businessman who got ulcers meeting payrolls and felt disgust for too many regulations and high taxes.
He also spoke of his contempt for a "gridlocked Congress" that routinely dismissed his proposals.


Ferraro and Holtzman Meet. That's All.
After weeks of nasty sniping, Elizabeth Holtzman and Geraldine A. Ferraro found themselves in the same room yesterday for the first time in four months, and neither was particularly pleased to see the other.
The setting was a luncheon sponsored by the Ms.
Foundation for Women, and the audience included supporters of both candidates, who are running in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate.
Though the two sat eating box lunches inches apart, they did not acknowledge each other, reserving their comments for reporters in the hallway outside.


Contrasts Mark Republican Primary for Senate
Connecticut's southwestern corner has produced a pair of Republican candidates for the United States Senate this year whose styles highlight contradictions within Fairfield County and, indeed, the rest of the state.
One of the candidates, Brook Johnson, makes his home in a Greenwich subdivision where the lots are sprawling and residents enter through an electronically monitored security gate.
The other, Chris Burnham, lives in Stamford, a city that borders Greenwich to the east and where neighborhoods range from rows of shabby tenements to elaborate estates tucked behind stone walls.


Correction Officers Do More Than Guard
To the Editor:
The 12,000 uniformed officers of the New York City Department of Correction are specially trained professional peace officers who manage the more than 100,000 inmates admitted to the city's jails each year.
They perform under difficult and stressful conditions that require discipline, confidence, care and understanding.


Credit Cards on the Rise in High Schools
When Saskia Herz, a 16-year-old high school student, needed to buy some expensive supplies this summer for a photography class, she didn't bring along her mother.
She brought along a credit card.
"I don't use it that much," said Ms.
Herz, who has had a credit card since she was 13.
"Because when I do, I have to pay it back out of my allowance."


Health Concerns Add to Nicaraguan Woes From Giant Waves


U.S. Puts a Halt To Talks Tying Genes to Crime
Faced with complaints of veiled racism, the National Institutes of Health today withdrew financing of an academic conference on the search for a genetic basis for criminal behavior, forcing its indefinite postponement.
The Federal agency, which oversees Government spending on medical research, said in withdrawing a $78,000 grant that organizers of the talks had made an "unjustified leap" in linking crime and genetics.
But the University of Maryland, where the conference was to be held, contended today that the action was politically motivated and a gross violation of academic freedom.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Two-Party System
During the last three months, pressure from what was originally thought to be a minority of baseball owners has grown into a committed movement to force Fay Vincent's resignation as commissioner of baseball.
On Thursday the first shoe dropped when owners, meeting in Rosemont, Ill., voted by secret ballot to ask for Vincent's immediate resignation.
Vincent has already said that he would never resign, so the battle will move to St.
Louis on Wednesday, when the owners will reconvene, apparently with the idea of forceably removing Vincent from office.


10 Violations on Wrecker Before Building Collapse
The contractor demolishing the old post office building that partly collapsed on the Upper West Side this week was cited for safety violations 10 times in the last three weeks, city officials said yesterday.
The front wall of the building collapsed on Thursday, slightly injuring a pedestrian on Broadway.
City officials said that the demolition company had previously been cited for what they described as an unusually high number of violations, although none were serious.


What Goes Around Will Still Be Around, if Only Briefly


Jet Defense Hoping To Catch Its Breath
The Jets spent the preseason and training camp readjusting their defensive line and the linebacker corps.
But as the team starts its 1992 season Sunday in Atlanta, it looks as if the secondary, the lone defensive unit that remains intact from last season, will get the early test.
The Falcons will come out firing their Red Gun offense, which is quite similar to Houston's run-and-shoot, featuring four wide receivers.
But the Atlanta receivers aren't your everyday wide receivers.
They're burners.


A Fire Curtails Amex Trading
Trading on the American Stock Exchange was suspended early yesterday as smoke from a nearby fire filled the trading floor.
Trading opened 15 minutes late, at 9:45, in only two of the Amex's three trading sections.
Half an hour later, as the smoke problem continued, the exchange ended trading for the day.





Review/Jazz; Controlling Improvisation Without Constraining It
Everything about the young tenor saxophonist Joshua Redman suggests moderation.
Mr.
Redman, who won the Thelonious Monk Institute's saxophone competition last year and was subsequently the object of a record-label bidding war, may be one of the least extroverted people to use the instrument.
He's a classicist, and in his playing come hints of late 1950's John Coltrane, of Sonny Rollins, Joe Henderson, even vintage Stanley Turrentine.
But he uses it all quietly, and his lines, never harsh or extreme, either in register or volume, resonate with thoughtfulness and gentility.
Mr.
Redman has been signed by Warner Brothers; at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night, he led the all-star band that he was using on his first record, including the bassist Charlie Haden, the drummer Billy Higgins and the guitarist Pat Metheny; the band will be replaced for the weekend shows.
On paper, the combination of Mr.
Metheny and Mr.
Redman seems a cynical nod toward the dollar.
Mr.
Metheny has, in most of his recent recordings and appearances, lost his ability to improvise in the jazz idiom; he's an advocate of sentimental bombast.
The restrained Mr.
Redman, a jazz historian, is anything but sentimental or overblown.


No Headline
It's a real jolt.
Even if you haven't lost your job, you've got to be pretty nervous.
STEPHEN S. ROACH, an economist at Morgan Stanley.  [ 1:6. ]


Runaway Carriage Injures Tourists in Times Square


BLACK SECT LEADER GETS 18-YEAR TERM
A black supremacist who calls himself Yahweh ben Yahweh was sentenced to 18 years in prison today for conspiring to use murder and arson to maintain a multimillion-dollar religious empire.
The penalty, which included a $20,000 fine, was two years short of the maximum sentence allowed by law for a conspiracy conviction.
By law, the 57-year-old defendant will be eligible for parole after serving one-third of the sentence, or six years.


U.S. Now Opposes Anklets For Use in Home Detention
In a policy shift, Federal prosecutors in Manhattan said yesterday that they would oppose the use of electronic monitoring devices to keep track of criminal defendants out on bail, because the prosecutors think the devices do not deter defendants from fleeing the country or committing other crimes.
"It is our general view that they do not work in these cases," said Howard E. Heiss, chief of the organized crime unit in the office of the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.


Mattingly Connects, and Afterward He Complains
So this was supposed to be Jose Canseco's night.
The slugger officially switched uniforms from Oakland to Texas and made his Ranger debut against the Yankees.
Anyone waiting for him to make an instant impact was disappointed.
Anyone waiting for Don Mattingly to have an impact was not.
He made his presence felt during and after the game.
While Canseco fizzled in his first game with the Rangers, going hitless, Mattingly smoked a homer and two singles, drove in three runs and powered the Yankees to a 6-3 victory over the Rangers last night at Yankee Stadium.
Then Mattingly continued having an impact with caustic words in the clubhouse about another season ending in meaningless fashion.


Mayor Seeks Relaxation Of Lead Law
The Dinkins administration wants to revise the city's law protecting children from lead paint, saying that a judge's strict interpretation of the current rules has made the program too difficult and costly to carry out.
Under the threat of a court order based on the current rules, city officials have submitted legislation to the City Council that would change the criteria housing inspectors use to decide which apartments pose a risk to children.


Bridge
One title went to Austria here today at the NEC world championships, while the United States and France continued to battle for another.
The Austrian women's team trailed early against Britain, but surged into the lead in the fourth session last night and wound up this afternoon with a victory by 48 imps.
The winners, taking a title their country has not held for 55 years, were Maria Erhart, Doris Fischer, Herta Gyimesi, Barbara Lindinger, Jovanka Smederevac and Terry Weigkricht.
The British losers were Pat Davies, Michelle Handley, Sandra Landy, Elizabeth McGowan, Sandra Penfold and Nicola Smith.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Tuesday about Werner Heisenberg, the leading physicist in the Nazi attempt to develop atomic weapons, misidentified a friend of his in some copies.
The friend, who arranged for a message to be passed to a friend in the United States saying that the Germans had begun the project and Heisenberg was trying to delay it, was Friedrich Georg Houtermans, not Heisenberg.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; DEBATING DEBATES AND THE DRAFT
Bill Clinton said yesterday that President Bush should "fess up" and explain why he refused to take part in three debates proposed by a nonpartisan group, and Republicans responded that Mr.
Clinton was trying to divert attention from his Vietnam draft troubles.


Allstate Sees High Storm Loss
The Allstate Insurance Company said yesterday that it expected to face $1.2 billion in damage claims from Hurricane Andrew, a surprisingly high figure that is more than four times what the company paid out for Hurricane Hugo in 1989.
An official insurance industry organization that specializes in estimating the costs of disasters has placed the total insured losses in Florida and Louisiana at about $8 billion, or less than twice what Hurricane Hugo cost.


'Ethnic Cleansing,' Cypriot Style
Alas, a month of direct talks at the United Nations between Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders has gotten nowhere.
An achievable "set of ideas" for uniting this dismembered island had been put forward by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
But Rauf Denktash, speaking for Cyprus's Turkish sector, shredded all proposals for power-sharing and justice for refugees.
So Cyprus remains a cruelly divided economic slum.
Such is the dirty legacy of "ethnic cleansing," which occurred in Cyprus long before Bosnia.


Guidepost
Despite confident names like Erase, Catcher and Resolve, many commercial carpet-stain removers work no better than their inexpensive, homemade counterparts.
Here are seven of the most dreaded stains, along with antidotes you could concoct with what you probably have under the kitchen sink.
No matter what the spill, react quickly, do not rub too hard (doing so would spread and deepen the stain), blot thoroughly before cleaning and between steps, and rinse and blot afterward.
BLOOD: Try not to let it dry.
Gently sponge it with cold water and dry with a towel; repeat as needed.


U.S. and Dutch Agree on a Pact To Aid Airlines
The United States and the Netherlands agreed yesterday to an aviation pact that ends most restrictions on flights between the two countries and will allow KLM Royal Dutch Airlines to fly anywhere in the United States.
The pact, the first with such wide rights, is expected to have a broad impact on international travel and the airline industry.
The United States hopes that the arrangement, by giving KLM broader access to the huge American market, will put pressure on larger European countries to negotiate similar deals.


CHEVRON SEEKING OFFERS FOR ITS ORTHO DIVISION
The Chevron Chemical Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Chevron Corporation, said yesterday that it was seeking offers for the purchase of its Ortho Consumer Products division.
Based in San Ramon, Calif., Ortho is the leading supplier in the United States of consumer lawn and garden products, with annual sales in excess of $250 million.


Nearby Blaze Stops Trading At Exchange
In a chaotic climax to a maddening Wall Street workweek, a fierce early morning blaze sent dense clouds of smoke through the ventilation system of the American Stock Exchange yesterday, forcing exchange officials to shut down for the day after only 30 minutes of trading.
Four hundred of the exchange's 2,500 workers -- the only ones who remained in the building -- were evacuated just after 10 A.M.
For many traders and other workers on the exchange floor, the mishap provided a welcome excuse to begin the long Labor Day weekend hours earlier than they had expected.


Downed Plane: Serbs and Bosnians Trade Charges
Leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the country's rebel Serbs today accused each other of responsibility for the downing Thursday of an Italian relief plane in the mountains outside Sarajevo.
Although the plane was downed in territory held by Croatian forces loyal to Bosnia, troops from various Muslim, Croatian and Serbian factions are said to operate in the area.
United Nations officials said they had still not determined which group might have fired at the plane.
Nor was it clear which faction fired at two United States helicopters that were searching for the wreckage, forcing them to withdraw.


Japan Dismisses Russian Security Complaints on Yeltsin Visit
Japan today dismissed Moscow's concerns over security arrangements for President Boris N. Yeltsin's coming trip to Tokyo, which surfaced this week as a possible pretext for postponing the politically delicate visit.
In a statement issued on Thursday to the news agency Itar-Tass, Mr.
Yeltsin's security service said a preliminary analysis of the trip, scheduled for Sept. 13 to 16, showed that the Japanese special services could not give a "full guarantee of security" for the Russian President and his entourage.
In particular, the service complained that the Japanese would not allow the Russian secret service to bring their own weapons, and would seek to "limit the participation of guards, even if unarmed."


New Giants Proposal
Five days before baseball owners can vote on an offer that would sweep the Giants from San Francisco to a new home in St.
Petersburg, Fla., a group of local investors stepped forward today to say it was ready to make its own proposal.
The new group would not say how much it was prepared to offer, nor would it name all of its investors.


Reporter's Notebook; On the Adriatic, Chess Mates and Chilled Campari
Things got off to an awkward start here at the exhibition chess match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky.
The cover of the glossy program prepared by the players' Yugoslav host referred to Mr.
Fischer as "the world shess champion."
Now virtually nobody, apart from Mr.
Fischer himself, believes the United States grandmaster is still world champion, a title currently held by Gary Kasparov of Russia.
But even Mr.
Fischer apparently agreed that he was not "world shess champion," for harried hordes of staff could be seen placing correctly spelled stickers on programs the night before the first match.


Whitfield Signs With Falcons
The Atlanta Falcons signed the former Stanford tackle BOB WHITFIELD, the eighth overall pick in the National Football League draft, to a series of four one-year contracts yesterday.


U.S. Markets Shut Monday
Stock and commodities markets will be closed in the United States on Monday for the Labor Day holiday.
Most foreign markets will be open.


Lobbying Group Acts Separately From Israel
To the Editor:
"Rabin and Pro-Israel Group Off to Testy Start" (news article, Aug. 22) leaves the false impression that the American Israel Public Affairs Committee may operate at the direction of the Israeli Government.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush  SUNDAY: 7-8 P.M., NBC, "The Brokaw Report."(Channel 4 in New York) Gov.
Bill Clinton
SUNDAY: 7-8 P.M., NBC, "The Brokaw Report."(Channel 4 in New York)  Senator Al Gore
SUNDAY: 9:30 A.M., NBC, "Meet the Press."  WEDNESDAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."


Your Taxes; I.R.S. May Help Storm Victims
One source of relief for some of Hurricane Andrew's victims is the Internal Revenue Service.
Taxpayers who file an amended 1991 tax return claiming a casualty loss can expect a refund check within four to six weeks because President Bush declared the hard-hit sites of Florida and Louisiana a disaster area.
That designation means that people who suffered losses do not have to wait until they file 1992 returns to claim them.
However, many taxpayers will be severely disappointed by the size of the losses they can claim, if any.


San Francisco, Here I Stay
JOE MONTANA wants to end his playing career where it began -- with the San Francisco 49ers -- and not with another team, says his agent.
Although Montana, who is on the injured-reserve list and ineligible to play until October, has told the team that he would rather play somewhere else than sit on the bench, PETER JOHNSON, who represents Montana, said the 36-year-old quarterback is hoping to stay put.


Investigation Of Symantec
The hiring of a key executive of Borland International Inc. by the Symantec Corporation, a rival software producer, has led to a criminal investigation into the possible theft of trade secrets.
The police in Scotts Valley, Calif., where Borland is based, announced late Wednesday that they had carried out four searches with warrants.
No charges have been filed at this time.
The searches were of Symantec headquarters in Cupertino, Calif.; two homes owned by Gordon Eubanks, Symantec's chairman, president and chief executive, and the home of Eugene Wang, who has for four years been Borland's vice president and general manager of the programming language business unit.
Mr.
Wang, who is 35 years old, joined Symantec on Tuesday as executive vice president of applications and development tools.
Neither Mr.
Wang nor Mr.
Eubanks was available to comment.


COMPANY BRIEFS
JAMES RIVER CORP., West Springfield, Va., a technical paper, latex and coated fibers concern, announced completion of the acquisition of the paper products business from Mennen Company, Morristown, N.J., including the Paper Art Company and C. A. Reed Inc., whose headquarters will remain in Indianapolis.
Terms were not disclosed.
MDT CORP., Torrance, Calif., a surgical equipment concern, has completed the purchase of Consolidated Equipment SupplyCorp., of Mercersburg, Pa., a producer of cleaning and decontaminating equipment.
The purchase price for the stock and related consultation and noncompetition agreements with the seller was $5 million.


Christians in Lebanon Plan to Block Election
The Christian militia in southern Lebanon today announced measures to block the third and final round of parliamentary elections on Sunday.
Gen.
Antoine Lahd, the commander of the Israeli-sponsored South Lebanon Army, said he had closed all roads to the 440-square-mile "security zone" established by Israel until next Monday.
He also warned the 70,000 potential voters that residents who left the zone to vote would not be allowed to return.


Pet Stores Can't Afford to Sell Sick Animals
To the Editor:
The Pet Industry Joint Advisory Council, which speaks for the pet industry, shares many of Larry Shook's concerns about genetic disease in dogs as a result of improper breeding ("Bad Dogs," Op-Ed, Aug. 8).


Religion Notes
Scriptures to Floridians
Along with the hot meals, clothing and bottles of water that have been moving briskly at the emergency distribution centers in Florida and Louisiana has been one other commodity: Bibles.
The American Bible Society in New York reported yesterday that it had shipped more than 31,000 copies of the Scriptures to victims of Hurricane Andrew.
English, Spanish and French Bibles were sent.


Nassau Clerk Plans to Retire As Files Pile Up
The Nassau County Clerk, Harold W. McConnell, has taken steps to retire later this month, ending his 45-year career in the County Clerk's office under an avalanche of criticism for logjams in its operations.
Mr.
McConnell, who is 73 years old, sent papers to the State Comptroller on Aug. 25 announcing his intention to leave, a decision he may rescind anytime before his retirement would become effective on Sept. 25.


Restoring Power After Storm To Take Months and Millions
The scope of the crisis that faced the Florida Power and Light Company after Hurricane Andrew knocked out electricity to more than 1.4 million customers and demolished mile after mile of its delivery network is best grasped in its particulars.
There was the several-mile stretch of 152d Avenue near Princeton choked off by dozens of steel-reinforced concrete utility poles that had crashed across traffic lanes.
Installed just three weeks before, the 65-foot, $5,000 poles broke clean at the base and toppled in the storm.


Sliding Ruble Seen as Omen Of Another Price Explosion
As summer draws to an end and Russians drift back to work after a month of backyard farming at their country cottages, the economy is showing signs of a looming price explosion that some experts predict could double the inflation rate by mid-autumn.
A tumble in the value of the ruble, which fell 25 percent against the dollar at restricted currency auctions over the last week, is just one sign of the wide perception that prices are about to soar again after a summer lull.


Bush Administration Doesn't Oppose Pill
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis mischaracterizes me both personally and in my professional capacity as the physician in charge of the national family planning program in "Record of Contempt" (column, Aug. 10).
Mr.
Lewis implies that I, and by extension the Bush Administration, are against family planning, hostile to women's health needs and opposed to the oral contraceptive pill.
He neglects to mention that I am a gynecologist, and he implies that I am driven by ideology to destroy the program that has been entrusted to me.


Ackerman And His Foe Duel on Sale
Congress should investigate allegations that Representative Gary Ackerman, the Queens Democrat, evaded House limits on outside income, his opponent for the Democratic nomination for Congress said today.
The allegations were raised today in a Newsday article that said Mr.
Ackerman negotiated a $45,000-a-year consulting contract for his wife, Rita, when he sold his newspaper and advertising company to Jerry Finkelstein in 1989.
The deal, Newsday said, allowed Mr.
Ackerman to evade Congressional limits on outside earnings.


Cooper Deal For Moog
Cooper Industries has agreed to acquire the Moog Automotive Group Inc. from Ifint S.A., an international investment company affiliated with the Agnelli family of Italy, for $350 million.
Moog, based in St.
Louis, makes replacement parts for cars and light trucks.
Its 1991 revenues amounted to about $450 million, and it has 3,000 employees and 25 manufacturing plants.
Cooper, a diversified manufacturer based in Houston, had been seeking an acquisition for several months.


Secret Is in the Crust: Simms Will Start
Phil Simms and not a banged-up Jeff Hostetler will start at quarterback for the Giants against the San Francisco 49ers here Sunday in the season opener.
Coach Ray Handley did not announce that.
He said only: "I know. The quarterbacks know. The team knows."


Owner Against Owner: It Could Be 9 Innings in Court
If Commissioner Fay Vincent's opponents take the next step, as expected, next Wednesday and vote to fire him, they may invite a lawsuit not only from the commissioner but also from some of their fellow owners.
The specter of owners suing owners arose yesterday in the aftermath of the 18-to-9 vote by which Vincent's opponents asked him to resign immediately.


Pilots on U.S. Carrier Given a Breather
After patrolling the skies over southern Iraq for what seemed like eight days a week, the pilots of this aircraft carrier did not fly today, giving themselves, their planes and the ship's crew a brief respite from the operation to exclude Iraqi warplanes from the area south of the 32d parallel.
Instead, the whole burden of monitoring Iraqi activities in the Shiite marshlands of Iraq was carried for a day by United States and allied warplanes based in Saudi Arabia, a favor the Navy will return later so the Air Force can take a full day off.


Pill Monitors Make Sure TB Patients Swallow
Lenora Alston watched carefully as a 38-year-old man known as Champagne downed the last of 14 tablets and capsules, standing by a bench in Red Hook Park in South Brooklyn.
Then she made a check mark on her clipboard.
Mrs.
Alston is one of about 50 workers in New York City whose sole job is to see, visit or find tuberculosis patients, people like Champagne, to insure that they take their medication.


Underground Blasts Rock Midtown Street
Two explosions, ignited by sparks from a Consolidated Edison cable, rocked a midtown Manhattan street yesterday morning, sending terrified pedestrians into flight, shattering windows and hurling manhole covers "into the air like pizzas," a Fire Department official said.
Two people were injured slightly when the first explosion shook West 40th Street between Fifth Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas about 9 A.M. -- a man in his office who was knocked out of his chair and a firefighter whose face was singed by flames that flared from a manhole.
Firefighters had been called to the scene before the first explosion, after receiving reports of smoke coming from the manholes.


An African Superstar Sings Out to the World
Some people in the singer Youssou N'Dour's native Senegal say his voice, a pristine tenor that soars heavenward with passion and then wafts tenderly toward earth, is the work of a powerful marabout, or Muslim holy man.
"They think a marabout is behind me, making people feel touched by my music," Mr.
N'Dour said, smiling.
"Or that my marabout put something in the water that forces people to swoon over my music.


METRO DIGEST
WATCHING THE MEDICINE GO DOWN
Lenora Alston is one of about 50 workers in New York City whose sole job is to see, visit or find tuberculosis patients to insure that they take their medication.
Her seemingly tedious job has become one of the most important in public health care.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY ELECTRONIC MONITORS FOUND FAULTY
In a policy shift, Federal prosecutors in Manhattan said yesterday that they would oppose the use of electronic monitoring devices to keep track of criminal defendants out on bail, because the prosecutors believed the devices did not deter defendants from fleeing the country or committing other crimes.
Page 23.
SAFETY VIOLATIONS SEEN
Before an old post office building on the Upper West Side of Manhattan partly collapsed on Thursday, the contractor demolishing it was cited by city inspectors 10 times for safety violations during the last three weeks, city officials said yesterday.
Page 23.
TWO EXPLOSIONS IN MIDTOWN
Two explosions, ignited by sparks from a Consolidated Edison cable, rocked a midtown Manhattan street yesterday morning, terrifying pedestrians, shattering windows and hurling manhole covers "into the air like pizzas," a Fire Department official said.
Page 23.
City wants a new lead-paint policy. Page 23. REGION NASSAU CLERK MAY RETIRE
The Nassau County Clerk has taken steps to retire, ending his 45-year career in the County Clerk's office under an avalanche of criticism for logjams in its operations.
"This is not the way I wanted to go out," Harold W. McConnell said.
"I thought I would go out after serving my full term, but the problems got to be too much. I'm not 30 years old anymore." Page 24.
ACKERMAN INVESTIGATION SOUGHT
Congress should investigate allegations that Representative Gary Ackerman, the Queens Democrat, evaded House limits on outside income, his opponent for the Democratic nomination for Congress said.
The allegations were raised in a Newsday article that said Mr.
Ackerman negotiated a $45,000-a-year consulting contract for his wife, Rita, when he sold his newspaper and advertising company in 1989.
Page 24.
TORNADO? NO, A MICROBURST
Meteorological sleuths attributed the damage of Thursday's fierce thunderstorms in southwestern Connecticut not to a tornado, but to an equally rare marauder known as a microburst, a sudden violent downdraft of a kind that has caused plane crashes and carried away buildings.
But the National Weather Service confirmed that two small tornadoes had touched down in Scarsdale and in Endicott, 150 miles northwest of New York City.
Page 24.
AN AMUSEMENT PARK'S SPECIAL WEEKEND
After a sorry, silent season, the roller coaster at Lake Compounce Festival Park in Bristol, Conn., was again clattering.
A corps of volunteers overcame squabbling owners and creeping neglect to reopen just for the holiday weekend what is said to be America's longest continuously operating amusement park.
Page 24.
About New York by David Gonzalez 23


Capriati Misplaces Her Golden Touch
It may have been the United States Open, but the American flags were removed from the skirt of the Olympic champion, Jennifer Capriati, and the magic was just as conspicuously absent from her racquet.
As a result, the No. 6-seeded player was eliminated from the already depleted women's draw, taken out in the third round yesterday, 7-5, 6-4, by Patricia Hy, a 27-year-old Cambodian refugee to Hong Kong who now plays out of Toronto.


Joseph Rauh Jr., Groundbreaking Civil Liberties Lawyer, Dies at 81
Joseph L. Rauh Jr., for decades one of the nation's leading champions of civil rights and liberal causes, died Thursday night at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 81 years old.
Americans for Democratic Action, which Mr.
Rauh helped found 45 years ago, said he died soon after suffering a heart attack at his Washington home.


Pet Stores Can't Afford to Sell Sick Animals; The Natural Dog
To the Editor:
Larry Shook (Op-Ed, Aug. 8) cites some of the hereditary diseases and behavior problems common to popular breeds of dogs.
However, his sug gestions that such woes may be corrected through "advances in molecular biology" and "behavioral science" are misguided and to a large degree appear part of the problem, rather than the solution.


2 Women Defy History in New Hampshire Governor Race
For many people in New Hampshire, the primary next Tuesday in the race for governor has become a tale of two women.
New Hampshire is one of only two states that have never elected a woman to either a statewide office or to Congress; Alaska is the other.
But the front-runner in the Democratic primary is Deborah (Arnie) Arnesen, a 38-year-old State Representative, while in the Republican race another State Representative, Elizabeth Hager, 47, is given a chance of an upset victory.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.33
5.43
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
3.11
5.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
3.17
5.33
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.85
6.02
7.56
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.28
7.35
8.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.45
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.25
6.30
6.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Stereotypes and Geraldine Ferraro
Women, blacks, Jews, Latinos -- anyone who has ever been smeared by an ugly stereotype -- can sympathize with Geraldine Ferraro's complaint of guilt by ethnic association.
Italian-Americans rightly resent stereotyped links to Mafia mobsters, and as a candidate for the Senate Ms.
Ferraro finds special reason to be angry about such charges and insinuations against her.
The question created for voters in the Sept. 15 Democratic primary is, which are they, legitimate charges or reckless insinuations?


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Strategy; Discipline, Message and Good Luck: How Clinton's Campaign Came Back
In the last three months, Gov.
Bill Clinton has transformed the Presidential campaign from a referendum on his character into one on George Bush's Presidency by sticking to a disciplined plan, and the tactic has salvaged the Democrats' hopes of regaining the White House.
The process of burnishing Mr.
Clinton's tarnished image began shortly after the June 2 California primary.
Top advisers, including James Carville, Mandy Grunwald, Stan Greenberg and George Stephanopoulos, formed a working group to plan their candidate's rehabilitation.


Joshua Morrison, 91, Retired Businessman
Joshua Morrison, a retired New York businessman with many charitable interests, died on Wednesday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 91 years old.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Thomas, Star Receiver, Rejoins Miami
Last-minute legal maneuvering yesterday gave the University of Miami's star receiver, LAMAR THOMAS, the prospect of playing in tonight's season opener at Iowa.
Hours after filing a lawsuit against the university, Thomas's lawyers won the agreement they sought from the United States Attorney's office.
Thomas has not practiced since his Federal indictment Aug. 18 on charges stemming from a financial aid scandal at the university.
The decision on whether Thomas will play rests with Coach DENNIS ERICKSON, who would not say what his plans were.


Rangers Sign Four Players
The Rangers signed defensemen JOBY MESSIER and BRAD TILEY and left wings CRAIG DUNCANSON and DAVE THOMLINSON yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed.
Messier, a distant cousin of Rangers captain MARK MESSIER, played four seasons at Michigan State.
Buffalo Sabres center DALE HAWERCHUK signed a multiyear contract that will pay him $1.2 million per season.
The length of the contract was not released.
Hawerchuk led Buffalo in scoring last season with 23 goals and 75 assists.


Rides Open Again, for All Generations
After a sorry, silent season, the roller coaster at Lake Compounce Festival Park was again clattering today.
A corps of volunteers overcame squabbling owners and creeping neglect to reopen just for the holiday weekend what is said to be America's longest continuously operating amusement park.
The 262-acre lakeside park, which had been a staple of summertime for central Connecticut families since 1846, never opened this spring for what would have been its 147th season because of management and financial problems.
But to area residents -- including the park's former owner, J. Harwood Norton Jr. -- a summer without at least a few days of jangling arcades, pedalboats on the lake and dancing in the ballroom would have been a travesty.


No Burnings in Salem
To the Editor:
Barbara Mosbacher's "Salem, Texas" (Op-Ed, Aug. 15) refers to the burning of witches in the 17th century.
While Ms.
Mosbacher does not state that witches were burned in Salem, Mass., the headline implies they were.
Of the 20 people executed for witchcraft in Salem, Mass., in the 1690's, 19 were hanged and one was crushed to death.
None were burned, though witches were burned in Europe in that era.
ROBERT SAXON Princeton, N.J., Aug. 22, 1992


Bonds Surge on Poor Jobs Report
The surprisingly steep decline reported yesterday for employment in August, including a loss of 167,000 private-sector jobs, stunned the bond market, where investors and analysts were expecting a modest increase.
The decidedly bad economic news sent prices soaring and yields tumbling across the board, from the three-month bill to the 30-year bond.


Price Tag: Your Portrait Photo


Put Handkerchief Away. Maleevas Don't Need It.
It was the loose-lipped commentator Pam Shriver who first dubbed them the Boo-Hoo Sisters.
Their mother has not forgotten the weepy insult.
"It is very sad for a person like Shriver, a well-traveled person who knows what we have gone through, to label people so as to earn a few extra bucks," said Yulia Berberian, mother to the Bulgarian stars Magdalena Maleeva, Katerina Maleeva and Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere.


Deal With Russia Is Said to Involve More Uranium Than Believed
Federal officials say an East-West deal in which the United States would buy Russian uranium from scrapped nuclear arms involves far greater amounts than generally reported, at least 500 metric tons of highly enriched uranium.
The purchased uranium is to be diluted for sale as commercial reactor fuel.
The agreement was announced by the White House late on Monday, but its complete terms were not spelled out, leading to differing interpretations of its meaning.


Brasilia Journal; A Staid Stand-In Waits To Fill the Collor Role
When Itamar Franco, Brazil's Vice President, goes home to visit his 93-year-old mother, he takes a commercial airline flight to Rio de Janeiro and then drives two and a half hours to the mountain city of Juiz de Fora.
For Brazilians weary of the passion for chartered executive jets displayed by the administration of President Fernando Collor de Mello, the sober style of the Vice President stands in welcome relief.


Fire Closes the American Stock Exchange


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Some 167,000 private-sector jobs were lost in August as factory employment skidded to its lowest level since April 1983, stunningly grim Government figures showed, even though the unemployment rate edged down one-tenth of a point, to 7.6 percent.
The figures promptly led to another cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board, which pushed the Federal funds rate down to 3 percent.
The Administration called the decline in the jobless rate encouraging, while the Clinton camp hammered at the Administration.  [ Page 1. ] International
A liberal aviation pact was agreed to by the U.S. and the Netherlands.
The agreement could allow KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Northwest to operate as a single airline.  [ 1. ] U.S. airlines are offering incentives to frequent fliers. [ 33. ]


Review/Music; City Opera's 'Rigoletto' Tests New Voices and Faces
The New York City Opera's current run of "Rigoletto" was virtually repopulated on Thursday night.
Some of the newcomers were recognizable faces in unaccustomed roles.
Others were voices appearing for the first time with the company.
In the first category was Donnie Ray Albert, who has sung off and on with the company for 14 years and in the title role here finds a comfortable home.
Mr.
Albert is an articulate singer, precise in technique, diction and control.
Bursting with health as he seems to be, the American baritone can only halfheartedly re-create Rigoletto's physical grotesqueness; yet there is such clarity in every sound and gesture that the eyes give way to the ears and take what they see on faith.


Review/Film; The Ideal of Brotherhood May Never Be the Same
Hollywood movies tend to be so formulaic that a reviewer can usually deduce why even the most unfortunate turkeys got made.
But not always.
The reasoning behind "Out on a Limb," a frantically unfunny new comedy starring Matthew Broderick, seems impenetrable.
The movie, which opened yesterday, follows the farcical misadventures of Bill Campbell (Mr. Broderick) a young financial whiz whose imaginative kid sister becomes convinced that her stepfather is a criminal and coaxes her brother to come home when he should be in Mexico closing a deal.
On the way home to Buzzsaw, a tiny logging community in northern California, Bill is kidnapped by a redheaded woman with a gun (Heidi Kling), who abandons him on a roadside without his clothes.
Rescued by two beer-guzzling brothers, both named Jim, and both with I.Q.'s well under 50, he eventually finds his way to the house, clad in a scarecrow's rags.
As it turns out, his stepfather, Peter (Jeffrey Jones), has an identical twin brother, Matt (Mr. Jones), who has just appeared intent on revenge for serving a 15-year prison sentence for a crime Peter committed.
The film doesn't make nearly enough hay out of the comedy of mistaken identity once Matt steps into Peter's shoes.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Bubka Again Fails to Clear a Height The world record-holder, Sergei Bubka, in a duplication of his Olympic failure, missed three times at his opening height, 19 feet 2 1/2 inches, last night at the I.A.A.F.
Mobil Grand Prix finals in Turin, Italy.
Last Sunday, he set the world record of 20-1 in Padua, Italy.
Jean Galfione of France won by clearing 19 feet 1/4 inches.
Kevin Young, the Olympic champion in the 400-meter hurdles, scored his 11th straight Grand Prix victory with a time of 48.16 seconds and won the men's overall title.
The women's title went to long jumper Heike Drechsler, who defeated Jackie Joyner-Kersee in this meet with a final jump of 23-4 1/2.
Dennis Mitchell used a strong start in winning the 100 meters in 10.09 seconds and beating Carl Lewis for the second straight time.
Mike Marsh, the 200-meter Olympic champion, and William Tanui, the 800-meter gold medalist, were defeated.
In the 200, Frankie Fredericks came from behind to beat Michael Bates and Marsh in 20.20 seconds.
Andrea Benvenuti took the 800 in 1 minute 45.61 seconds, ahead of Nixon Kiprotich, Tom McKean and Tanui.(AP) O'Brien on Record Pace: Dan O'Brien was on a world record pace yesterday after five events of the decathlon at an invitational meet in Talence, France.
O'Brien had 4,720 points, 43 more than Daley Thompson had after five events at the 1984 Olympics, when the Briton set the world record of 8,847 points.
O'Brien set personal bests by long-jumping 26 feet 6 1/4 inches, worth 1,081 points, and shot-putting 54-9 1/2, good for 860 points.
Robert Zmelik of Czechoslovakia, the Olympic gold medalist, was a distant second with 4,277 points, followed by two Americans, Steve Fritz (4,106) and Brian Brophy (4,102). (AP) GOLF Lehman Has 80-Foot Birdie and the Lead Tom Lehman, who starred on the Hogan Tour last year, made an 80-foot birdie putt yesterday en route to taking the second-round lead of the Greater Milwaukee Open in Franklin, Wis.
Lehman had a four-under-par 68 and completed two rounds at 135 for a one-stroke lead over David Frost, Tom Sieckmann, Dudley Hart, Dick Mast and Mark Brooks, the defending champion.
Brooks shot a 66, Sieckmann and Hart had 67's, Mast a 69 and Frost a 70.
After sinking the 80-footer on the par-5 second hole for a birdie, Lehman double-bogeyed No. 3.
But he came back with three more birdies on the front nine and then added three more against a lone bogey on the back. (AP)


Abandonded Pets Add Another Tragic Aspect to the Storm Toll


Louis J. Brindisi, 62, Executive Pay Expert
Louis J. Brindisi Jr., a noted authority on executive-pay practices and corporate performance, died on Sunday at his home in Secaucus, N.J.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, Gary Hourihan, president of Strategic Compensation Associates, a management consulting firm, said.


Lower-Fat Diet Recommended After Age of 2
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommended yesterday that all American children over the age of 2 follow the lower-fat diet now recommended for adults to prevent heart disease and obesity.
In issuing the new guidelines, the nation's leading organization concerned with children's health in effect adopted the advice given a decade ago by the American Heart Association and the recommendations issued in February 1990 by the National Cholesterol Education Program, a coalition of 38 health agencies seeking to reduce Americans' risk of heart disease.


Storm Damage Measured And Repair Work Begins
Examining a truck and huge steel I-beams that had been tossed by the wind like toys, meteorological sleuths yesterday attributed the damage of Thursday's fierce thunderstorms in southwestern Connecticut not to a tornado, but to an equally rare marauder known as a microburst, a sudden violent downdraft of a kind that has caused plane crashes and carried away buildings.
But the National Weather Service confirmed that two small tornadoes had touched down in New York State on Thursday, causing six minor injuries and moderate damage to businesses, homes, trees and utility lines in Scarsdale and in Endicott, near Binghamton, 150 miles northwest of New York City.


Coaches Are Waiting For Showalter's Sign
With less than four weeks left in the season, it is natural for some Yankee players to wonder if they will have jobs next year.
Coaches are the same way.
One by one, the Yankee coaches have been asking Manager Buck Showalter what his plans are for next season.
The rookie manager, who has a contract that runs through 1995, has not been able to offer his coaches the same security.
Each has a one-year contract.


William J. Harrington, 68, Doctor And Specialist in Blood Diseases
Dr.
William J. Harrington, an internationally known blood specialist who made major discoveries about the basic mechanisms of blood disorders from experiments he performed on himself, died yesterday at his home in Miami.
He was 68 years old.
He died while repairing a generator outside his home, which has been without electricity and running water since Hurricane Andrew hit southern Florida last week.
His daughter, Ann, said that electrocution had been ruled out but that the precise cause of death was not known.


Bush Administration Doesn't Oppose Pill; Never a Good Idea
To the Editor:
I wonder with what special knowledge Anthony Lewis condemns the position on the pill taken by the obstetrician in charge of the family planning program of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Mr.
Lewis criticizes Dr.
William R. Archer for thinking that "the pill is a bad idea" (column, Aug. 10).
Does Mr.
Lewis always believe what drug advertisers and other promoters of a product say?


Executive Changes
CHAMPION INTERNATIONAL CORP., Stamford, Conn., the forest products company, named Richard L. Porterfield executive vice president of forest products and Mark V. Childers senior vice president, organizational development and human resources.
EAGLE TECHNOLOGY, San Jose, Calif., a maker of connectivity products and a unit of Anthem Electronics Inc., appointed Jerry A. Dusa president.


BOLIVIANS IN FEAR AS MAOIST REBELS SLIP IN FROM PERU
The Shining Path, the fierce and elusive guerrilla group that holds sway over much of Peru and threatens the Government, has expanded its operations across Peru's borders for the first time and is making inroads in Bolivia.
El Sendero Luminoso, as it is known in Spanish, is using this isolated border area about 170 miles north of La Paz, the Bolivian capital, as a sanctuary for its wounded and as a source of food and clothing for its troops, local officials say.


Japanese Fight Back As U.S. Companies Press Patent Claims
When the Nikon Corporation, the Japanese camera maker, agreed two weeks ago to pay Honeywell a reported $45 million to settle patent-infringement charges, it became one of the latest casualties in what some people here are calling the "patent wars." With increasing regularity, American companies are demanding, and winning, large royalty payments from Japanese companies for the use of patented technology.
But angry Japanese companies are preparing to fight back at what they view as excessive American demands.


French Team Wins World Bridge Title
An ebullient French team captured the NEC World Bridge Team Championship title here this afternoon after a hard battle with a strong American squad.
The winners were Paul Chemla, Michel Perron, Alain Levy and Herve Mouiel.
The losers were Bob Wolff, Bob Hamman, Jeff Meckstroth, Eric Rodwell, Michael Rosenberg and Seymon Deutsch.
The Americans were attempting to retain the title they won four years ago in Venice, but started poorly and never made up the lost ground.
Friday night they cut the French lead to 28 international match points, but that was as close as it got.
In the final 32 deals today the French showed superior judgment in a series of difficult competitive hands and wound up winning by 80 imps.


Cruise Lines Duel On Alaska Route
Three of the major cruise lines for Alaska trips -- Holland America Line-Westours, Princess Cruises and Regency Cruises -- are engaged in a battle for passengers next year with discounts this year.
They are offering early booking reductions for the 1993 May-to-September Alaska cruise season, cutting the minimum fare for seven-day voyages to its lowest level in several years, according to officials of the shipping lines.
The competition for 1993 traffic comes as vessels sailing from Vancouver to Glacier Bay and other favorite spots along the Alaska coast are still involved in what the Alaska Division of Tourism says is one of its busiest tourist seasons.


Alicia Batty and William Batts Jr.
Alicia Joyce Batty, the daughter of Dr.
Constance J. Batty of Upper Brookville, L.I., and the late Beauford R. Batty, was married yesterday in Locust Valley, L.I., to William Batts Jr., a son of Mr.
Batts of Chicago and Lee A. Batts of San Antonio.
The Rev.
Preston Hannibal, the chaplain of Harvard College, performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Church.
Mrs.
Batts, 27 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She graduated from Harvard, as did her husband, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her mother is the acting vice president of student affairs at the State University College at Old Westbury, L.I., where her father was a visiting professor of education.


Wake Up!
Now that Labor Day is here, it's time to shift out of vacation mode and return to a regular work schedule.
This seasonal wake-up call affects almost everyone.
With that in mind, a number of notables were mailed cameras and asked to photograph what gets them up in the morning.
The results range from Katie Couric's bedside telephone to a cement truck outside Isaac Mizrahi's window -- and even the occasional alarm clock.
By design, these snapshots give a real -- or fractured -- picture of home life.
Not so incidentally, they provide a revealing portrait of the person behind the camera.


Blue-Gray Ball
To the Sports Editor:
A possible solution to the National League realignment dilemma: recast the senior circuit into Northern and Southern divisions.
While this might risk reopening the nation's deepest historical wounds, it could be a workable framework for baseball rivalry, and very little shifting would be required.
Here's how the franchises could line up:


Alice R. Gray, Walker Stites
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas O. Moore of Sparta, N.C., have announced November wedding plans for her daughter Alice Redway Gray and James Walker Stites 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stites Jr. of Glenview, Ky.
The prospective bride is also a daughter of the late Bowman Gray 3d.
Miss Gray, 27 years old, is a production editor at Abbeville Press in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in English literature from Columbia University.
Her father was the president of General Occidental Inc., a holding company in New York.
Her grandfather, the late Bowman Gray Jr., and her great-grandfather, the late Bowman Gray, were presidents of the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in Winston-Salem, N.C.
The prospective bride is also a granddaughter of Mrs.
Robert L. Hoguet of New York and of the late Martin J. Condon 3d, who was the chairman of the Conwood Corporation, a tobacco concern in Memphis.
Her stepfather is president of Blue Ox Industries, a building-components company in Kernersville, N.C.


Setting Up a New Wall Switch
A convenient way to install a wall switch, and thus be able to operate a floor or table lamp from a distance, is by wiring it to an existing wall outlet so that the switch controls the outlet's upper socket, not the lower one.
The technique is called split-wiring.
Needed are a single-pole electrical switch, a metal wall box and cover plate to contain it and 14-gauge, two-conductor plastic-sheathed electrical cable to link the switch and outlet.


Ukraine Finds 'Active Independence' Despite Military and Other Obstacles
The Ukrainian Defense Ministry began like a revolutionary cell, with three officers.
In the months after Ukraine's declaration of independence on Aug. 24, 1991, President Leonid M. Kravchuk and the present Defense Minister, Gen.
Konstantin Morozov, began a series of quiet visits to Soviet military bases.
A sovereign Ukraine would emerge from the collapsing empire, they told senior officers, and an independent army would be central to the new state.
Anyone willing to take an oath of allegiance to Ukraine would be guaranteed his job and full pension and other rights, including citizenship.


Brothers Make History
JIMMI and JOHNNY BREDAHL of Denmark made pro boxing history as they won World Boxing Organization titles in successive bouts.
The brothers, both European champions and undefeated, also became Denmark's first pro boxing champions in modern times before a boisterous crowd of 6,000 at the Parken, Copenhagen's new soccer stadium.


Lisa D'Amato, L. L. Schreier
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert G. D'Amato of Cranford, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Marie D'Amato, to Lawrence Lee Schreier, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Schreier of Purchase, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
D'Amato, 34 years old, is the New York metropolitan-area manager in Manhattan for MCI Forum, part of MCI Communications.
She graduated from Georgian Court College.
She and her fiance are M.B.A. degree candidates at Fordham University.
Her father, who is retired, was a social studies teacher at Burnett Junior High School in Union Township, N.J.
Mr.
Schreier, 30, is the New York metropolitan-area manager in Manhattan for RCI, a long-distance telephone company.
He graduated from Syracuse University.
His mother, Marcia Schreier, teaches the hearing-impaired at the Board of Cooperative Educational Services of South Westchester in Rye Brook, N.Y.
His father is a partner in the New York law firm of Leibman &amp; Schreier.


Mutual Funds; Buying a New Fund With No History
BUYING a newly created mutual fund can be risky because it has no track record, and past performance is an important criterion in investing.
A good rule is to buy funds that have outperformed their peers in three of the last five years.
But a solid history is only one thing that investors give up in buying a new fund.
Often "new funds combine the worst of all worlds: less than top-of-the-line service, high expenses and inexperienced management," said Don Phillips, vice president of Morningstar Inc., a fund research group in Chicago.


The Lilting Sound and Soul of Immigration
The laugh of the Mighty Sparrow these days is one of deep delight.
As he sits in a T-shirt and shorts at Jenille's Jamaican restaurant in Queens, the reigning "Calypso King of the World" dips his spoon into a bowl of red pea soup and then breaks into a rich laugh, slapping out a fast calypso rhythm on his seat cushion.


Putting on the Ritz: Beans?
Dried beans, those inexpensive, nutritious pantry-shelf staples have acquired new-found glamour.
Bean dishes, once lowly sustenance for people who had little else, are now being featured on pricey menus.
People who can afford truffles are ordering beans.
It's understandable.
When properly prepared, beans are deliciously toothsome, lush in texture and able to sop up flavor.
They are an excellent foil for fatty foods like sausages and offer an irresistible richness when spiked with garlic and drizzled with some peppery green extra-virgin olive oil.


MCMILLAN'S MILLIONS
As chairman of the fiction panel of the 1990 National Book Award, I must amend the account of our work in your article about Terry McMillan, one of our five panelists ("McMillan's Millions," by Daniel Max, Aug. 9).


AUG. 30 - SEPT. 5: Aviation Treaty; U.S. and the Netherlands Agree to Free Skies
The United States and the Netherlands last week agreed on a treaty that allows airlines in each country unlimited rights to fly where they want, making it the most liberal aviation agreement in history.
The treaty, effective immediately, could force other European nations, which had wanted greater limits, to back off.
It also opens the door to anti-trust immunity for KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Northwest Airlines, which would then act as one airline even while retaining separate ownership.
KLM has bought a 49 percent equity stake in Northwest but the two carriers have been hampered from coordinating pricing, flights and routes by restrictions in the old bilateral agreement and anti-trust laws in the United States.


Chinese Seem to Be Risking More Open Protests
The campaign by Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese leaders for faster economic change seems to be having an unintended effect: Dissidents and ordinary citizens are becoming a bit bolder in challenging the authorities.
Partly because the hard-liners appear to be losing ground as the airwaves fill with calls for reform, many Chinese say they find the atmosphere looser and less ominous.
Some say that the fear that has gripped the country for the last three years, since the Tiananmen Square crackdown of June 1989, is gradually easing.


'Butterfly' Examines Sexism And Myths
THE drama "M. Butterfly" by David Henry Hwang is now celebrating a long-overdue Long Island premiere at Theater Three in Port Jefferson.
The play's plot is based on the actual 20-year affair between a French diplomat and Chinese spy.
What elevated their trial for treason, and brought it widespread publicity, was that the diplomat expressed shock when he discovered during the court proceeding that his long-time lover was a man.


Putting on the Ritz: Beans?
Dried beans, those inexpensive, nutritious pantry-shelf staples have acquired new-found glamour.
Bean dishes, once lowly sustenance for people who had little else, are now being featured on pricey menus.
People who can afford truffles are ordering beans.
It's understandable.
When properly prepared, beans are deliciously toothsome, lush in texture and able to sop up flavor.
They are an excellent foil for fatty foods like sausages and offer an irresistible richness when spiked with garlic and drizzled with some peppery green extra-virgin olive oil.


Holiday Tomorrow
Labor Day will be observed tomorrow. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
PARADE Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.
The West Indian Day Parade begins at 10:00 A.M. at Utica Avenue in Brooklyn and goes along Eastern Parkway to Grand Army Plaza.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickup, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Transit Authority buses and subways on Sunday schedules; L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit on Sunday schedule. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule. Traffic Alert TODAY
CHELSEA STREET FAIR Eighth Avenue will be closed between 15th and 23d Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
EL FIESTON Broadway and Seventh Avenues will be closed between 35th and 42d Streets from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
BRAZILIAN-AMERICAN STREET FAIR 46th Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Madison Avenue will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


The Executive Computer; Be It a Whale or a Dinosaur, Can I.B.M. Really Evolve?
EVERYONE knows what happened to the dinosaurs that once ruled the earth, and no one more so than the International Business Machines Corporation, which last week pressed ahead with its attempt to evolve into a sprightlier, swifter life form.
I.B.M., the biggest dinosaur in the computer industry, split off its personal computer operations into a separate operating unit, called the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company.
"It's like a whale trying to crawl up on the beach, shed some weight, and walk like a man," said William M. Bluestein, senior analyst for the Forrester Group, a research company in Cambridge, Mass.
The beach is in Somers, N.Y., down the road from Armonk, where I.B.M. has its headquarters in the suburbs north of New York City.
Not exactly a startup, the new company comes to life with 10,000 veteran employees, a well-established brand name and current revenues of an estimated $7 billion a year.
It also comes with a senior management team trained in the "Iron Age" of I.B.M., when mainframes dominated the corporate computing landscape.
If all goes according to plan, the new company will eventually become a wholly owned subsidiary of the parent, free to prosper or fail on its own strengths and weaknesses.
The goal of the current quasi-independent company is "to increase efficiencies and focus and improve our responsiveness in a fast-changing PC marketplace," said James A. Cannavino, an I.B.M. vice president who oversees all personal computer systems operations, including the new company.
Just how independent will the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company be?
Will it be able to buy disk drives, microprocessors, memory chips and circuit boards from sources other than the International Business Machines Corporation?
Will it pre-install the Microsoft Corporation's Windows and Windows NT on its systems, perhaps in place of I.B.M.'s own OS/2?
Will it be free to develop powerful desktop PC's and boast that they will, dollar for dollar, outperform I.B.M. mid-range systems?
Should it take these bold moves, it would be doing nothing more remarkable than the competition.
Another point to ponder is whether the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company will be bound by the same "no layoffs" employment rules of the parent corporation, or whether Mr.
Cannavino will be free to act quickly to trim his large work force, should he find the need.
In the past, several I.B.M. executives have acknowledged privately, the personal computer division had to wage long, bureaucratic battles with other I.B.M. business units to make even minor changes in technology, pricing or marketing.
These executives say it was a cultural hallmark of I.B.M. to require managers and engineers to defend new ideas in something akin to a technological and bureaucratic gantlet.
The theory was that only the strongest and best ideas would survive the review process.
But it often took months before innovations were approved or rejected.
The result was that I.B.M. has been slow to reach the market with new technologies, and slower still to respond to challenges from its rivals.
Some competitors boasted that they could give I.B.M. a six-month head start with a new computer chip and still beat it to market -- at lower prices and with more features.
The difference was not in technical or manufacturing skills -- I.B.M.'s resources in those areas are believed to be second to none -- but in I.B.M.'s management structure, which, for all its strengths, is hardly nimble.
In the brave new world of the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company, Mr.
Cannavino says, decisions on product development, technology, sales and marketing will be largely insulated from the other I.B.M. divisions.
By 1994, I.B.M. itself says, the personal computer company's balance sheets will be reported independently.
"The structure is now more reasonable, but what counts is not the structure but the products," said Will Zachman, president of Canopus Research of Duxbury, Mass.
"Reorganizations in themselves don't do anything; it's what you do after the reorganization. The keys are good products, aggressive pricing, and a well-known name backed by service and support.
Customers will not have to wait long to see the results.
On Tuesday, the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company will make the first of a series of product introductions, bringing forward several PS/1 home computers that will use either an Intel Corporation 486 microprocessor or an I.B.M. variation of it.
Originally offered as a simplified version of the PS/2 line, lacking the power and features of interest to business customers, the new PS/1's are said to be quite powerful.
I.B.M. has been coy about what it will announce, but in subsequent weeks, according to the reports in the trade press, the company is expected to overhaul its PS/2 series of business computers, introduce new notebook and pen-based portable systems, and create a new brand name -- PS/ Valuepoint -- for a line of computers that will compete directly against the clones that have battered I.B.M. for years.
The PS/Valuepoint machines are said to be based on I.B.M.'s original PC-AT design, which the company largely abandoned in 1987 when it created the PS/2 series.
That AT design, marketed as I.B.M.-compatible even after Big Blue had walked away from it, has generated billions of dollars in sales for I.B.M.'s competitors, and I.B.M.'s share of the market has plummeted.
"The company has the opportunity to regain market share, not the commanding role it had, but a strong role," Mr.
Zachman said.
Obviously, these products were in development under the old system, and probably under the same leadership.
Mr.
Cannavino joined I.B.M. as an engineer in 1963.
The president of the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company is Robert J. Corrigan, who joined I.B.M. as an engineer in 1962.  (He will have day-to-day responsibility for running the company and will report to Mr. Cannavino.) And the head of the new company's North American operations is Sam M. Inman 3d, a 20-year I.B.M. veteran.
"If you have a $7 billion company, it's a real company right off the bat," said David B. Jemison, professor of management at the Graduate School of Business at the University of Texas and a specialist in business strategy.
"You can't populate it with new people, so they all come from the same gene pool.
"The question is," he continued, "how do we change old habits, and can you really change old habits with the same people? It can happen, if indeed in the old situation there were constraints that were keeping them from doing the things they wanted."
Philip C. Rueppel, a research analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, a brokerage in New York, commented: "They have removed many of the organizational roadblocks and fully understand their costs. What's left is an organization that has the potential of truly being much more responsive."
Mr.
Bluestein, who imagines the whale walking ashore, focuses on the word potential.
"Basically, it doesn't mean anything until I.B.M. addresses certain fundamental questions in the PC market," he said.
"If they don't shed the ingrained culture, they're just transferring all the same people, with all the same problems and headaches, into a new procedure. Whether this reorganization unclogs their arteries for decision-making and product development is really the question."
Some of I.B.M.'s competitors have tried, in similar fashion, to unclog their corporate arteries.
Eckhardt Pfeiffer, shortly before he was named chief executive of the Compaq Computer Corporation of Houston, was chatting with two mid-level employees at a trade show last year when they said they were sure Compaq could build high-quality computers at less cost.
The two wandered the show and were quoted prices for components that were less than what Compaq, a $3 billion company, was paying.
Mr.
Pfeiffer asked the employees to form a secret "swat team," free from executive review and unrestrained by typical Compaq procedures, with a mandate to design a line of computers to battle the lower-cost clones, which had done to Compaq what Compaq had done to I.B.M.
Other senior Compaq officials now confirm that they did not know of the group until months later, when the team presented Mr.
Pfeiffer with the design for Compaq's Prolinea series.
The Prolineas have proven so popular that Compaq cannot meet demand.
The Digital Equipment Corporation of Maynard, Mass., perhaps the biggest dinosaur other than I.B.M., was being nibbled to death, and in a bold move earlier this year, it formed a new company, Digital Direct, patterned after direct marketers like the Dell Computer Corporation of Austin, Tex.
By breaking from its corporate mold, Digital Direct has been able to sustain hardware sales of $10 million a week, according to industry analysts who have attended Digital briefings.
In other words, personal computers went from a negligible part of Digital's business to bringing in revenues at an annual rate of $500 million, in less than a year.
That may not be enough to insure that Digital escapes the tar pits, but it is a promising sign.
The irony is that even if this latest step in I.B.M.'s grand experiment succeeds, the company will only be learning from itself.
More than a decade ago, because of suspicion that the personal computer market would never amount to much -- maybe 50,000 machines for hobbyists, one projection held -- I.B.M. allowed Don Estridge to form a small team to work independently in Boca Raton, Fla.
The result, introduced in 1981, was the phenomenally successful I.B.M.
PC.
Later, when the success of the PC was apparent, I.B.M. reined the division back into the corporate fold, and it has paid ever since for that decision.


5 Europe Airlines Ending 1st Class
Swissair and Lufthansa German Airlines will join British Airways, Iberia Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines in offering only two classes -- business and economy -- on flights within Europe.
Lufthansa will begin phasing out its first-class service on Nov 1.
Its expanded business class will feature roomier seating, new menus, telephone and facscimile services in the airport in Frankfurt, and new business lounges in Frankfurt and Munich.


Set Apart
On Aug. 31, at the Women's Tennis Association's awards gala.


A Slow and Steady Evolution Is Building to a Rush for Swilling
Like a hawk swooping and snatching a defenseless mouse, Pat Swilling glided in clean from right end and there was quarterback Warren Moon, back exposed and eyes focused downfield, an easy prey for the mammoth linebacker.
But in this recent preseason matchup -- and really, it would very likely have unfolded this way even in a regular-season game -- Swilling's sharp mind overtook his sheer brawn.
Oomph! Thud!


Super Gumshoes


Talking: Parental Aid; Lenders Relaxing The Rules
ALONG with a college education, parents are increasingly providing their children with the down payment, and sometimes the closing costs, on a first home.
A Chicago Title and Trust survey released this year suggests that up to 12 percent of first-time buyers get this benefit, up from 8.8 percent in 1989.
Even with the decline in home prices generally, meeting the cash requirements of a purchase is still difficult for many young people.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Strategy; Recasting Bush Isn't Easy, Baker and Aides Discover
From their State Department perch six blocks west of the West Wing, the Baker team had scoffed and raged for two years about the clumsy attempts of Bush officials to deal with politics and domestic affairs.
The foreign affairs "whiz kids," as they liked to think of themselves, could not always hide their contempt for what they saw as a slapstick, slapdash White House operation.
When the country turned inward after the Persian Gulf war, when Los Angeles burned, when Ross Perot tapped into voter disgust, James A. Baker 3d and his band of fortysome thing aides looked over at the White House in wonder.
What they saw was President Bush and his advisers squandering record-high approval ratings through their failure to understand the anxiety of Americans in economic pain and to offer a convincing plan to solve their problems.
Fixing the Mechanics
But now that they have commandeered the White House, members of the Baker SWAT team confide that they are coming to grips with the fact that it is not so easy to ride to the rescue.
They are, after all, operating within the constraints of a Reagan-Bush legacy that has dismantled important levers of government, especially in the domestic agencies.
They are also working with a President who had wasted political capital for four years by scorning the idea that he needed to communicate, or even develop, a coherent theme and long-range strategy for his Presidency.


Envisioned for Africa, a Tribal-Art Museum Thrives in Paris
The brainchild of a wealthy French businessman and his wife in the mid-1980's, the Dapper Museum is now among the most active institutions in collecting and exhibiting African art.
Housed in a three-story 1910 town house on the Left Bank, the Dapper presents two or three shows a year, each documented in a scholarly catalogue.
In its current show, "The Grand Heritage: Sculpture of Black Africa," on view until Sept. 15, the emphasis is on the variety of styles and materials in art produced over 2,000 years.
There are ivory saltcellars from the area now called Sierre Leone, wood masks from Gabon, terra-cotta heads from Ghana, brass plaques from Nigeria and carved wood figures from Cameroon.
The 60 objects, produced by artists of many different tribes between the fifth century B.C. and the 20th century, are illustrated and described in the catalogue ($50).


Harold Curtis Fleming Dies at 70; Tirelessly Fought for Civil Rights
Harold Curtis Fleming, a white Southerner who became an early leader in the struggle for racial justice in a "new South," died Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 70 years old.
Friends said he died suddenly after a brief illness.
As executive director of the Southern Regional Council, an organization formed in 1944 to promote equal opportunity for Southerners, Mr.
Fleming joined the civil-rights cause well before it became fashionable.
And long after others had lost their fervor, he continued to work for that cause as head of the Potomac Institute in Washington.


Assembly Speaker Challenges Florio Cuts for Public Defenders
The Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly today challenged the contention of the Florio administration that Republican-imposed budget cuts have doomed the state's system of providing free lawyers for poor defendants.
The Speaker, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, suggested that a court-ordered hearing on the issue was politically inspired.


A Fanfare For the Emmys
AT the Russian Tea Room last Sunday night, Anne Meara was watching waiters dressed as Cossacks pass trays of buckwheat blini while the theme song from the old "Patty Duke Show" segued into the theme song from the old "Dick Van Dyke Show."
"TV screwed me up just like it screwed up everybody else," she said.


Leaving Roadside Blurs Behind, Photographer Takes Firm Stand
TOM ZETTERSTROM is best known for "moving landscapes," that is, black and white photographs of the countryside taken from an automobile which he often drives himself.
Since a speed blur is usually equated with drama -- like a disaster caught on the wing by a lucky witness -- the viewer automatically searches for the cause of the commotion.
But to no avail.
There are no bodies in these pictures, no wreckage -- only trees that look as if they were rooted in racing flood waters and the feeling that something untoward had happened or was about to.


How to Help Victims of Hurricane Andrew
Following is a list of organizations seeking donations for the hurricane relief effort:  Adventist Community Services Andrews University, Berrien Springs, Mich. 49104. (800) 253-3000.
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013. (800) 842-2200, or, for Spanish speakers, (800) 257-7575.
AmeriCares 161 Cherry Street, New Canaan, Conn. 06840. (800) 486-4357.
Catholic Charities USA Disaster Response, 1731 King Street, Suite 200, Alexandria, Va. 22314.
Church World Service P.O. Box 968, Elkhart, Ind. 46515.
Episcopal Church/Presiding Bishop's Fund for World Relief 815 Second Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017. (800) 334-7626.
Feed the Children P.O. Box 36, Oklahoma City, Okla. 73101. (800) 648-3900.
Florida Relief Center Florida Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 7000, Tallahassee, Fla. 32314. (800) 354-3571.
Hadassah-The Women's Zionist Organization of America Inc.
Hadassah-Andrew Relief Fund, 50 W. 58th St., New York, N.Y. 10019. (212) 303-8153.
National Association of Evangelicals World Relief, Hurricane Andrew Fund, P.O.
Box WRC, Wheaton, Ill. 60189. (708) 665-0235.
The Salvation Army Salvation Army Hurricane Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 270848, Tampa, Fla. 33688. (800) 554-5515.
Seventh-Day Adventists Adventist Community Services, 12601 Old Columbia Pike, Silver Springs, Md. 20904-6600. (800) 253-3000.
Union of American Hebrew Congregations Kol Ami Hunger Relief Fund, 8200 Peters Road, Plantation, Fla. 33324. (305) 472-1988.
The Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001. (212) 563-4000.
The United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropics of New York Inc.
Miami Disaster Relief Fund, 130 East 59th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022. (212) 980-1000.
The United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism Rabbinical Assembly Emergency Relief Fund, 155 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010. (212) 533-7800.
We Will Rebuild P.O. Box 010790, Miami, Fla. 33131.
World Vision P.O. Box 1131, Pasadena, Calif. 91131. (800) 423-4200.


Challenge From Holtzman
The New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, challenged Geraldine A. Ferraro yesterday to contribute $340,000 to organizations that aid child sex-abuse victims and rape victims.
The two women are seeking the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate.
Ms.
Holtzman contended that Ms.
Ferraro's family-owned business in the mid-1980's received the money in rental of warehouse space to a mob-linked pornographer after Ms.
Ferraro had promised to evict him.


Personal Loss
To the Editor:
Historically, those who have spoken of jazz "losing its soul" invariably are reflecting upon lack of audience for their own brand of jazz.
In Mr.
Jarrett's essay there is not a single musician identified who possesses a "lost soul," not a single media maven identified as a villain and ditto a single nightclub owner who has sold out.
Whole categories are invented: "black musicians without soul" and "studio musicians reading newspapers in the control rooms."


William Paterson Passes By Geneva
Richie Smith passed for two touchdowns as William Paterson opened the season with a 20-9 victory over visiting Geneva yesterday.
The victory was the fifth straight for the Pioneers, who were 8-2-1 last year.


A Cool Housing Market Heats Up
IN residential real estate circles, the beginning of the school year is not what it once was.
"I remember the days when you could see a definite upward surge in sales of houses before school started because buyers were anxious to have their kids settled in time for the new school term," said Merritt K. Mitchell, president of Merritt Associates, a 60-year-old realty firm in Larchmont.


Indians Become Foes In Bid for Tribal Rights
In a windowless room off the main street in this small port city, a handful of American Indians are waging a campaign to bring their tribe back from extinction.
A few blocks away, another tribe, working out of a trailer, is making a similar effort to gain recognition by the Federal Government.
Such campaigns are not all that unusual.
Like others who lost their tribal status in the last century, the Samish and Snohomish Indians of Puget Sound are basically invisible without the Government's recognition of their sovereign status or their claims to Federal rights and benefits.


POSTINGS: Gramercy Park Sale; A 'Significant' Coda
The 136-year-old town house at 11 Gramercy Park South where the composer Samuel L. M. Barlow once lived has been sold for $1.45 million.
"This sale will be significant for the entire Gramercy Park area," said Edward J. Winslow Jr., of Massey Knakal Realty Services of Manhattan, which represented the former owners, a group that included Joseph Neumann.
The significance, Mr.
Winslow said, is that the new owner, John Benitez, "is planning a historic restoration of the property which will be in keeping with the quality of the neighborhood."


Apollo's Temple
To the Editor: John Van Kirk's account of his trip to the Temple of Apollo at Bassae ("Above the Dales of Arcady, Alas," July 26) reminded me of my own much happier visit in the spring of 1983.
The temple was unspoiled and gloriously visible then.
My husband and I spent a peaceful afternoon there.
However, what struck me most in Mr.
Van Kirk's article was his experience of the people in the village of Andritsena.
Nine years ago we encountered almost the identical cast of characters and far from worrying that they might kill a stranger for his money, we were struck by their kindness.


'HOUSE FOR RENT' BECOMES A RARITY
When Ofelia Centeno's house near Miami's Metrozoo was wrecked by Hurricane Andrew, her frantic search for temporary housing turned up nothing until the other day, when her brother found a small apartment that was still available in his neighborhood near the airport.
As thousands of others desperate for temporary shelter are doing, Mrs.
Centeno scraped together the $820 rent plus security deposit, paying it without question so that she could relocate to the two-bedroom apartment with her parents, a sister and two children.


Knicks and 3-Way Trade Still Up in the Air
The proposed three-way trade involving the Knicks, the Orlando Magic and the Los Angeles Clippers was expected to remain unresolved until next week.
Magic center Stanley Roberts continued to block the deal, exercising his contractual right to reject a trade.


Renee Harrison, Thomas Morris Jr.
Renee du Pont Harrison, a daughter of Herbert P. Harrison of Richmond and Sarah S. Harrison of Greenville, Del., was married yesterday to Thomas Patrick Morris Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Adam Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville.
Ms.
Harrison, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Pine Manor College, she is an art curator at the State Department in Washington.
Her father is a vice president of Morton G. Thalhimer, the real estate sales company in Richmond.


Lisa Judy Sotto and Bruce D. Saber
Lisa Judy Sotto, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn Sotto of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married last night in Lawrence, L.I., to Bruce David Saber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Saber of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Saul Teplitz performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.
Ms.
Sotto, who is 29 years old and is retaining her name, is an associate at the New York office of Hunton &amp; Williams, a law firm in Richmond.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a J.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was an importer of women's clothing.


BEST SELLERS: September 6, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
2
2
26
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
3
15
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
10
2
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A romantic novel about Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton, her husband and Neapolitan society in the 18th century.
5
13
2
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
6
14
2
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
7
9
2
NIGHT OF THE HAWK, by Dale Brown. (Fine/ Putnam, $22.95.) American airmen and marines undertake to rescue a serviceman in Lithuania.
8
8
2
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $22.) On a visit to New York to track down her grandmother, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
9
4
8
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old South Carolina woman recalls her life at a Maine summer retreat.
10
6
12
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
11 *
5
9
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
12
7
4
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife share new visions while taking pictures of old bridges in Iowa.
13
2
RUM PUNCH, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $21.) A crime thriller involving the Feds, a ruthless gun dealer, a flight attendant and a bail bondsman ripe for romance. (LP)
14
12
124
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
15
11
14
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) The second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
15
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
2
12
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
4
5
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918; based in part on newly available material.
4
5
13
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
5
3
10
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
6
1
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
7
6
3
MARILYN: THE LAST TAKE, by Peter Harry Brown and Patte B. Barham. (Dutton, $23.) Did intrigues in Hollywood boardrooms and in the Kennedys' circle lead to Marilyn Monroe's death?
8
7
4
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
9
1
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
10
8
11
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
11
9
8
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
12
10
18
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
13
13
17
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
14
14
39
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
15
11
32
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
29
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
5
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
3
3
8
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
4
4
40
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
5
39
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
SCREENING HISTORY, by Gore Vidal. (Harvard University, $14.95.) Epigrammatic, realistic to the point of cynicism but consumed with nostalgia for what he believes our Republic was supposed to be, these essays about Mr.
Vidal himself and American culture originated as a series of lectures at Harvard.
MAKING LOVE: An Erotic Odyssey, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $18.) Well, different such and such for different folks: Mr.
Rhodes's report on his lifetime obsessions and performances has the virtue, rare in autobiography, of sounding like the truth.
CARMICHAEL'S DOG, by R. M. Koster. (Norton, $21.95.) The titular hero of Mr.
Koster's novel is a dog whose unqualified love saves a hard-drinking, foulmouthed, egotistical science fiction writer from the demons (real, not metaphorical) who inhabit him.
LIFE SENTENCES: Rage and Survival Behind Bars, by Wilbert Rideau and Ron Wikberg. (Times Books/Random House, paper, $15.) A collection, cool, detached, reasonable but necessarily painful, of essays and reportage from The Angolite, a journal published in the Louisiana maximum-security prison at Angola.
SECOND SON, by Stephen Stark. (Holt, $22.50.) This headlong novel brings disquieting news about the battle between fathers and sons, a family game of chicken with love instead of cars as the weapon.
KICKING TOMORROW, by Daniel Richler. (Random House, $21.) Teen-age angst and alienation in Montreal in the 1970's propel a novel whose punk-rocker hero aspires to destroy the world with an apocalyptic rock message that will drive adults "mad with grief."
EASY KEEPER, by Mary Tannen. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A novel of down-to-earth wit and unembittered sharpness about lives built on fantasy in a Rocky Mountain backwater.


William Paterson Passes By Geneva
Richie Smith passed for two touchdowns as William Paterson opened the season with a 20-9 victory over visiting Geneva yesterday.
The victory was the fifth straight for the Pioneers, who were 8-2-1 last year.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Eugene M. Haring; How the Practice of Law Has Changed
IN his small 14th-floor office in the Gateway Center, behind a barren, polished leather-topped desk, sat Eugene M. Haring, 65 years old, looking more like a mischievous, crackly-eyed grandfather than the senior partner of New Jersey's oldest and largest law firm.
Mr.
Haring has silver hair, a deep, soothing voice and a genial smile that seems to involve nearly every line and muscle in his face.
He has worked for the Newark law firm of McCarter &amp; English since 1953, when he was hired as a summer clerk.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
Tim Wirth's son asks: "Who really wants you to run? Who out there is just desperate to have you stay in the Senate?" I would respond: I do; I am.
A politician who cares more about the environment than about his perks is enough to restore my faith and lift my spirits.
When I read that Tim Wirth can no longer face the hassle, my faith and spirits drop.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BRITISH WATERCOLORS
British landscape watercolors from 1840 through the end of the century are the focus of an exhibition opening on Wednesday at the Yale Center for British Art at 1080 Chapel Street in New Haven.
Gathered from public and private collections in Britain and the United States, the 125 or so paintings exemplify the departure in style and content from the grand themes of J. M. W. Turner and his contemporaries to the more personal, poetic and naturalistic concepts of John Ruskin, William Holman Hunt, John Brett, George Price Boyce and other pre-Raphaelites represented in the show.


With No Stomach for Tennis, So Ivanisevic is Upset
Goran Ivanisevic, Croatia's most valuable export, said it was a mere shadow of himself that trudged out to Court 16 to deal with Aleksandr Volkov in their third-round match at the United States Open yesterday.
In fact, it was a corpse.
"I felt like a dead man, I don't know," said the fifth-seeded Ivanisevic after being temporarily revived by a chilly post-match shower.
"I can't eat, can't sleep, can't play. I was serving so badly because my arms were so heavy," said Ivanisevic, who doled out just nine aces, minuscule by his standards, and folded on five of the six break points earned by Volkov.


All the Hangar's a Stage
NAME: Naked Angels, a theater company that performs at 114 West 17th Street.
PRINCIPALS: Jenifer Estess, the producing director, and a 10-member artistic committee that includes Fisher Stevens, an actor; the playwrights Jon Robin Baitz and Frank Pugliese, and Merrill Holtzman, an actor and producer.


SURFACING
SPORTS --
NFL Throwbacks
: a complete line of "vintage" jackets, jerseys and helmets from pro football's glory days.
FOOD --
Sweet-potato pancakes:
nouvelle Jewish cuisine.


America Isn't Creating Enough Jobs, And No One Seems to Know Why
This is a joyless Labor Day for many people.
It is like a May Day without a Maypole or Christmas without gift-giving.
It is hard to remember a time when so much was going wrong for the American worker.
Labor Day used to be a celebration of the nation's wage earners -- 20-year employees in factory and office jobs with rising incomes that made tens of millions of Americans, by the early 1970's, solidly middle class.
Rarely, if ever, had prosperity been so widely spread through a population.
"You could train a person on the job and it was like he had been born into a rich family," said Richard Freeman, a Harvard labor economist.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
Wirth frankly details the forces that led to his abrupt withdrawal from the Senate.
We learn of his confidants, his campaign efforts and his causes, but hear little about his constituents.
Perhaps the vitality needed to sustain our public servants can come from the electorate.
Maintaining a link not only to issues but also to voters might forestall burnout.
JOSEPH TENENBAUM, M.D.
Leonia, N.J.


Nancy Miller, David Farhi
Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Miller of White Plains have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Nancy Miller and David Marcel Farhi, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Daniel Farhi of Paris.
Ms.
Miller, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is a law student at New York University.
Her father is the president of Toy Manufacturers of America, a trade association in New York.
Her mother, Elizabeth D. Miller, is an exercise instructor at Boutelle Method Inc. in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Ripple of Layoffs Upsets State Workers
For the 75,000 men and women who draw their paychecks from the State of New Jersey, one of life's certainties used to be the security of a government job.
But now there is mass uncertainty and insecurity as state workers face the elimination of at least 2,000 jobs by Oct. 2, as well as a chaotic game of falling dominoes in which workers with seniority can knock more recent employees into lower-paying or less desirable jobs.
For every worker eventually forced out the door by the state's recent budget cuts, Anthony J. Cimino, New Jersey's Commissioner of Personnel, estimates that four or five more will work their way through the process that allows those with more seniority to displace or "bump" those with less.  'Terrible Way to Live'
"It's a terrible way to live," said Kathleen Den Bleyker, whose co-workers at the Division of Coastal Resources office in Toms River call her Kim.
"Even if I finally end up keeping my job, I'll probably end up somewhere else doing a new job that I'll have to be retrained for, or driving two hours to a new location."


Clinton Country
Some people in the North see only redneck Bubbas when they look south.
The South has plenty of rednecks.
And Southerners have cultivated the redneck image to some extent to deceive outsiders into thinking that all of us down here are a bunch of country boys, easily gulled.
Historically, that has meant that the outsider should keep one hand on his wallet.
In my part of the South, there is also a tendency not to care much about the world's good opinion.
If New York's style is in-your-face, Arkansas's is mind-your-own-business.
To our discomfort, we are now being asked to explain ourselves, thanks to Bill Clinton.
So, how to explain the prevalence of progressive politics in this Dogpatch of a place?
There are several causes.
Alongside a lot of poverty, mismanagement, corruption, violence and plain bad luck stretching back to the 19th century, Arkansas has been fortunate in certain of its leaders and institutions.
It had a strong but little-known cadre of activist women in the 20's and 30's that predated the women's movement.
It was blessed, until last fall, with a statewide newspaper of uncommon elegance and influence.
The same poverty that has dogged the state from its beginnings has spawned a hardy political ideology that has tended continuously, if erratically, toward antiestablishment populism, giving rise to a succession of leaders who have tried to stand up for common people.


HITTING THE WALL
Hitting a wall, or anything else, in an angry rage, is not, as Junger would have us believe, a charming social custom of the male subculture.
It is a mental illness classified in the "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" as Intermittent Explosive Disorder.
The essential features of this disorder are discrete episodes of loss of control of aggressive impulses, resulting in serious assaultive acts or destruction of property.
IRENE K. HAWKS
New York, N.Y.


Memory of Massacre Is Kept Alive
Shaul Ladany, a race walker, still keeps the written security instructions that he and other Israeli athletes received before the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, where 11 of his colleagues were killed in an attack by Palestinian gunmen on Sept. 5-6, 1972.
Ankie Rekhess-Spitzer recently found a receipt from a Munich inn where she had stayed with her husband, the fencing coach Andrei Spitzer, days before he was killed.
And last month, for the first time since his death, she was allowed to see German post-mortem photographs and to identify his remains.


Liza Graves, Patrick Smith
Elizabeth Weld Graves, the daughter of Elizabeth Minot Graves of Irvington, N.Y., and the late Charles P. Graves, was married yesterday in New York to Patrick James Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. J. Smith of Bremerton, Wash.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas More Church.
Mrs.
Smith, who is 38 years old and is known as Liza, is a regional vice president in New York for American Express Travel Related Services.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father was an advertising copywriter and an author of children's books.
Her mother is a children's book writer and editor and a consultant to Dutton Children's Books in New York.


Bishops' Struggle on Role of Women Yields Little
In 1988, when the nation's Roman Catholic bishops released the first draft of a pastoral letter on women's concerns, the document resounded with the voices of women and called for groundbreaking though limited changes in church practices.
Last week, when the bishops received in the mail a fourth and almost certainly final draft, it was a very different document, one that echoed the voice of the Pope and emphasized existing church teaching as the remedy for problems faced by women.


Ferraro Foes Strive to Take High Ground
Just nine days before the New York Senate primary, Geraldine A. Ferraro's main rivals are pushing hard to reshape a race that has so far turned largely on her fame in this year of the woman into a fight over who best represents the state's traditionally liberal Democratic voters.
In television advertising and daily press barrages, State Attorney General Robert Abrams and City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman are attacking Ms.
Ferraro, the acknowledged front-runner, and striving to portray themselves as the rightful heirs to the legacy of Roosevelt, Wagner and Lehman.


Commercial Property: Troubled Office Tenants; When an Owner Defaults, What of Past Promises?
WHEN Herzfeld &amp; Rubin signed a lease in 1988 for 60,000 square feet in the distinguished old bank building at 40 Wall Street, the expectation was for Class A space befitting a top law firm with corporate clients.
Since the building was more than 60 years old, the lease had guaranteed an enticing package of improvements, including a refurbished lobby, including a waterfall, plus new elevators and improved security.


Kathleen MacPhee, John McDermott
Dr. and Mrs.
Laurence E. MacPhee of Westfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Regina MacPhee to John Fitzpatrick McDermott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. McDermott Jr. of Stuart, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
MacPhee, 27 years old, is a treasury analyst at Merck &amp; Company in Rahway, N.J.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of English at Seton Hall University in South Orange, N.J.
Her mother, Regina M. MacPhee, is a supervisor of education in the Rahway public schools.


Wall Street; Ivax's Earnings May Be Less Healthy Than Hoped
THE road to riches for the Ivax Corporation may be a bit rougher than some on Wall Street have been expecting.
The drug company has attracted investors betting that big future earnings will justify its current lofty stock price.
And last month came the first sign that they might be right: The Government approved Ivax's application for a generic, slow-release verapamil, a hypertension medication.


Noelle A. Miller, Robert S. Haft
Noelle A. Miller, president of the Mercedes Medical Corporation, a maker and distributor of laboratory products in New Hyde Park, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Stephen Haft, a lawyer in New York.
New York State Supreme Court Justice Helen Freedman officiated at the couple's home in New York.


Wall Street; Boom and Bluster at the Merc
BIG shots at the nation's trading exchanges love nothing more than to flex their muscles over the latest record-breaker.
Little wonder, then, that they are hooting and hollering out in Chicago.
The price of a membership, or "seat," on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange has been hitting record highs this summer nearly as often as the U.S. dollar has been hitting record lows.
Meanwhile, seats on its arch-rival New York Stock Exchange are a shadow of the record $1.15 million set in the headier days of 1987.


The Pink Flamingo Question
A MISSISSIPPI gardener named Felder Rushing gave the Long Island Horticultural Society something to think about at its meeting last month at Planting Fields Arboretum in Oyster Bay.
The members weren't sure what it was exactly, but it made them shift around a bit in their chairs.
"I can't understand a word he's saying," one woman said to her companion.
And she probably didn't mean his accent -- a nice slow Southern drawl.
She meant his fast-paced stream-of-consciousness barrage of philosophical musings as to what is art and what is boring scaredy-cat conformity (like lawns and whisky barrels and stuff) and what is, as Mr.
Rushing likes to say, "just having fun in the garden." (Your neighbors are going to talk about you anyway, he said in his soft voice, so why don't you just go ahead and have fun?)


New York Lead-Test Results, Meant to Reassure, Do the Opposite
To address fears of Brooklyn residents about lead-tainted debris from the Williamsburg Bridge, the city last week released test results that officials thought would show that lead is simply a reality of urban life.
But what the tests yielded, scientists say, were alarming numbers that raise difficult questions about how to respond to what they see as a serious potential health risk.
Officials and scientists have long known or presumed that lead from paint, gasoline, factories and other sources pervades the soil of cities across the country, but the tests marked the first time that anyone had quantified the extent of lead contamination in the city's soil and dust.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; A Myth on West 46th St., Remembering Schrafft's
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
A Clinton Connection?
Q.
I used to live at Clinton Court, 420 to 422 West 46th Street, which has an unusual one- and three-story rear building.
I have heard that the rear building was a stable for DeWitt Clinton's estate.
What is its history? . . .
Paula A. Lysak, Hillside, N.J.


Got a Flat? Keep on Rolling
Anyone who has suffered through the wearisome chore of changing a flat tire on a highway in the late hours of the night will be heartened by the introduction of a tire that, when depleted of air, will hold up for at least another 50 miles traveling at a speed of 55 miles an hour.
The Bridgestone Corporation of Japan and the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company of Akron, Ohio, have worked separately to design the tires, which are about 50 percent thicker than the standard passenger tire.
The Bridgestone tire requires a specially made wheel; Goodyear says that its tire will fit on any standard wheel.


Claudine Juge, Daniel Osipow
Claudine Juge, a daughter of James and Blanche Juge of Gardena, Calif., was married yesterday to Daniel Osipow, a son of Dr.
Joseph Osipow of Great Neck, L.I., and Stella Caranica of South Lake Tahoe, Calif.
The Rev.
Liam Kidney officiated at St.
Vincent DePaul Roman Catholic Church in San Francisco.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
123.08
123.03
135.65
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4017
1.4095
1.7145
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1988
1.1968
1.1393
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9960
1.9830
1.7185
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$339.75
$341.25
$348.90
Republic National BankCurrency: Friday NY Close


Fame vs. Ideology In New York Race
With New York's Senate primary nine days away, Geraldine A. Ferraro's main rivals struggle to shift the focus of the race, which has been dominated by Ms.
Ferraro's fame in the year of the woman, to who best represents the state's traditionally liberal Democratic voters.


A New York Morality Tale With a Happy Ending
Summer began with a blaze: live televised images of flames licking along the rooftops of buildings in South-Central Los Angeles.
And the season ought to go out with a splash: a picture of families plunging into the swimming pools at Hamilton Fish Park Play Center on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
If I were a network newscaster, I'd send my film crews out there again and again until people began to get the message about this remarkable place.
Better yet, I'd encourage them to go see for themselves how a neighborhood can be changed by something as simple as children splashing around in a pool.
They are the sights and sounds of hope.
Fish Park, a 100-year-old landmark at the corner of Houston and Pitt Streets, named for the 19th-century philanthropist and politician, reopened in June after many years of community effort.
To see it now, full of activity after so many years of disuse, is a sight nearly as shocking as the Los Angeles riots.
For surely stories like this happen only on sappy television dramas: an abandoned park, long lorded over by drug pushers, is transformed into a scene of mothers and children, of trees, open space and sun sparkling on blue water.


Who Deconstructed Adam Snell?
BOOK
A Novel. By Robert Grudin. 251 pp. New York: Random House. $19.


Glancing Backward With an Eye On the Future
Labor Day brings not only a sense of changing seasons but the last gasp of the dance year as well.
Where did it all go?
The busy 1991-92 season has had its share of triumphs, disasters and fascinating ambiguities.
What do they say about the future?
One of the things there should be more of are performances by some of the first-rate solo artists who distinguished themselves this past season.
Two that spring readily to mind are Beverly Blossom, who appeared at Dance Theater Workshop in January, and Jeannie Hutchins, whose full-evening "Do Not Use If More Salty Than Tears" was presented at Performance Space 122 in March.


Crime
In Rita Mae Brown's REST IN PIECES (Bantam, $20), every house, barn, shop, rectory and civic building in the tiny Virginia hamlet of Crozet seems to have a resident cat.
One sees in such details the fine paw of Sneaky Pie Brown, Ms.
Brown's cat, who gets co-author credit for this cozy tale and who bears "an uncanny resemblance" to one of its heroines, the "wonderfully intelligent" Mrs.
Murphy, a tiger cat who resides with the town postmistress, Mary Minor (Harry) Haristeen.
When she isn't lording it over the other animals on Harry's farm, Mrs.
Murphy trains her formidable intellect on the appalling case of a corpse ("No fingerprints. No clothes. . . . No head") that turns up in bits and pieces all over town, just as a handsome stranger with a dark secret comes to Crozet and takes a friendly interest in Harry.
The suspense isn't exactly killing, but it gets us jumpy enough to look over our shoulders in church.


Republicans and AIDS
To the Editor:
While it is regrettable that Mary Fisher -- or anyone -- must suffer because of AIDS, I do not understand why she merits such special attention as a supposed profile in courage ("Aids Test," Aug. 16).
It is doubtful, as her illness progresses, that Ms.
Fisher will have to worry about obtaining adequate medical care or keeping a roof over her head or feeding her children.


Whose Faces?
To the Editor:
Please be advised that photographs of five white women infected with H.I.V. ("The New Faces of AIDS," Aug. 16) hardly show the real face of AIDS.
Of women with AIDS, a full 70 percent are women of color.
TIMOTHY BENNETT New York


Sports of The Times; The Jets and the Giants Are Now Open for Questions
IN Giants Stadium, an elevator goes down from the Giants offices to a hallway leading to the tunnel to the team locker rooms.
Ever since the stadium opened in 1976, the white walls of that hallway had been split by two wide horizontal stripes, one blue and one red, the Giants colors.
But on Friday workmen were painting the walls three shades of soft brown.
"Leon Hess had it changed to neutral colors," a Giants official explained, referring to the Jets' owner.
"He always comes into the stadium this way and he was tired of looking at the Giants colors when the Jets were playing."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
STILL LOVED BY THE SUN A Rape Survivor's Journal.
By Migael Scherer.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.


Fine the Employers Of the Exploited
The injustices to the Hispanics on the East End cannot be condoned, but we have never had a decent immigration policy and for the most part new arrivals have always been resented.  [ "Hispanic Influx Being Felt on East End," July 12 ]
I cannot understand why the employers have not been fined or brought up on any charges.
When I hire anyone I have to fill out an IS9 form and have proper documentation or run the risk of being fined.
How do they get away without this form?
Perhaps if the employer not just the employee had to answer to the Immigration and Naturalization Service and were fined or audited when they call on one of the immigrants there would be a different attitude.


Family Values
INTEGRITY, COURAGE, strength" -- those were the
family values
as defined by Barbara Bush at the Republican convention in Houston.
She added "sharing, love of God and pride in being an American." Not much controversy in that definition.
But on "family values night," as Marilyn Quayle described the session dominated by Republican women, the values took on an accusatory edge: after recalling that many in the baby boom had not "joined the counterculture" or "dodged the draft," the Vice President's wife made clear to cheering conservatives what she felt was at the center of family values: "Commitment, marriage and fidelity are not just arbitrary arrangements."


Revlon's Troubling Make-Over
To the Editor:
I was appalled at Revlon's decision to drop its older models in "Revlon Tries Its Own Make-Over," (Aug. 23).
As a young woman -- 26 years old -- I reject the notion that only young models appeal to young women consumers.
When will advertisers realize that women consumers want to see real models of talent and character as well as of beauty?
Women such as Audry Hepburn and Liza Minelli are all three of these whereas Claudia Schiffer, Cindy Crawford and their ilk are not.


Christine Breck, Jan Pettersson
Christine Breck, a daughter of Richard F. Breck of Sarasota, Fla., and Mrs.
Andrzej Alkiewicz of Ridgefield, Conn., was married in Ridgefield yesterday to Jan Birger Pettersson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Birger Pettersson of Malmberget, Sweden.
The Rev.
Francis J. Moy officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.


Anne Orsoni, Martin Horner
Anne Marie Cecilia Orsoni, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rene Orsoni of Ajaccio, Corsica, was married yesterday in Coti Chiavari, Corsica, to Martin Horner, a son of Mrs.
G.
P.
Lynch of Cedarhurst, L.I., and Martin M. Horner of Orient Point, L.I.
The Rev.
Roger Poggi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the village church.
Mrs.
Horner, 30 years old, graduated and received a master's degree in clinical pathology from the University of Pharmacy in Paris.
She is the product manager at American Bioproducts Company in Parsippany, N.J.


Making a Difference; Men Who Love the Smell of Oil
MORE big investors are sniffing opportunities in the nation's long-depressed oil-and-gas fields.
A Houston oilman, Ernest H. Cockrell, joined the billionaire, Jay Pritzker, and his son, Thomas, and two other wealthy investors, Dan Lufkin and Mel Klein, in a partnership last week to buy reserves that major oil companies have on the auction block.
Mr.
Cockrell, a third-generation oilman, is in a position that leaves other producers envious.
He avoided big losses when prices collapsed in the 1980's by selling most of his family-held reserves in 1983.
The move put his Cockrell Oil Corporation near the sidelines, with no debt, lots of cash and large royalty holdings along the gulf coast.
He was able to hold on as many producers failed.


Two Not-Too-Remote Lodges
REMOTENESS is to Alaska what hospitality is to the Deep South.
But, in Alaskan terms, the Tutka Bay Lodge on Kachemak Bay is not particularly out of the way.
A flight of less than an hour from Anchorage to Homer, a taxi ride out to the mile-long natural spit that houses the Homer docks and then a 25-minute trip across the bay by motorboat and you're there.
Or nearly there.
It was a brilliantly clear afternoon so on the spur of the moment Jon Osgood, who owns the lodge with his wife, Nelda, and was at the helm of the boat, suggested we take advantage of the weather and helicopter to the Harding Glacier.
This was an expedition that the four of us -- my husband and I and another couple -- had originally planned for the following day.
After a couple of calls by radiophone, the boat wheeled 180 degrees and there we were, back at the Homer Airport.


Deborah Smiley, Ira Kerner
Deborah Rose Smiley, the daughter of Diane Terman Felenstein of New York and the stepdaughter of Marshall Felenstein of New York, was married on Thursday to Ira Glenn Kerner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Kerner of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Rabbi Louis Frischman performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Kerner, 25 years old, is an account executive in New York at her mother's company, Diane Terman Public Relations.
She and her husband graduated from Syracuse University.
Her stepfather is a principal in Felenstein, Koniver &amp; Associates, a retail consultant in New York.
Mrs.
Kerner is also the daughter of Robert Smiley of Scarsdale, N.Y., a principal in Smiley Associates, insurance consultants in New York.


Corrections
An entry in the Egos &amp; Ids column in Styles of the Times on Aug. 16, about Madonna's registering to vote, misidentified a music industry group that encourages voting.
It is Rock the Vote.


'The Type C Connection'
To the Editor:
We were astonished to discover that Natalie Angier, in her review of "The Type C Connection: The Behavioral Links to Cancer and Your Health" (Aug. 2), passed judgment on a book we never wrote.
Her most egregious misrepresentation is: "Ms. Temoshok includes little scientific data to support her thesis." We cite and discuss more than 150 published studies, half of which demonstrate relationships between psychological factors and cancer, while the others represent pieces of the psychobiological puzzle that help to explain such relationships.
Ms.
Temoshok's studies of Type C behavior and cancer, which have been published in peer-reviewed scientific journals, are fully described in the book, and her methods are painstakingly detailed in a lengthy notes section.


'Business as Usual Won't Work'
Articles in the Sunday, Aug. 2 issue  [ "New Fields Opening Up, Offering Hope for Jobs" and "Retraining Classes Inundated") underscore the reality that business as usual won't work, recent changes seem permanent and our economy will never again be what it was. For high school students close to graduation, for seasoned workers facing a bleak job picture and for the broad community of counseling and educational professionals the challenge is great.
Counselors in L.I. high schools have the task of refocusing students' expectations and goals, helping to guide them into marketable fields of interest and to schools that can meet their needs.
Sometimes, that choice is a two-year college first, to help move them more quickly into the job market.
At Briarcliffe, more than a third of our graduates eventually go on to a four-year institution (usually on Long Island) to complete a bachelor's degree.
Many go for graduate work.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Farm Policy; NO ADDED MONEY IN FARM AID PLAN
Wheat farmers who were promised $1 billion in export subsidies by President Bush on Wednesday will find that sum more than offset by reductions in domestic programs that help them, Bush Administration officials now acknowledge.
The Administration is counting on the increase in exports to result in slightly higher domestic wheat prices.
The higher prices in turn would reduce Government payments to farmers under domestic programs by $1.7 billion.


Correction
The picture caption with the At Work column on Aug. 23, which described the relative impact of job cutbacks on higher and lower corporate levels, reversed the identification of the two New York University finance professors shown.
Kose John was at the right, Larry Lang at the left.


When Looking for the Best Division, Make a Sharp Turn to N.F.C. East
N.F.C.
East teams have won the last two Super Bowls and four of the last six.
Teams from this division have played in 9 of the last 11 N.F.C. championship games.
N.F.C.
East players had 7 of the 22 starting positions on the 1991 All-N.F.L. team selected by The Associated Press and the Professional Football Writers of America.
Six N.F.C.
East players were on the writers' All-Rookie team.


Mara Mehlman and Marvin Appel
Mara Elizabeth Mehlman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Myron A. Mehlman of Princeton, N.J., was married last evening in New York to Dr.
Marvin L. Appel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Appel of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi David M. Posner performed the ceremony at the Plaza.
Mrs.
Appel, 30 years old, is a sculptor.
Until recently she was a nurse at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received a master's degree in sculpture from New York University and a bachelor's degree in nursing from Columbia University.
Her father, a toxicologist, is a visiting scientist at the Federal Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry in Atlanta.
Her mother, Constance L. Mehlman, is the president of Princeton Scientific Publishing.
Dr.
Mehlman is the company's scientific editor.


LIZZIE BORDEN TOOK AN AX
I was delighted to read Mary Cantwell's article "Lizzie Borden Took an Ax" (July 26).
My father and his older brother used to deliver the newspaper to Lizzie Borden when they were boys.
She would give them a Christmas present each year, and both my father and uncle said she was a lovely and generous woman.
JOAN SARAH WEXLER
Washington


3 Teen-Agers Wounded in Shooting at Club
Three young men were wounded, two critically, outside a Manhattan dance club early yesterday when an argument between two groups of teen-agers ended with one youth pulling a gun and firing several times, the police said.
The fight flared outside the club, the Home Base Squad, at 531 West 19th Street in Chelsea, when the groups squared off because of a dispute over a girlfriend of one of the teen-agers, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.
Apparently, Sergeant James said, a member of one group thought that his former girlfriend was now dating a member of the other group.


Gaultier and Mugler Will Wear Each Other's Clothes for a Cause
Jean-Paul Gaultier and Thierry Mugler, the French fashion designers, must trust each other.
On Oct. 19 at the Folies-Bergere in Paris, Mr.
Gaultier, right, will walk down a runway in an outfit designed by Mr.
Mugler, who will in turn wear Mr.
Gaultier's creations.


Conversations/Richard Price; Kilos of Crack and $200 Sneakers: Young Dealers Confide in a Novelist
"I didn't personally see a lot of corruption," Richard Price says, alluding to the time he spent running with the pack on both sides of the law doing research for "Clockers," his novel about street-level drug trade.
"But this is the way it works."
And then he launches into a story that illustrates both the dense, intractable weave of the inner-city drug world and his own narrative style -- a rapid-fire vernacular, self-conscious, wry, street.


Intersections of Art and Technology at Hudson River Museum
IMAGES of liquid in slow or arrested motion are a staple of advertising, be the commodity detergent or mouthwash, chocolate or motor oil.
So if the show of Harold Edgerton's photographs at the Hudson River Museum seems at first a reprise of advertisements, it may be because of the nine black-and-white prints that make up the "Milk Drop Splash Series" (c. 1935) and the color print "Milk Drop Coronet" (1957), which is as much a classic as his 1934 black-and-white of a football dented by the impact of Wes Fesler's boot.
When Dr.
Edgerton died in 1990, at the age of 87, he was professor emeritus of electrical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, trailing a long list of accomplishments.
Among these was his camera-stroboscope combination that became the basis of the electronic flash essential for ultra-high-speed and stop-motion photography.
The device, coupled with a shutter that had no moving parts, made it possible to illuminate subjects for one-millionth of a second or less.


Chicago Journal; Cafe Plies Homeless With Hope
When Lisa Nigro was still packing a pistol for a living she decided she could do a lot more for her patch of this troubled world by carrying pots and pans instead.
At the time, Ms.
Nigro was a Chicago police officer fed up with just locking up bad guys.


Without A Doubt, The Guy's A Winner
As he walked with purpose Friday from Court 18 back to the players' locker room at the National Tennis Center, MaliVai Washington heard his name mispronounced by at least 20 people.
Ma-li-vay.
Ma-lee-vah.
Wrong.
And wrong again.
None of this seemed to bother the 14th-seeded Washington, a man on the move at the United States Open, with no time to correct the enunciations.


Sheila A. Dooley, Andre P. Holmes
Sheila Alberta Dooley, a daughter of Helen B. Dooley of Philadelphia and the late Oscar N. Dooley, was married yesterday to Andre Pierre Holmes, a son of Shirley E. Holmes of Washington.
The Rev.
William Glenn performed the ceremony at Zion Baptist Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Holmes, 28 years old, is a senior financial analyst at the Federal National Mortgage Association in Washington.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.


LIZZIE BORDEN TOOK AN AX
Cantwell's article about the Lizzie Borden case prompts me to make a comparison with a more recent saga -- the case of the arson murder of the 3-month-old baby Kristie Fischer, for which the Swiss au pair Olivia Riner was put on trial and acquitted.
As the grandfather of Leah Fischer, Kristie's half-sister, and the builder of the house that was set on fire, I closely followed the proceedings and was struck by the similarities to the Borden case and trial: wide coverage by the news media; sensational, unproven implications of other people by the defense.


Would Marky Mark Show Off Underwear For Calvin Klein?
When Brooke Shields posed in advertisements for Calvin Klein jeans 12 years ago, the tease was that she was wearing nothing underneath.
But that was before Mr.
Klein had a line of designer underwear.
Now, Mr.
Klein is in talks with Marky Mark, the pop star and teen-age heartthrob who often wears underwear (but no jeans) onstage, about endorsing Mr.
Klein's clothing, said two people who have spoken with the designer.


Shadows of Doubt in a Tale of Death on the Farm
As with any murder mystery, ambiguity abounds in "Brother's Keeper." The documentary, which opens Wednesday at the Film Forum in Manhattan, tells the story of Delbert Ward, an elderly, illiterate dairy farmer from upstate New York.
Two years ago, Mr.
Ward was charged with a bizarre crime: he was accused of smothering his brother Bill, 64 years old and in ill health, in the bed they shared in their squalid shack.
Outraged by the farmer's arrest, the people of nearby Munnsville, population 499, took up his case as a cause celebre.
Delbert Ward's plight drew national media attention.
"Brother's Keeper," which was made by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, is an American Gothic tale of fratricide (or perhaps not), justice gone awry (or not) and old-fashioned community values (or not).
One courtroom exchange suggests the film's shades of gray.
"You know the difference between truth and a lie, don't you?" the prosecutor asks Delbert Ward.
"Maybe, maybe not," Mr.
Ward responds.


Counterattack? Sure, If Losing Doesn't Matter
HAVE you ever wondered why, when the pundits extol dynamic, counterattacking play, they don't try it more often as Black?
The answer is that it is a lot more enjoyable to win, or at least draw, and counterattacking heightens the risk of defeat.
That is why the Tarrasch Defense to the Ruy Lopez is so rare.
It admirably contests the center and gets the black pieces into action.
The not-too-well-kept secret is that White's pieces also achieve aggressive play.
This can be seen in the game between Alexander Shabalov, a Latvian grandmaster, and Ariel Sorin, an Argentine international master, from the fifth round of the Biel (Switzerland) International Open, which ended in early August.
Shabalov took first prize in a field of 190.


Imperatives Of Recycling Are Gaining On Detroit
Visionaries like Walter Chrysler and Louis Chevrolet couldn't have imagined the sprawling graveyards of rusting cars and trucks that bear testimony to the automotive culture they helped invent.
These days the graveyards are shrinking slightly as recyclers find ways to recover materials and automakers respond to concern over the impact of automobiles on the environment and landscape.


A Home To Many
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's essay "Once and Future Audubon"  [ Aug. 23 ]  prompts another story about this hall, one perhaps not known generally but of interest to many who, like me, came to Washington Heights as refugees from Hitler's Third Reich in the late 1930's and lived there for some years.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article last week about Tim Robbins and his new movie, "Bob Roberts," referred incorrectly to events during the Bush and Reagan Administrations.
The movie deals with the savings and loan banking scandal, not the troubles of the House bank.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 22 MANHATTAN  Columbia University Area 215,000
420 Riverside Drive (114th St.)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in an unrenovated prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room; maintenance $825, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clarke Real Estate)  East Midtown 80,000
333 East 53d Street  450-sq.-ft. studio in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, renovated kitchen, dressing area; maintenance $460, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Arthur P. Brooks)  Fort Washington 76,000
116 Pinehurst Avenue  (Hudson View Gardens)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining alcove, south exposure, 7-acres of private grounds; maintenance $636, 22% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  Greenwich Village 925,000
30 West 11th Street  4-family, 1841 Greek Revival townhouse; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, 2 fireplaces in each unit; landmark district, original moldings and detail, 22- by 94-ft. lot; taxes $14,500 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Greenwich Village 425,000
115 Fourth Avenue (12th St.)  (Petersfield)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 2 exposures; common charge $653, taxes $5,400 (Broker: Silverman Group)  BRONX  Baychester 165,000
4080 Monticello Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached frame; dining room, remodeled kitchen, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/ Best Match Real Estate)  Eastchester Road Area 270,000
2817 Kingsland Avenue  3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Realty World/Gold Circle)  BROOKLYN  East Flatbush 130,000
151 East 87th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dinette, hospitality suite on the first floor, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,053 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage)  Marine Park Area 210,000
2015 Quentin Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 28- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  QUEENS  Maspeth 365,000
51-05 65th Street  3-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, Jacuzzi in second-floor unit; 2 baths in second and third-floor units; 1 bath in first floor unit; 3 bedrooms in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Century 21/Triboro Terrace Realty)  Forest Hills 555,000
69-08 112th Street  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick colonial; dining room, 2 fireplaces, finished basement, c/a, music room, 1-car garage, 100- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $5,400 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  Woodside 150,000
35-46 64th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, attached colonial; dining room, semi-finished basement, private driveway, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Randall Manor 201,000
55 Walbrooke Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, fireplace, study, finished basement, detached, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)  Sunset Hill 149,900
553 Bement Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


SNARL OF RED TAPE KEEPS U.S. CHECKS FROM STORM AREAS
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Government's lifeline to people caught in disasters, is so understaffed and consumed by paperwork that tens of thousands of victims of Hurricane Andrew are unlikely to get immediate financial help when they need it most.
Few have seen a check yet, and many others have been told that it will be weeks more before they can even apply for aid.
The main problem seems to be red tape that keeps even the most dedicated agency workers from doing more than helping the hurricane victims fill out forms. 16 Centers for Thousands
Of scores of people interviewed over the last week, not one had yet received a Government check, and many others were still trying to apply for one.
A major Homestead bank that has been operating since the day after the storm hit on Aug. 24 said it had seen numerous checks from insurance companies but no Federal relief checks.
The emergency management agency has set up 16 temporary Disaster Assistance Centers in Dade County, most in tents, where several hundred registrars help people fill out forms for subsistence and home-repair grants.
The registrars also steer people to other workers at the centers who can help, including counselors from the Small Business Administration, which provides loans to qualified businesses and homeowners, and the Internal Revenue Service, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Red Cross and the Salvation Army.
The management agency also takes information for grant applications by telephone, although working telephones are hard to find in badly battered communities like Homestead, Florida City and Cutler Ridge.
And some centers have begun dispatching bilingual aides into neighborhoods where people are clinging to the ruins of their homes.
But many of the estimated 200,000 people left homeless have still not been reached, and when lines build up at the assistance centers, the storm victims are given appointments to come back days and even weeks later.
"What do we do in the meantime?" Juanita Mosely said after she was told to come back between 10 A.M. and noon on Sept. 26.
The agency said that by Wednesday it had paid out $500,000 in several hundred checks to grant applicants in Florida, for an average payment of less than $2,000.
The five disaster centers in Louisiana, a state that took less of a hurricane blow than Florida, had dispatched 169 checks totaling $228,000.
"We are writing checks faster than in any other disaster," said Andrea Booher, a spokeswoman for the emergency management agency.
As he rushed off from a quick inspection of an assistance center in Homestead, Antonio Perez, an associate director of the agency, said, "F.E.M.A.'s doing just great despite what your newspaper is reporting." No Checks at a Bank
Whatever the amounts, it is almost impossible to find anyone who has received a check from either the emergency management agency or the Small Business Administration.
Likely people to come across the checks are cashiers at the First National Bank of Homestead, whose main office reopened the day after the storm.
Through a week when nearly all other banks remained out of commission, First National cashed checks and took deposits for all comers, customers or not.
"We are not seeing any Government checks," Bob Jensen, a First National vice president, said late this week.
Mr.
Jensen said that he was seeing checks only from insurance companies to policyholders and that the first of those to show up were for immediate living expenses, typically $2,500 to $5,000.
Lately, he said, he was seeing much larger amounts for the full value of homes that were destroyed.
One day this week, Juanita Mosley, whose Southern Gentleman barber shop in Cutler Ridge is shut down and strewn with the debris of a collapsed ceiling, joined the line of 20 people at the assistance center in the parking lot of Cutler Ridge Mall.
Ms.
Mosley, who has owned the shop for 22 years, said she could not find her landlord to ask if he would rebuild the barber shop space.
She had recently let her insurance expire while she looked at other policies.
"I don't have a business," Ms.
Mosley said.
"I don't have a home. I don't have an income."
Many people here do not buy insurance other than personal liability coverage for their cars.
This is a low-wage economy of clerks and farm workers who typically do not own much personal property or have the disposable income to pay for insurance.
At the center, operating from folding tables and chairs under two candy-cane-striped canopies, 10 counselors worked patiently, most straight through lunch in 90-degree heat filling out the emergency agency's 29-question Disaster Assistance Registration/ Application forms.
One of the smaller centers, it is also the most productive in putting through applications quickly, agency figures show. 'Mass of People' in Need
"I'm finding that we have a mass of people that need help now," said Jimmy Wheeler, the center's manager, who stood at his post all day greeting people.
"We try to find out what type of assistance they need."
But there is little the counselors can actually do.
The center cannot approve applications or shed light on how much money applicants might get, when they will get it or whether they will get any at all.
There was still less the center could do for Ms.
Mosley.
When she came to the front of the line after a 20-minute wait, Mr.
Wheeler gave her an Appointment Information form inviting her back on Sept. 26.
Yet Ms.
Mosley was luckier than people who came later.
By mid-afternoon, when Margaret McBean, 37, got in line, appointments were backing up, and she was asked to come back on Oct. 2.
"Four kids and they put you on hold," said Ms.
McBean, a medical secretary who is separated from her husband.
"I can't go to work," she added.
"My car's windshield is broke. We don't have no electricity or water. I need to move somewhere. I don't have savings. I live from paycheck to paycheck, like everybody else.
"You listen to the radio saying the Government is going to help you. Where do they help you? 'Go fill out this application and wait.' I can't wait one month, two months."
Ms.
Mosley and Ms.
McBean might have been immediately served if they had gone to one of the centers that, because of their remote locations, have been getting little business.
"They're not limited to going to that center in their neighborhood," said Jim Aguirre, a spokesman for the emergency management agency.
But at the Cutler Ridge center, no one advised people to try elsewhere.
In general, information of the centers is spread by word of mouth and by radio.
But most of the centers are so poorly marked that a person could pass by without realizing they are there.
There is little uniformity in appearance or organization.
In addition to location, luck is a factor in getting processed.
On a recent day, the counselors at Mr.
Wheeler's center were told that if long lines formed appointments were to be given for Oct. 7, but rain cut down on the number of visitors to the center, allowing counselors to meet with all comers.
Bureaucratic Caution
What seems to be involved here is a conflict between compassion and caution, with the emphasis on caution.
The emergency management agency and the Small Business Administration want to be alert to fraud and the criticism of taxpayers and Congressmen.
"We don't have someone willy-nilly writing checks," Mr.
Aguirre said.
But because of the scrutiny given to applications, the agency can violate another of its missions: helping people quickly and making sure that, as an agency flier puts it, "people have a safe place to live until their homes can be prepared."
Both agencies are also under budget constraints that prevent them from sending enough counselors and investigators into the area to speed the work.
And as big organizations, they can be slow in responding to the ever-changing needs of people here.
Although F.E.M.A. has dealt with scores of disasters in the 13 years since President Jimmy Carter established it, the agency is learning as it goes in confronting what is proving to be the costliest natural disaster in the nation's history.
On Thursday, for example, the agency told its registrars to disregard 14 of the 29 questions on the assistance form.
Adapting to Needs
Typically at the centers here, a hurricane victim approaches the manager, who makes a quick assessment of the person's needs and assigns him to a registrar.
If the registrars are backed up, the manager sets up an appointment to return.
The registrar first helps fill out the disaster application form and tries to see if the applicant has enough income to carry an Small Business Administration loan for up to $100,000 for home repairs or up to $500,000 to re-establish his business.
If the applicant qualifies, he is sent home with a big manila envelope, addressed to the S.B.A., that contains other forms and requests for documents like tax returns, even though for many people such records blew away with their roofs.
People with little or no income and little insurance can apply for grants of up to $11,500 to repair their homes.
And every person with a damaged home, whatever his or her income, can apply for a grant to pay for three or four months rent, based on rental costs in the area and the emergency management agency's determination of the family's housing needs.
Each grant seeker is told that in 8 to 10 days an inspector will contact him to set up a time to visit and verify his claims.
The applicant is also given an (800) telephone number with which he can track his application's progress or report a new address.
Once an applicant finds a working a phone, however, the (800) number is often busy.
Paper, but No Money
A few people seem fed up with their visits to the assistance centers.
An unshaven man who appeared to be in his late 50's bolted from the big center in Homestead, saying, "Yeah, I got help. A lot of paper but no money.
Another man, Jerry Beard, who wanted a small-business loan to replace lost equipment, seemed befuddled by the paper chase the Homestead center was sending him on.
"I was here 40 minutes, and I've got enough stuff to keep me busy for a month," said Mr.
Beard, who owns Jerry's Pest Control.
David Banks stopped at a center, waited in line for an hour, gave up and then came upon another, in the parking lot of the Naranja Park Baptist Church.
That center is one of the more remote ones, and with no one in line, Mr.
Banks was able to sit down with a registrar immediately.
Like many people here, Mr.
Banks lost both his home and his business, a auto-repair business in which he went to people who would call him or send him a fax.
He still has his truck but his home was demolished.
He has moved to an apartment in Miami but has not been able to get his phone numbers transferred and so cannot get work.
In addition, he said, he has lost a lot of his tools.
Mr.
Banks's house was insured, and the insurance company has given him $2,000 in living expenses.
He used all but $132 of that to get his temporary apartment -- $619 for a month's rent and the rest for security and a deposit.
The registrar chided him for spending so much of the money, Mr.
Banks said, adding, "They know nothing about rents around here. That just got me four walls to live in."
The registrar gave Mr.
Banks forms and told him to come back when the insurance company contacted about reimbursing him for the loss of his home.
"Then another guy here said, 'Forget that. Come back tomorrow,' " Mr.
Banks said.
"I'm coming back tomorrow."
"What angers me most," he continued, "is that their favorite answers are, 'Wait a minute,' and 'I don't know.' Nobody has any idea of when the money is going to be available. One guy says seven days. Another guy says two weeks. I expect it to be a long, long time."  Getting On With Life
With the immediate trauma of the hurricane over, many people applying for aid seem worn down but working to reassemble the order of their lives, and many say they get sympathetic hearings at the assistance centers.
"We don't have a check, but at least we have a number now," said Frances Blackwelder, whose home and furniture store were destroyed.


Chronicling the Post-Baby Boom Generation
Sequestered in an office on the old Samuel Goldwyn lot in West Hollywood, Cameron Crowe gazes at 80 index cards bearing legends like "Laundry Room/Elevator -- Janet and Cliff kiss." A Rolling Stone reporter turned film maker, Mr.
Crowe is knee-deep in post-production on "Singles," which he wrote and directed.
The movie, which was shot in Seattle and opens on Sept. 18, tracks the romantic blood pressure of six post-collegiates.
"It's about the lengths people go to to make a connection with another person, the good advice and bad advice they get along the way," says the director.
To bring that seemingly straightforward premise to the screen, Mr.
Crowe concocted a narrative that darts around the couplings and uncouplings of the principals, played by Matt Dillon, Bridget Fonda, Campbell Scott, Kyra Sedgwick, Sheila Kelley and Jim True.
"It's kind of oddly structured," Mr.
Crowe admits.
So much so, in fact, the director has thumbtacked the index cards describing the entire movie to the wall of his office.


High Steppin' Strutters
The Grand Prix finale of the Hampton Classic horse show in Bridgehampton, L.I. last Sunday provided the more than 15,000 spectators with an additional show: an end-of-summer fashion promenade.
Wide-brimmed straw hats, many of them decorated with silk flowers, ribbons and lace, added a nostalgic topping to ankle-length chalk-white cotton and linen dresses.
Some women added vests.
Tied around waists: sweaters or faded blue-jeans jackets.


Imperatives Of Recycling Are Gaining On Detroit
Visionaries like Walter Chrysler and Louis Chevrolet couldn't have imagined the sprawling graveyards of rusting cars and trucks that bear testimony to the automotive culture they helped invent.
These days the graveyards are shrinking slightly as recyclers find ways to recover materials and automakers respond to concern over the impact of automobiles on the environment and landscape.


I'd Like to Thank . . .
At the first New York Emmy-watching dinner, on Aug. 30.


Technology; A Lab to Renew the Vineyards
A VORACIOUS insect, the phylloxera louse, which devastated vineyards across Europe and California in the 19th century, has returned to northern California.
And there is still no defense against the intruder except to pull up the infested vines and plant new ones.
An Oregon biotechnology company sees the problem as an opportunity to expand into the grape-growing industry.
The company, Agritope Inc., is promising to deliver large quantities of grapevine rootstock -- roots to which buds have been grafted -- that is resistant to the phylloxera.
And it expects to be able to insure that its vines are also free of viruses and bacteria.


Election Galas In Cities Abroad
Travelers overseas on Nov. 3 and 4 will be able to keep abreast of the Presidential election results at get-togethers around TV sets.
American communities in cities like London and Paris, for example, usually organize such events, although some are private.
Now Hong Kong has taken up the election theme.
Several American groups in the colony, including the League of Women Voters, the American Chamber of Commerce and the American University Club, are presenting a gala called Election Central '92 Hong Kong in the Marriott Hotel ballroom from 7 A.M. to 3 P.M. on Nov. 4, the day after the election.
In the United States at that time it will be the evening of Nov. 3, election day. (Hong Kong will be 13 hours ahead of Eastern standard time.)


Auction of Land Draws Few Bids in Hungary
The residents of this tiny rural village in central Hungary didn't give much thought to a day that farmers here should have been awaiting eagerly for 40 years: the first chance to regain the land that the Communist authorities snatched from them.
Over the next six months, Hungarian farmers who lost their land to collectivization in the 1940's and 50's, or their descendants, can try to regain some property through auctions.


Bush Takes Economics Out Beyond Voodoo; No to Consumption Tax
To the Editor:
"Aid for the Rich, Not the Economy" (editorial, Aug. 22) calls for a bolder plan of tax reform than President Bush seems willing to propose.
As an example, you suggest we scrap our income tax code -- you say it discourages saving and investment -- and adopt instead a national consumption tax, which favors them.
"That would be worth fighting for," you say, because it is "pro-growth and fair."


An Album to Lure New Collectors
THE average age of stamp collectors in the United States is 60.7, according to a survey by Linn's Stamp News, a weekly newspaper.
A club in England for collectors interested in Italian stamps and postal history reports three deaths in the small organization within a few months.
A conversation with Joseph Savarese, executive director of the American Stamp Dealers Association, focuses on the dearth of young collectors.
To introduce more people to stamp collecting, Lance D. and Dianne L. Limoges, stamp dealers in State College, Pa., have published a "Learner Album for Collecting Stamps" that is sophisticated and instructional.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Who's for Grilling?
ON Fire Island, hamburgers and hot dogs have become fighting words.
Residents of the village of Saltaire are divided into two camps: those who want to lift a ban on gas grills, and those who do not.


Putting on the Ritz: Beans?
Dried beans, those inexpensive, nutritious pantry-shelf staples have acquired new-found glamour.
Bean dishes, once lowly sustenance for people who had little else, are now being featured on pricey menus.
People who can afford truffles are ordering beans.
It's understandable.
When properly prepared, beans are deliciously toothsome, lush in texture and able to sop up flavor.
They are an excellent foil for fatty foods like sausages and offer an irresistible richness when spiked with garlic and drizzled with some peppery green extra-virgin olive oil.


German Mayor Takes Steps to Stem Attacks on Foreigners in Eastern City
The telephone rang at 4:30 Monday afternoon in Mayor Fritz Handrow's office, and the news was startling.
That very afternoon, a Government immigration official told him, 43 foreigners seeking political asylum in Germany would be arriving in Kolkwitz.
An hour later, they arrived aboard a government bus, a group from Romania, Bulgaria, Angola and Mozambique.
They needed beds not just for Monday night, but perhaps for months or even years, while German officials reviewed each of their cases.


Player Is Dropped
JAMAL FAULKNER was dropped from the Arizona State basketball team yesterday after his arrest for allegedly slapping his former girlfriend who last week testified on his behalf in court.


Cynthia Henry, John Kantor
Mr. and Mrs.
Louis F. Henry 2d of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Louise Henry, to John Bennett Kantor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertram M. Kantor of Scarsdale.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Henry, 25 years old, is the assistant china buyer at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Providence College.
Her father is a retired New York City police lieutenant.
Her mother, Barbara A. Henry, is the owner of Balloons and Tunes, party consultants in Scarsdale.


Networking; Compaq Taps on a Stronghold's Door
HEWLETT-PACKARD owns the laser printer market and thus the network printer market, but it has more company these days.
Last week, Compaq Computer joined the battle to capture a share of HP's laser printer market with two new network printers.
Known for its high-quality personal computers and network servers, Compaq has started a new peripheral division whose first two products are the Pagemarq 20 and the Pagemarq 15 network laser printers.
It's interest in the market is not hard to fathom.
By 1996, the entire network laser market will exceed $700 million.


School Year Beginning With Relief and Concern
LONG ISLAND school officials are greeting the new academic year with a mixture of relief and concern.
In districts that have been able to maintain programs and services, following a school year of drastic cuts, the prevailing response among administrators has been relief.


Putting on the Ritz: Beans?
Dried beans, those inexpensive, nutritious pantry-shelf staples have acquired new-found glamour.
Bean dishes, once lowly sustenance for people who had little else, are now being featured on pricey menus.
People who can afford truffles are ordering beans.
It's understandable.
When properly prepared, beans are deliciously toothsome, lush in texture and able to sop up flavor.
They are an excellent foil for fatty foods like sausages and offer an irresistible richness when spiked with garlic and drizzled with some peppery green extra-virgin olive oil.


Ms. Rhinelander, Edward Widmer
Mary Frederica Rhinelander, a daughter of Frederic W. T. Rhinelander of Glenelg, Md., and Nancy Crocker Rhinelander of Columbia, Md., was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Edward Ladd Widmer, a son of Eric G. Widmer of Providence, R.I., and Ellen B. Widmer of Middletown, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert W. Tobin performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Ms.
Rhinelander, who is keeping her name, is a print maker and figurative artist in Cambridge.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in print making from the School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
Her father, who is retired, was the headmaster of St.
John's Episcopal School in Olney, Md.
Her mother is an acupuncturist in Columbia.


Anna B. Grimes, Thomas E. Noser
Anna Bauer Grimes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Andrew Grimes of Nashville, was married there yesterday to Thomas Edward Noser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Noser Jr. of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Anne B. Stevenson performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Grimes, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, is an account executive with Atkinson Public Relations in Nashville.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the former president of Middlesex General Hospital, now Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, in New Brunswick, N.J.


Police Unions Still Loyal to Biaggi
It was hard to get into or out of City Hall most mornings last week, so crowded were the building's graceful steps with clusters of politicians endorsing one another in next week's primary elections.
There are often intricate subplots in such endorsements -- the settling of old scores or the honoring of ancient loyalties -- but of the dozens of political stamps of approval, none was more striking than the endorsement of former Representative Mario Biaggi by the unions representing New York City police officers.


Voyage Explores Orinoco River
A voyage that explores the rain forest of the Orinoco River in Venezuela and visits Venezuelan islands as well as Trinidad is offered on the 80-passenger Polaris.
The 11-day itinerary arranged by Special Expeditions, leaving Miami on Nov. 15, begins with an overnight stay at a lodge in Canaima National Park in the Venezuelan rain forest and a flight close to Angel Falls, the world's highest waterfall.
From Canaima Camp the group flies to Ciudad Bolivar to board the Polaris.
In addition to Trinidad, the vessel's route includes Venezuela's Roques Archipelago, Bonaire and Curacao.
The passengers will navigate channels along the Orinoco and in the Roques on motorized landing craft.
Among sites to be visited are the Asa Wright Center, Trinidad, which has many species of orchids and birds, and Washington-Slaagbai National Park, Bonaire, with its desert vegetation and flock of flamingos.


POSTINGS: Panel Discussion at N.Y.U.; On the Waterfront -- the Issues
From the Hudson River waterfront in Manhattan to the Erie Basin in Brooklyn, stretches of New York City's waterfront have figured prominently, and controversially, in recent redevelopment plans.


Corrections
The Thing column in Styles of the Times last week about bandanas referred incorrectly to Roger Forsythe, the late design director for the men's wear division at Perry Ellis.
Mr.
Forsythe died last October.


Pact for Hawerchuk Buffalo Sabres center DALE HAWERCHUK signed a multiyear contract worth $1.2 million a season. The length of the contract was not released. The agreement makes the 29-year-old Hawerchuk the second-highest paid Sabre behind PAT LAFONTAINE, who earns $1.5 million a year plus bonuses that can push his salary to $1.8 million. Hawerchuk led Buffalo in scoring last season with 23 goals and 75 assists for 98 points.  (AP)


Miss Adaire, Mr. Lindenmayer
Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce B. Adaire of St.
Louis have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Robin Adaire, to William John Lindenmayer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. Lindenmayer of Middleville, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Adaire, 30 years old, is a manager of brand marketing at the Nutrasweet Company in Deerfield, Ill.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a vice president of Anheuser-Busch International Inc. in St.
Louis.


Setting Up a New Wall Switch
A convenient way to install a wall switch, and thus be able to operate a floor or table lamp from a distance, is by wiring it to an existing wall outlet so that the switch controls the outlet's upper socket, not the lower one.
The technique is called split-wiring.
Needed are a single-pole electrical switch, a metal wall box and cover plate to contain it and 14-gauge, two-conductor plastic-sheathed electrical cable to link the switch and outlet.


POSTINGS: For Aging Public Spaces; Weekend Design Competitions
Since it was formed in 1990, Designing New York, an organization of architects and designers, has been exploring ways the design community can assist in the effort to revitalize the city's aging public spaces.
To that end, the group has planned a series of weekend design competitions, in which participants will do design "make-overs" on some of the city's most rundown public facilities.


Wendy Newman, William Pratt Jr.
Wendy Valerie Newman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald B. Newman Jr. of Buffalo, was married there yesterday to William Joseph Pratt Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pratt of Rydal, Pa.
The Rev.
Peter W. Bridgford performed the ceremony at St.
John's Grace Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Pratt, 27 years old, is an advertising account manager at McCall's magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father is the president and an owner of the Noco Energy Corporation, an oil company in Tonawanda, N.Y.


The Card Answer Is to Market Debits . . .
To the Editor:
In "Banks Play It Too Safe on Visa Cards" (Forum, Aug. 23), Barry Nalebuff neglects an important alternative: aggressive marketing of debit cards.
A debit card provides access to a bank account from which purchase amounts are directly subtracted.
Eliminating paperwork means costs are greatly reduced and with debit cards there are no payment defaults, which have grown to more than 5 percent of balances for credit cards.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MR. CAPONE By Robert J. Schoenberg. Morrow, $23.


Abolish the Disaster Agency
The Federal Emergency Management Agency's lackluster response to Hurricane Andrew makes it painfully clear that the agency should be abolished.
In theory, the management agency is responsible for coordinating the Government's response to domestic emergencies.
In reality, it has little practical authority to carry out Presidential priorities -- particularly when it tries to coordinate with much larger entities, like the Pentagon or the Department of Transportation.
Moreover, the agency has become a dumping ground for mediocre political appointees with little background or interest in disaster relief.
In fact, its ratio of political appointees to career professionals is the highest in the Government.


Shape Up!
Decades after you graduate, Fall continues to signal a beginning, a renewed vigor, another go at lifelong projects.
Reading, writing and arithmetic have long since been commandeered by the ongoing demands of adult life: glancing at junk mail, balancing the checkbook and calculating the number of pounds between you and your true, happy, sylphlike self.
Nevertheless, a back-to-school spirit lingers.
You vow to join a health club.
To eat healthfully.
The first gusts of northerly wind leave you hopelessly bent on self-improvement.
Spas and commercial diet programs consistently draw post-summer crowds as large as those seen after New Year's or in the spring, when the desire for a presentable beach physique becomes overwhelming.
But September engenders a cooler, more philosophical, better-tempered resolve.
You are willing to forgo drastic measures in favor of subtle changes in your eating habits.
Maybe it's the reassurance of baggy corduroys, floppy sweaters and wool jackets.
Or perhaps the steady September sun on the sides of yellow school buses rekindles the kind of innocent belief that makes fundamental change seem possible.


ABRAMS ON THE ATTACK
THE TELEVISION SCRIPT
Female Narrator: Who can we count on...to fight for us?
While Bob Abrams was forcing giant corporations to clean up their toxic dumps, Geraldine Ferraro was in Congress voting to weaken environmental laws.
Now, while Abrams fights for sweeping changes in our health insurance system, Ferraro goes along with the Band-Aid approach of Congressional insiders.
While Abrams stood up to the anti-abortion extremists, Ferraro was silent.
The record speaks for itself...Bob Abrams...a fighter for New York.
PRODUCER Struble, Totten of Washington.
ON THE SCREEN Staged footage of Mr.
Abrams at a toxic site on Staten Island, at his conference table and walking beside staff members.
Footage interspersed with black-and-white photographs of Ms.
Ferraro and a cover of the Congressional Record, with smokestacks spewing smoke in the background, and black-and-white footage of some "Washington insiders" walking down the Capitol steps.
News clippings floating across the screen with headlines like "Abrams Sues Four Alleged River Polluters" ACCURACY As Attorney General, Mr.
Abrams has forced companies to clean up toxic-waste sites in New York State.
While in Congress, Ms.
Ferarro voted for several bills that allowed for some environmental restrictions to be relaxed to address the energy crisis, her office says.
She also voted for the law that created the Superfund and co-sponsored recycling legislation as early as 1981.
On health care, Mr.
Abrams supports a Federally-financed system backed by a payroll tax on employers, while Ms.
Ferraro favors a plan -- similar to that endorsed by Senate leaders -- that would require employers who do not offer health coverage to pay into a Government fund set up for uninsured people.
Earlier this year, Mr.
Abrams sought and won injunctions against Operation Rescue, which had vowed to block access to abortion clinics in Buffalo.
Ms.
Ferraro, who supports abortion rights, did not visit Buffalo because, she said, she did not want to be a lightning rod for anti-abortion forces.
SCORECARD In contrast to Mr.
Abrams's first English-language advertisement, a feel-good account of his record, this ad seeks to frame stark differences between him and Ms.
Ferraro.He is clearly trying to set himself up as more liberal than Ms.
Ferraro.
Seeking to establish himself as a champion of womens' causes, Mr.
Abrams has chosen a calm-voiced woman as narrator.
He uses action, color footage to show his accomplishments and still, black-and-white pictures to portray Ms.
Ferraro as a shill for the Washington establishment.
While Mr.
Abrams is shown as friendly and competent, the images of Ms.
Ferraro are grim and almost sinister.


Now Showing on Cable: Really Terrible Films
"Attack of the Killer Shrews," "Teen-Age Caveman," "Viking Women and the Sea Serpent," "Nude on the Moon." So many bad movies, so little time.
In olden days, America huddled in darkened theaters or parked in fish-finned sedans to watch that much-maligned Hollywood byproduct, the B-movie.
Now we can enjoy terrible movies in the comfort of our own homes, by remote control, in the living room drive-ins of cable television.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ARMED AND DANGEROUS By Jim Kelly with Vic Carucci. Doubleday, $20.


Museum Notes Diamond Landscape
An attribution error in a May 24 review by Phyllis Brafff regarding a work in our 33d Juried Exhibition has been brought to our attention.
A work by Nancy Diamond has been incorrectly identified as by Constance Diamond.
Nancy Diamond's landscape is on the wall of landscapes cited.
ANDREA GURVITZ Parrish Museum Southampton


INSIDE
Hard Questions Over Lead
Tests of lead levels around three Brooklyn bridges yielded results that raise hard questions about how to respond to what scientists call a serious potential health risk.
Page 49.
Loosening Bonds in China
A fresh boldness is seeping through the cracks in China, diluting the fear that cements the Government and leaving the country more open and perhaps more vulnerable.
Page 3.
Hatred Stalks a Haven
When the call for asylum comes to a German town, the mandate to care for refugees often extends to protecting them from neo-Nazis.
Page 16.
Far Apart in Big Sky Country
Montana's sole Congressional district is the largest ever created, even big enough for two candidates who couldn't be more different.
Page 26.
World Record in Decathlon
Dan O'Brien, who failed to qualify for the U.S.
Olympic team in June, broke Daley Thompson's eight-year-old mark.
SportsSunday, section 8.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 60 Weather, Page 61 Radio, Updated TV, Page 59


Westport Stages 'Park Your Car'
THE play "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard" is a throwback to a time when summer stock was thriving and audiences accepted slight, synthetic works just for the pleasure of a good acting company.
Israel Horovitz's two-character exercise about a cranky, dying high school teacher and a young housekeeper, who happens to be his former student, is fundamentally uninteresting and shamelessly contrived, but good actors can validate it as a display piece.
At the Westport Country Playhouse, one of the tenacious survivors of an eroded professional summer theater circuit, E. G. Marshall (as Jacob Brackish) and Maryann Plunkett (as Kathleen Hogan) are so fine that, for the moment, they muster the power -- call it sorcery -- to keep the lid on Mr.
Horovitz's manipulations.


Dana Dowell, R. D. Windatt 2d
Dana Dowell, the daughter of Jeanne Dowell of Orinda, Calif., and Dudley Dowell Jr. of Cumming, Iowa, was married yesterday to Richard Donaldson Windatt 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Windatt of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas Trutner officiated at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Orinda.
Mrs.
Windatt, 27 years old, is an actress.
Her father is an insurance broker in Cumming.
Her mother is a fitness instructor in Orinda.
Her stepfather, Ralph P. Boghosian of Orinda, is the president of Chroma Industries, an importer of Oriental and Persian carpets in San Francisco.


Israeli Memorial Honors Lost Jews
A major new memorial, commemorating European Jewish communities that were eradicated during the Holocaust, is scheduled to open on Oct. 3 in Jerusalem.
The memorial, the Valley of the Destroyed Communities, has been under construction since 1983, and will be operated as an addition to Yad Vashem, Israel's central depository of Holocaust documents and exhibits.
The opening dedication will include an address by the Israeli President, Chaim Herzog, on Oct. 3, and other ceremonies on Oct. 4 and 5.


Business Diary: August 30 - September 4
INTERNATIONAL Failing Pravda Gets a Partner  When Pravda was founded in Moscow by Vladimir Lenin in 1912 as the official organ of the Soviet Communist Party, its purpose was to be the party's "agitator and organizer." But with the Soviet Union dissolved and the Communist Party having fallen on hard times, Pravda has seen its circulation shrink from 10 million in 1987, to less than 1.4 million.
And more than once it has found itself on the wrong side of history: when it supported last year's failed coup and when it opposed many of Russian President Boris Yeltsin's economic reforms.
Pravda -- it means truth -- also saw its revenues decline.
Last March it was forced to shut down for three weeks while it arranged emergency bank loans.
Last week, Pravda's editor-in-chief, Gennady Seleznyov, announced he had found a savior for the paper -- and he's certainly no Lenin.
For an undisclosed amount, Greek businessman Yannis Yannikos will buy a 55 percent interest in Pravda.
The Rights to Fly  Countries guard their airlines jealously against too much competition.
But last week, the United States and the Netherlands agreed on broad new aviation pact that could change all that.
The agreement will allow airlines in each country the rights to fly anywhere in the other country.
"This is a very significant event in international aviation," said Secretary of Transporation Andrew E. Card Jr.
"Not only does it cement an extremely close relationship, but it will provide a mood for market-oriented aviation agreements with other countries." The immediate impact of the agreement is to allow KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, which owns 49 percent of Northwest Airlines, and Northwest to operate as a single airline, with antitrust immunity.
Previous treaties had prohibited the two airlines from coordinating their pricing, routes and flight schedules.
The Department of Transportaton is though to be putting pressure on Britain to negotiate a similar aviation treaty.
Cost-Cutting, Japanese Style Dai Ichi Kangyo, the world's largest bank, is cutting costs Japanese style.
Rather than laying off low-level clerks, it is asking its 41 top executives to take 5 percent pay cuts and has asked them to trim 20 percent off their expense accounts.
Those executives must certainly do a lot of entertaining.
According to Yoshihide Akazawa, a spokesman for the company, the cuts -- along with a few others -- are expected to save an estimated $40 million a year.
ECONOMY Politician Bush Has a Little Something for Taiwan and U.S.
Farmers President Bush has been loathe to anger China.
He opposed sanctions after the 1989 massacre in Tiananmen Square and fought hard for China to keep its most-favored-nation trade status.
But this is an election year and last week -- at a General Dynamics Corporation plant in Fort Worth -- Mr.
Bush said he had approved the sale of 150 of the company's F-16 fighters to Taiwan, China's long-time foe.
The sale could be worth $6 billion over 10 years to American companies in Texas, California and Connecticut.
The same day, in South Dakota, Mr.
Bush -- a staunch foe of agricultural subsidies in this year's trade negotiations with Europe -- said he had approved $1 billion to subsidize American wheat sales abroad and another $755 million to aid farmers whose crops were damaged by Hurricane Andrew.
"This is pure pork-barrel politics," said Dee Dee Myers, a spokeswoman for Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic challenger.
Outlook: Stagnant to Grim Behind every President there are economists.
But George Bush's economic mavens must be feeling a little uneasy.
Last week's report from the Commerce Department on the Index of Leading Economic Indicators showed the pace of growth at just 0.1 percent in July after a 0.3 percent decline the month before.
The index, which forecasts economic activity six to nine months hence, suggests a slower economy in first quarter of next year.
"The economy is essentially dead," said Lawrence Chimerine, of DRI-McGraw Hill Inc.
More Poverty for All Sluggish economic growth?
How about plain poverty?
The Census Bureau said last week that the number of Americans living in poverty increased by 2.1 million last year to a total of 35.7 million or 14.2 percent of the population.
It was the second consecutive annual increase in the poverty rate.
What's more, there are now more people living in poverty in America than at any time since 1964.
The purchasing power of the average household also shrank last year by $1,100, the bureau said.
Presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater blamed the increase in the poverty rate on Congress's inability to pass the Administration's economic proposals.
Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Democratic challenger, blamed it on the Administration saying it has the "worst economic record in 50 years." Handling Hurricane Andrew Tallying up the damage from a disaster as vast as Hurricane Andrew is no mean feat.
But last week estimates began to trickle in.
The American Insurance Services Group, a nonprofit research organization, figures Andrew will cost insurance companies about $7.3 billion.
But those estimates do not include uninsured losses, losses in Louisiana, damage to the infrastructure and damage to Government-owned installations.
Though Andrew is the costliest natural disaster ever, analysts believe the insurance industry -- with $160 billion in capital -- will be able to take the hit.
"The one thing this industry is very effective at is spreading risk," said G. Alan Zimermann, an analyst with Prudential Securities.
No Glee in Purchasing If the nation's purchasing managers are the economy's weathervane, they are saying there's hardly a breeze.
Last week, the National Association of Purchasing Management said its Purchasing Mangers Index fell to 53.7 from 54.2.
A reading above 50 indicates economy is growing, below 50 indicates it is contracting.
Fed Acts on Jobless Numbers Though unemployment fell to 7.6 percent in August, from 7.7 percent in July, it was accompanied by an alarming loss of 83,000 jobs from the nation's nonfarm payrolls and -- if government employment is excluded from the picture -- an even gloomier loss of 167,000 jobs from the nation's private payrolls.
The unemployment numbers show "a dramatic deterioration in the job market," said Norman Robertson, chief economist at the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
Most of the job losses were concentrated in the transportation, instruments and electronics sectors of the economy.
"This news will not be well received in the White House," Mr.
Robertson said.
In response to the figures, the Federal Reserve lowered its Federal funds rate to 3.0 percent from 3.25 percent, the lowest level since 1963.
The move is designed to make it easier for banks to borrow money.
COMPANIES Bad Season for Citicorp It hasn't been the best of summers for Citicorp.
First the banking examiners identified problems that forced it to revise downward its second-quarter earnings by $28 million, to $143 million.
Then a document leaked out from the Comptroller of the Currency's office that criticized the nation's No. 1 bank for the shoddy way it has run its mortgage subsidiary.
The report said Citicorp overcharged customers and exposed the bank to undue risks.
It did such a poor job at screening out unqualified mortgage applicants that it was unable to sell its mortgages to other institutions.
The report also said Citicorp executives "have neglected their responsibilities to correct identified problems," some of which were first pinpointed in 1988.
Citicorp said it could not legally comment on the report but that not everything in it was necessarily true.
General Mills's Shredded Wheat Last week, General Mills, the nation's No. 2 cereal maker after Kellogg, said it planned to add RJR Nabisco's ready-to-eat cereal business to its Wheaties-led lineup.
For $450 million, (no boxtops please) General Mills will get mostly shredded wheat -- in the form of Shreddies, Spoon-Sized Shredded Wheat, Frosted Shredded Wheat and the original, 100-year-old Shredded Wheat.
The proceeds from the sale will help RJR pay off the $13.6 billion debt remaining from the $25 billion it borrowed in 1988 to finance a leveraged buyout.
RJR's market share in cereals has slipped to 3 percent from 5 percent.
"Nabisco had been on the slide for a long period of time," said William Leach, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Because of the increasing concentration in the food business, the deal is expected to be scrutinized by the Government for antitrust violations.
Whither Letterman?
It's no secret that late-night TV host David Letterman wanted Johnny Carson's old job.
He's said so himself.
But NBC replaced Mr.
Carson with Jay Leno.
If last week's reports in Advertising Age are correct, however, Mr.
Letterman is determined to leave the network.
Though his contract does not allow him to negotiate with anyone until after he has completed talks with NBC, other suitors -- including syndication companies -- have made "presentations," to Mr.
Letterman's agents at the Creative Artists Agency in Los Angeles.
A syndicated show could be far more lucrative -- but riskier -- than staying with a network.
NBC said in a statement that Mr.
Letterman has been "a valuable member of the NBC family for the past 10 years," and that it wants to keep him right where he is.
Mr.
Letterman has remained silent.
Labor Strife at G.M.
The strike at General Motors Corporation's Lordstown complex has spread from a single metal shop to include 30,000 workers, forcing production at its Saturn division to be halted.
But this strike is not over wages.
Members of the United Automobiles Workers union walked out to protest the replacement of some of G.M.'s tool and die makers with a plan to buy from the outside.
To become more competitive, G.M. wants to do more outsourcing; it currently produces 70 percent of all the parts it uses, versus about 40 percent at Toyota.
Last week union and management teams met for talks.
"G.M. is in a tough economic position," said Harry Katz, professor of labor relations at Cornell University.
Both sides are "looking for bargaining leverage.  Now It's Canon-I.B.M.  Is there any high-tech company anywhere that hasn't entered an alliance with I.B.M.? Last week the International Business Machines Corporation joined with Canon Inc. to develop a new notebook computer.


Old-Time Fiddling?


Brazilian President Courts His Bureaucracy
In one sunlit office of the marble and glass Presidential Palace here, an aide talked confidently today of President Fernando Collor de Mello's battle against impeachment and plans for a visit this month to the United States.
Two flights up, one corridor over, another presidential aide brusquely cut off a visitor who cautiously mentioned Brazil's Vice President.


Republicans and AIDS
To the Editor:
While it is regrettable that Mary Fisher -- or anyone -- must suffer because of AIDS, I do not understand why she merits such special attention as a supposed profile in courage ("Aids Test," Aug. 16).
It is doubtful, as her illness progresses, that Ms.
Fisher will have to worry about obtaining adequate medical care or keeping a roof over her head or feeding her children.


Dividing Sufferers
To the Editor:
In "AIDS Test" (Aug. 16), Mary Fisher "bristles" at the question of how her former husband became infected with H.I.V.
Citing the division of victims into bad and innocent, she considers this question "outrageous." Yet in the same paragraph she is said to have contracted H.I.V. from this man.


Uma Muthu and John Vlahoplus
Uma Muthu, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Subba P. Muthu of Regina, Saskatchewan, was married yesterday in New York to John Christopher Vlahoplus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Vlahoplus of Columbia, S.C.
The Rev.
Melvin Arthur Hawthorne, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society.
Mrs.
Vlahoplus, 27 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
She graduated from the University of Regina, where her father is a professor of business administration.
She and her husband received law degrees from Harvard University, she cum laude and he magna cum laude.


Unwrapping the del Sol, Honda's Sporty New Civic
Forget for a moment that Honda's new del Sol is an innovative open-air competitor to the Mazda Miata and the Mercury Capri, among others.
What is really neat and worth remarking is that
thing
right there in the middle of the dashboard, a panel that slides up and hides the radio from would-be thieves.
City dwellers are going to love it.
And never mind that as soon as those urbanites throw away their "No-Radio-in-Car" signs, the audio rustlers are going to figure it all out.
By that time, the del Sol's owners are going to love the car for a lot of other reasons.


The 'Oklahoma!' Legend Thrives at Candlewood
FORESEEING an "Oklahoma!" blitz next year the 50th anniversary of the musical that many say changed musicals -- the Candlewood Playhouse is celebrating seven months ahead of time.
It seems that the mere scheduling of the phenomenal first collaboration between Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, each having already staked a claim to musical theater immortality, virtually guarantees packed houses.
No sooner did the Candlewood production open than the engagement was extended a week.
The legend thrives.


One-on-One Hits the Football Field and Is Called 'Matching Up'
Al Davis has maintained a vision for the Raiders that emulated the great Yankee and Brooklyn Dodger baseball teams that he admired as a youth.
His philosophy is built around gathering big, intimidating people, those who not only strike fear in opponents but also "hit the home run" and wear the Raiders uniform with so much brash pride that it, too, comes to espouse a mystique of its own.
Those characteristics, coupled with the Raiders' concept of matchup football, became the avenues that helped Davis reach the Hall of Fame this summer, and together they form the blueprint the Raiders have used to remain among the National Football League's elite in both winning and popularity.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS, by Elizabeth Spencer. (Penguin, $10.) This novel takes place during the Vietnam War, but its conflicts are personal as well as political.
Mary, a former dance student, is torn between the cold rationalism of her scientist mother and the romantic idealism of her husband, an activist and fugitive.
Last year our reviewer, Edward Hower, found the book more "about relationships than about historical events, and this is one of its greatest strengths."
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/ Simon &amp; Schuster, $12.) There is street crime and there is Wall Street crime, and as different as the latter is from the former, James B. Stewart shows that it has no less power to threaten society.
This book, which examines the insider-trading scandals of the 1980's, reveals how brokerage-house bad guys manipulated not only money but fundamental free-market principles in their quest -- staggering in its scope -- for ever-increasing wealth.
" 'Den of Thieves' should, must be read by every American who gives a damn about this country," Michael M. Thomas said in The Book Review last year, calling it "as good a book on Wall Street as I have ever read."


Rutgers Turns Scarlet Against Boston College
Put the bowl bids on hold. Save the Heisman nominations.
Boston College destroyed any excessive expectations about Rutgers football today as the Big East Conference's season began.
The Eagles, getting three touchdown passes from Glenn Foley, were thorough and convincing in defeating the Scarlet Knights, 37-20, in a game previewed as one between teams behind only Miami and Syracuse in the Big East.


Baseball As It Ought to Be
To the Sports Editor:
This summer I happened to attend a game of the Class A Pittsfield Mets in Massachusetts with my son.
We sat in fourth-row box seats for $5.75 apiece.
Two hot dogs, two sodas and a large package of bubble gum cost a bit over $6.
Between innings kids could compete for prizes and the Mets' mascot threw candy into the stands.
Players in the batter's box smiled at fans and made eye contact when their names were called.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Tries a Personal Touch In Weekend Campaign Blitz
President Bush embarked today on a six-state Labor Day weekend blitz of ethnic festivals, folksy fairs and private homes in an effort to lend a more personal touch to his own re-election bid and tarnish the warm and caring image that Gov.
Bill Clinton has tried to create.
In Asheville, N.C., he ate lunch at the home of Roy Harris, a Democrat who had challenged the President on live television to come down and tell his children exactly what the Bush Administration had done for them.
Then he attended an apple harvest celebration here to denounce Mr.
Clinton's policies across the board.


Hamptons Chef Finds a Rustic Outpost
MORRIS WEINTRAUB is clicking at his new Cafe Max in East Hampton.
Mr.
Weintraub, who was chef and owner of the restaurant at the Maidstone Arms for many years, has moved a mile west and found his niche at this cozy cafe.
The switch from staid dining rooms and traditional cuisine to casual quarters with food to match is proving popular.
Mr.
Weintraub's followers are finding both well-loved old favorites and contemporary fare.


A House by the Fjords
MY heart sank into the fjord at my first sight of the house.
We had lured people from all over the globe to this dump.
And they were about to arrive.
Every traveler should write down in advance what she expects from a place she's never visited.
I hadn't, of course.
But my fantasy of a Norwegian fjordside cottage had been decidedly romantic.
Fjordhytters, touted to us by a friend who'd been renting them for years, hadn't been billed as luxury accommodations, mind you.
The word was variously translated in the agency brochure as "chalets de vacances," "ferienhauser" or "holiday homes." This is the way that most of middle-class Europe vacations.
These rented houses offer strictly family-style living, but when we chose Norway, I had pictured gleaming Scandinavian interiors, simply furnished in pale, natural wood, with bright, hand-woven fabrics here and there and a cupboardful of crockery in primary colors.
Huge feathery puffs on the beds, thick turkish towels.


Poland Sets Rough Path In Market Restructuring
Communism left its mark on Eastern Europe, from the polluted landscape to the acres of dilapidated concrete apartment blocks.
But perhaps the most politically significant legacy was a human one: the millions of workers who run the heavy industries and were used to being taken care of, after a fashion, by their government.
It is a proletariat fired by an incendiary mixture of anger about the past and fears about the future.


Jack Ossofsky, 66; Led Council on Aging
Jack Ossofsky, whose leadership of an organization for older Americans let him play a role in shaping Government policy on the aging, died on Friday at his home in East Boothbay, Me., where he lived in retirement.
He was 66 years old.
His family said he died of a brain tumor.


Fischer and Spassky Agree to Draw in Third Match Game
Boris Spassky tried a new idea yesterday against Bobby Fischer's favorite opening in Game 3 of their exhibition match in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
But even though he succeeded in gaining the initiative, he failed to produce anything like a full-scale attack.
After he had exchanged the high-powered queens to go into a favorable endgame, he did not put teeth into his maneuvers.
And not long afterward, he acquiesced in a draw.
That was the kind of situation he must try harder to exploit, if he is to make up for his loss in Game 1 and get back on even terms in this match.
He is not likely to get more out of play with the black pieces than he did yesterday and cannot afford to waste his chances.


Next Year On Minds Of Many '92 Mets
Expansion draft protected list.
Free agency.
Rebuilding program.
Playing for jobs.
Lots of off-season decisions to make.
Busy winter.
Assume nothing.
The phrases and terms swirl around the Mets, spoken soberly by management officials, whispered by players.
The uncertainty in the clubhouse is palpable.
Projections for the club's 1993 makeup are elusive.


Kimberly Gorman, Stephen Muto
Robert H. Gorman of Princeton, N.J., and Judith A. Gorman of Pennington, N.J., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Kimberly Ann Gorman, and Stephen James Muto, the son of Salvatore and Lucille Muto of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.


The Millions of New Immigrants Yearning to Call Home
WHEN Radha Krishnan arrived in New York from his native India in June 1983, fresh out of medical school, he went straight to his parents' house in White Plains, N.Y., and telephoned family and friends back home.
Calling Dehli is almost as easy as dialing Dallas -- one reason why Dr.
Krishnan, now a physician at the Mercer Medical Center in Trenton, N.J., still spends about $60 a month on calls to India.
Many immigrants spend much more on an expense that is an accepted fact of immigrant life -- and one not lost on the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company, MCI Communications Corporation and the Sprint Corporation.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
Senator Tim Wirth's "Diary of a Dropout" (Aug. 9) was both inspiring and disheartening.
I believe that if there were more politicians with his scruples, there would be many more of us who would vote.
Unfortunately, we are as disillusioned as he is.
ALICE D. SCHELLER
Paterson, N.J.


Jane E. Hewett, John P. Cooney Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Hewett of Westport, Conn., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Jane Elizabeth Hewett, and John Patrick Cooney Jr., the son of Katherine Cooney of Chicago and the late John P. Cooney.


Healthier. Wealthier. Weiser.
TAKING in the spectacular view from Selma Weiser's 16th-floor wraparound terrace on Riverside Drive on a sparkling, fume-free afternoon, it's possible to imagine that you are glimpsing the coast and hills of Italy.
Well, O.K., if not Italy, certainly the five Manhattan clothing shops presided over by Mrs.
Weiser, their chief executive.
Make that an even half-dozen: Charivari No. 6, the first with an East Side address, is scheduled to open next week at 78th Street and Madison Avenue.


Bush Takes Economics Out Beyond Voodoo
To the Editor:
One of the notable features of the Reagan Administration was its reliance on voodoo economics, the dubious benefits of which are presumably still with us.
President Reagan's program was coherent but wrong.
President Bush, with the two major tax proposals in his acceptance speech, has given up on coherence as well.


HITTING THE WALL
Sebastian Junger's About Men column "Hitting the Wall" (Aug. 16) kept me laughing from beginning to end.
I had always wondered where a strangely shaped indentation in our foyer wall came from -- fortunately, my dad was careful not to hit a stud.
He enjoyed Junger's story even more than I did.
Incidentally, I'm going to frame it and hang it on the wall -- at fist level.
AMY LYNNE JOHNSON
Madison, Conn.


Beth Anne Fouhy, Joseph H. Marty
Beth Anne Fouhy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Fouhy of Washington, was married there yesterday to Joseph Henry Marty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugo A. Marty of Hugo, Minn.
The Rev.
Michael Kelley, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Naval Security Station chapel.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Belmar
BELMAR, a Monmouth County shore resort between Avon-by-the-Sea and South Belmar, is bounded on two sides by water: the Atlantic Ocean on the east and the Shark River on the north.
Its population, nearly 6,000 year-round, swells to almost 50,000 in the summer.
"Most of the residents here have young kids or are looking to start a family," Mayor Kenneth E. Pringle said.
"And they like the fact that Belmar is a small town with a small-town feel for nine months out of the year. And for three months it's really a fun place to be. It's the quintessential shore town."


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
Wirth's decision to forgo another term in the United States Senate provides further proof that this country gets the Government it deserves.
An electorate that prefers style over substance, image over issues and somnambulism to scrutiny hardly deserves the 18 years served by the Senator.
RON KIM
Chicago


Jocelyn Tucker Anita Strawbridge And Benoit Pellet
Anita Berwind Strawbridge, a daughter of Mrs.
Marcus W. Smith of Locust Valley, L.I., and Robert E. Strawbridge 3d of Jackson, Wyo., was married yesterday in Prouts Neck, Me., to Benoit Jean Francois Xavier Pellet, a son of Mrs.
Jacques Pellet of Cenac, France, and the late Mr.
Pellet.
The Very Rev.
Stephen W. Foote, an Episcopal minister, officiated at St.
James Church.
The Rev.
Michael S. Hilbert of the Vatican assisted.


Nancy Cooperman and Kenneth Hyatt
Nancy Dale Cooperman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Cooperman of Great Neck, L.I., was married on Thursday in Brooklyn to Kenneth Joseph Ehrli Hyatt, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry Hyatt of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Hyatt, 26 years old, is a postgraduate fellow in social work at Boston Children's Hospital.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Cooperman Levitt &amp; Winikoff.
Her mother, Bonnie Cooperman, is the director of counseling at the All Women's Medical Pavilion in Forest Hills, Queens.


When Nature Blooms, or Sings, or Moos
In the waning days of summer, a visit to "Images From Nature in the Decorative Arts" at the New Jersey State Museum can prolong memories of flowers, songbirds, seashells and butterflies.
Roses, symbols of perfection, seem to bloom throughout the show.
A 1906 Thomas Edison phonograph is ornamented with hand-painted pink and ivory roses inside its funnel-shaped speaker.
A 19th-century water pitcher and washbowl, encircled with sprays of roses, were created by the Glasgow Pottery of Trenton.
Nearby, on an 1884 fireplace tile from the Trent Tile Company of Trenton, a pensive cupid holds a long-stemmed rose.


Shirts On, Shirts Off
Some women have been baring their breasts at a series of public rallies aimed at persuading Canadian society to accept new legal standards on indecency.
The demonstrations, which have taken place on Parliament Hill in Ottawa among other places, have resulted in dozens of arrests on indecency charges.
The appearance in court of the women who were arrested kicked off additional protests.


From Soviet Warheads to U.S. Reactor Fuel
Last week a new kind of unthinkable came to pass, marking a milestone in the transformation of nuclear swords into plowshares.
The Bush Administration announced it had quietly cut a deal with Russia to buy much of its highly enriched uranium -- the very stuff that for decades was the explosive core of Soviet warheads, prompting Americans to build fallout shelters and a costly military-industrial complex.
The agreement marks the first time in the atomic age that large amounts of military uranium are to be diluted into fuel for civilian power plants.
The deal, particulars of which must be ironed out and approved by the two Governments, calls for the United States to buy at least 500 metric tons of highly enriched uranium over 20 years.
That amount of material is valued at several billion dollars.
The Administration's aim is to bolster the shaky Russian economy, to reduce the risks of nuclear accidents and theft and, less explicitly, to expedite the disarmament of a former foe.


We Have a Style of Child Custody Justice to Fit Every Purse
To the Editor:
The Woody Allen-Mia Farrow matter shows there are apparently three tiers of justice in New York State's courts for child custody disputes.
On one tier reside the wealthy and celebrities, who are given the rare luxury of receiving immediate and personal audiences with the presiding judge to try to settle matters amicably.


Recent Sales
Glenwood Landing 175,000
13 Glen Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 84-year-old colonial; dining room, 2-car garage; taxes $1,300.
Massapequa Park 165,000
114 Westwood Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Rocky Point 106,500
61 Zenith Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 19-year-old high ranch; den, fireplace, deck; taxes $3,200.
Shoreham 210,000
24 Highland Down  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; dining room, den, deck; taxes $2,100.
Wading River 209,000
Betsy Court  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, new colonial; eat-in kitchen, dining room, 2 dens, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,400.
Williston Park  , $235,000
232 Broad Street,
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; new kitchen, den, family room, finished attic, 1-car garage; taxes $4,400.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 266,000
Old Post Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; living room, 2 fireplaces, deck, dining area, family room, pond, 1.3 acres; taxes $4,574.
East Hartford, Conn. 94,100
70 Cross Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; replacement windows, patio, fenced-in yard, 70- by 118-foot lot; taxes $1,248.
Bergenfield, N.J. 162,500
293 East Johnson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old renovated colonial; front porch, full basement; taxes $3,570.


The 'Short Buster' Saga
To the Editor:
Contrary to your article "A Fast-and-Loose 'Short Buster' " (Aug. 2), I did not take "a drubbing in the press" prior to Short Buster Day, but from Barron's alone.
Barron's July 6 story and your own are the first ever critical of me or to question my integrity.
Perhaps it is good for me to experience how the other guy who is written about negatively feels for a change.


Buildings No Match for Storm
The hurricane exposed shoddy construction and inadequate building oversight throughout the ravaged areas south of Miami.
Page 36.


After Many Walks, Militello Loses Way
Sooner or later, the walks were bound to bury Sam Militello.
The rookie again struggled with his control, and littering the bases against the Texas Rangers is not a sound strategy.
Why give sluggers anything for free?
Militello walked one batter in the first, two in the third and another in the fourth, but avoided damage in each inning.
His fortune ran out in the fifth when a two-out walk to Jack Daugherty was followed by Rafael Palmeiro's homer.


Versailles Dinner On Trip to France
The Friends of Vieilles Maisons Francaises, an American charitable organization dedicated to preserving the French cultural heritage, is sponsoring a five-day trip to France on Oct. 23 that will include a private dinner at the Chateau de Versailles and visits to rooms in Versailles not open to the public.


San Diego State and Star Tie U.S.C. and Its Star
San Diego State 31, U.S.C. 31
SAN DIEGO, Sept. 5 (AP) -- A shootout between two super sophomores, running back Marshall Faulk of San Diego State and quarterback Rob Johnson of Southern California, ended in a 31-31 tie today when the Aztecs' Andy Trakas missed two field-goal attempts in the final 54 seconds.


Alison Moore, Arthur Brody
Dr.
Alison Ahern Moore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Moore of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Stamford, Conn., to Dr.
Arthur Lawrence Brody, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvan Brody of Watertown, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard Van Wely, an Episcopal minister, officiated, and Rabbi Charles D. Lippman took part in the ceremony, at the Stamford Yacht Club.
Dr.
Moore, who is keeping her name, is a fellow in geriatric medicine at the University of California at Los Angeles.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in public health and an M.D. from Tulane University.
Her father is the president of the Columbia University Press in New York.


Ecuador Gives Indians Title to Big Amazon Area
To defuse tension over the 500th anniversary of Spain's arrival in the Americas, Ecuador's Government is preparing a present for its Indian minority: stewardship over a swath of Amazon rain forest nearly the size of Connecticut.
Land titles are the fruit of a two-week, 160-mile march that brought 2,500 Indians out of the tropical Amazon and into this chilly mountain capital, 9,400 feet high in the Andes.
After camping in a city park for three weeks, the Indians won promises in May of formal title to traditional homelands covering 4,305 square miles in Pastaza Province in eastern Ecuador.


'Tasteless' Tableau On Pan Am 103
I have seen the original installations at Elaine Benson's Gallery in Bridgehampton of "The Dark Elegy" by the sculptor Suse Lowenstein and was deeply touched by her depiction of grief over the unnecessary loss of a young son.
However, reading the article by Phyllis Braff "Mother of Pan Am 103 Victim Creates a Passionate Tableau"  [ Aug. 9 ]  and seeing the two photographs of the new installation of 28 other mothers' reacting to the news of the tragedy that befell them leaves me in a state of utter dismay.
The mere fact that Ms.
Braff calls this installation a tableau, albeit a passionate one, describes the trivialization of this tragic event.
I am baffled by the fact that mothers were willing to disrobe and "re-enact" a moment of such deep and personal sorrow.


Corrections
A picture credit on Aug. 2 with a photograph of several young women dressed as ears of corn, printed with a review of Betty Fussell's book "The Story of Corn," misstated the source of the picture.
It was the University of Illinois Archives.


The Rate Of Serious Crime Drops in the County
FOLLOWING a statewide pattern, Westchester recorded fewer crimes in the most serious categories last year than in 1990, according to statistics released in late August by the State Division of Criminal Justice Services.
Although county officials were encouraged by the latest figures, which show that Westchester had a 3 percent decrease in the crimes that the state calls index offenses -- murder, negligent manslaughter, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny and car and truck theft -- they also cautioned against drawing too many conclusions from short-term data.


Summer Series Wind Down Seasons
FAREWELLS to summer bracket the week with the Ives Center in Danbury closing out its set of Armstrong Chamber Concerts this afternoon at 3, and the South Shore Music Club calling it a season at 8:30 P.M.
Friday at the Pequot Library in Southport.
The recitals organized by Helen Armstrong have been an integral part of the Ives Festival this year, and for this afternoon's finale, the violinist welcomes four other important artists, the violist Masao Kawasaki, the cellist Frederick Zlotkin, the double-bassist Kenneth Fricker and the pianist Sandra Rivers, their program building from a Mozart Trio through Schumann's Piano Quartet in E and on to Schubert's "Trout" Quintet (797-4002).


Wall of Death Slams the Coast Of Nicaragua
The terror came so quickly to the coast of Nicaragua that survivors later described it as being like a well-known stomach remedy that bubbles up in the glass, then is suddenly calm.
Giant tidal waves, created by an underwater earthquake some 35 miles offshore in the Pacific, overwhelmed a thin strip of land along 150 miles of the coast last week, killing at least 116 people and destroying the simple wooden homes and boats of thousands of fishermen.


Apollo's Temple
To the Editor: It was dismaying to read the account of the protective tent over the Temple of Apollo.
In my experience, in no other ancient site in Greece was the feeling so palpable that one of the gods was present.
Apollo was there.
Part of this sense of the sacred came from the remoteness and wildness of the place.
In two separate visits my companion and I were alone at the site and the only sounds were the wind, birdsong, bees in the wildflowers, and far-off goats' bells.


In Rush to Patent Genes, The Claims Get Smaller
Scientists always knew their quest for genes would likely lead to bitter disputes over property rights.
After all, among the estimated 100,000 human genes are ones that provide blueprints for making natural substances to fight the most deadly diseases.
Any company that could own such a gene could make billions.
Any scientist who found such a gene could become an instant millionaire.
But no one imagined the form the gene wars would take.
Eschewing the tedious process of finding whole genes and learning what they do, some scientists have found a shortcut.
They are fishing shards of genes from the mass of genetic material inside human cells.
And, arguing that these fragments uniquely identify the genes from which they came, they are applying for patents, which have not yet been granted.


Andrea Hoover, James Gettys
Andrea Ruth Hoover, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Hoover Jr. of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Gettys, a son of the late Myra and Briggs Gettys.
W.
Russell Savage officiated at the Unitarian Church.


HITTING THE WALL
I enjoyed Junger's article.
It reminded me of a heated and deadlocked argument I had some 30 years ago with my then-wife.
In a furious rage, I opened the closet door, took out a handful of wire clothes hangers and flung them against a wall.
The noise was wonderfully intense; my anger dissipated and nobody was hurt.
All that remained to be done was to pick up the hangers -- which eventually my wife did.
MILTON WYATT
New York, N.Y.


LITHUANIAN INDEPENDENCE
Thank you for the very moving and yet disturbing article "Is This What the 15 People at the TV Tower Died For?" (by John Budris, Aug. 2).
Being of Lithuanian descent, I read with great pride of the struggle for independence.
Yet, I am aware of the price that is being paid by this small nation, struggling with the problems of newly found independence.
Congratulations to John Budris for capturing the true picture of the price of freedom.
LEAH PETROKUBI
Palm Harbor, Fla.


Page A. Andes, C. S. Morocco
Page Alexandra Andes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Andes of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to Christopher Steven Morocco, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Morocco of Athens, Ga.
The Rev.
Dr.
George E. Hollingshead Jr. performed the ceremony at the Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Morocco, 27 years old, is the marketing manager for the MTV Networks in Atlanta.
She graduated from Furman University.
Her father, the former chairman and chief executive of the Franklin Mint, is the chairman of the Franklin Institute and the president of the Technology Council of Greater Philadelphia.
He is a member of the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Authority, the financial oversight board for the City of Philadelphia.
Her mother, Dorothea R. Andes, is the president of Sanderling Interiors, a decorating concern in Villanova.


A Gay City Councilman Wants to Tell His Story
Tom Duane, left, one of New York City's two openly gay City Council members, is planning to write his life story.
Mr.
Duane, who announced during his election campaign last fall that he was H.I.V. positive, has received an offer to publish the autobiography from St.
Martin's Press, but a contract has not yet been signed.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; Tech Campus Up for Sale
INSTEAD of students, potential bidders have been strolling around Spring Garden College here this summer to consider buying the 33-acre campus and its mostly Victorian-era stone buildings, the earliest dating to 1892.
On July 1, the college announced it would not reopen this fall and, a month later, it was reclaimed by Continental Bank, which financed $10 million for the property's purchase in 1985 through a state bond program.
Now Continental is seeking a buyer, said Jay Hartmann, spokesman for Midlantic Corporation, the bank's parent company.
He would not discuss how much of the defaulted bond payments were unpaid.


Approaching 50 Years of 'Oklahoma!'
FORESEEING an "Oklahoma!" blitz next year -- the 50th anniversary of the musical that they say changed musicals -- the Candlewood Playhouse is getting the celebration over with seven months ahead of time.
It seems that the mere scheduling of the phenomenal first collaboration between Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, each having already staked a claim to musical theater immortality, virtually guarantees packed houses.
No sooner did the Candlewood production open than the engagement was extended one week.
The legend thrives.


Return of Angolan Refugees Increasing as Elections Near
After spending more than half his life in Zaire, Domingos Kizembe has returned to his native Angola, vowing never to leave again.
"I returned because there is peace here now," said Mr.
Kizembe, who is 59 years old.
"If there is any more war, I will not leave again but will die in my country."


Britta Keehn, Edward Scott
Mr. and Mrs.
Silas Keehn of Winnetka, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter Britta Keehn to Edward Ward Scott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Scott of Basking Ridge, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Keehn, a vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. degree from Northwestern University.
Her father is the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Her grandfather the late Grant Keehn was the president of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States and a limited partner in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.


Discount Flurry Trims Air Fares On Asian Routes


Vetoes Force Budget-Fixing Session in California
A snag in the agreement that ended a 63-day impasse over California's $57 billion budget this week will force lawmakers to return to the State Capitol next week for a special session.
Citing technical flaws in the budget measures that the Democratic-controlled Legislature sent him on Wednesday, Gov.
Pete Wilson, a Republican, used his line-item veto this week to remove $520 million in education spending.
He insisted that the action would not interrupt the flow of money to the public schools.
But late Friday, legislative leaders recalled members for sessions in Sacramento on Wednesday.


Bush Extends Full Cleanup Coverage to Louisiana
President Bush said today that the Federal Government would pay 100 percent of the eligible costs of cleaning up and repairing the damage in Louisiana from Hurricane Andrew.
Mr.
Bush had already made the same promise to Florida.
A spokesman for Mr.
Bush said the decision came after a request for aid by the Governor of Louisiana, Edwin Edwards, who spoke with the President this morning.


Clara L. Baur, Edward N. Heumann
Clara Louisa Baur, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Baur Jr. of Woodstock, Conn., was married yesterday to Edward Nelson Heumann, a son of Mary K. Schmidt of New Orleans and the late Alvin S. Heumann.
The Rev.
James A. Birdsall performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Pomfret, Conn.
Mrs.
Heumann, 31 years old, is a media consultant at the Nickelodeon/ Nick at Nite cable networks in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father, who is retired, was the president and chief executive of the William E. Wright Company, a notions and trimming concern in West Warren, Mass.


Correction
The Stamps column on Aug. 23 misstated the date when Georgia, the former Soviet republic, was last independent.
It was just after World War I, not World War II.


Outspoken Polish Priest Pursues Dialogue With Synagogue
THE Rev.
Henry G. d'Anjou is proud of his accomplishments during his 16 years at the Church of the Sacred Heart of Jesus here.
As he tells it, the church was a profane place when he arrived -- "like a club, with a restaurant and barroom" -- and he has refocused his congregation on religion.
Father d'Anjou, a Polish emigre, serves a large Polish Catholic community in this village and its environs.
He has withstood threats and harassment for his outspoken views against nationalism, Marxism and anti-Semitism, and he has formed strong ties with Port Chester's Jewish community.


... Not to Upset the Pricing Cart
To the Editor:
Credit card issuers may be shrewder than Barry Nalebuff.
His analysis omits the crucial fact that businesses that accept credit cards build the cost (averaging 2.15 percent) into their pricing structure.
The issuers are unlikely to threaten their houses of cards by following the professor's proposals to penalize maxpayers.
To do so would surely invite laws requiring businesses that accept credit cards to offer commensurate discounts to those who pay in cash.
Such a discount would be an offer consumers would find hard to refuse, for the extra 2.15 percent charged for the privilege of receiving an average 27 days of credit card float is a 30 percent annual interest rate.
HAROLD G. DIAMOND  Urbana, Ill., Aug. 23


William J. Harrington, 68, Doctor And Specialist in Blood Diseases
Dr.
William J. Harrington, an internationally known blood specialist who made major discoveries about the basic mechanisms of blood disorders from experiments he performed on himself, died yesterday at his home in Miami.
He was 68 years old.
He died while repairing a generator outside his home, which had been without electricity and running water since Hurricane Andrew hit southern Florida last week.
His daughter, Ann, said the cause of death was not known but that electrocution had been ruled out.


Mitterrand Becoming a Focus of Treaty Vote
The future of the European Community may well be in the balance in this month's French referendum on a new treaty on European union, but France itself seems just as interested in what will happen to President Francois Mitterrand if the verdict is no.
Aware that his popularity is at a near-record low, the French leader has insisted that the referendum on Sept. 20 is a vote about Europe and not a plebiscite on his performance over the last 11 years.
Yet rejection of the treaty would be an irreversible blow to his prestige at home and abroad.


Where 2 House Candidates Are as Far Apart as Voters
Voters in this state have no excuse for complaining that all politicians are alike.
Ideological differences as vast as Montana's mountains and prairies make the race for its only seat in the House of Representatives a classic political contest.
The two opponents -- each a popular incumbent, one a liberal Democrat, one a conservative Republican -- disagree about almost everything.


Q AND A
Refinancing for a Co-op
Question: My owner-occupied, five-unit brownstone co-op is facing a balloon payment on the mortgage next January.
The underlying mortgage is $115,000.
We would like to refinance the loan for a 15-year term.


Toward Perfect Pitch in Attire
The hot girl group En Vogue seems to spend as much time worrying about what to wear as what to sing.
The four-woman singing act -- whose second album, "Funky Divas," a collection of doo-wop harmonies, dance tunes and even a hard-rock number, is scaling the charts -- is embracing cutting-edge fashion trends and designers.
The look is the creation of Danny Flynn, a fashion stylist.
Mr.
Flynn, who collects vintage clothing from the 1920's to the 70's, vowed to get them noticed.


The Jobs Are In Government, Not Industry
YOU can't sell it if you don't have it, even if you are willing to cut the price.
And when it comes to manufactured goods, you have to make them to sell them.
The employment report for August was a disaster from every perspective save that of the bond traders, who figured that the Federal Reserve would push interest rates lower, as it promptly did .
Much will be made of the fact that the private sector has 38,000 fewer employees now than in January 1989, when President Bush took office.


When Mary Is Sighted, a Blessing Has Its Burdens
At first blush, a report of a visit from the Virgin Mary -- in traditional Christian belief, the very mother of God who lives in heaven with Him -- sounds like a wonderful event in the life of a local church and its community.
But local bishops, municipal officials and others can find such a report more of a burden than a blessing.


Andersen Consulting's Culture of 'Clones'
ON Sunday night, the buses roar up to the main entrance of Andersen Consulting's 150-acre training center in St.
Charles, a Chicago suburb, and drop off hundreds of new employees from around the world.
During the year, 4,000 raw recruits, most fresh from college, will file into this idyllic boot camp, with its wooded grounds and connecting country club.
Here they will spend three weeks being indoctrinated in a rigid corporate culture and a strict methodology for helping companies navigate the morass of high technology, whether it be installing existing computer systems or planning for future technologies.


Munich 1972: Tragic Blur on Olympic Family Memory
Twenty years after the massacre of Israeli athletes and officials at the 1972 Munich Olympics, the event remains the most poignant episode in the history of sports -- a tragedy that totally changed not only the Olympic movement but also sports as a way of life on the international scene.
Anyone who witnessed those Games -- athletes, officials, spectators, even members of the news media -- remain frozen and frustrated by the experience, touched even today by circumstances they could not control or comprehend at the time.


Peggy Sand, J. L. Kronstadt
Judge and Mrs.
Leonard B. Sand of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Margaret Louise Sand to Jonathan Lee Kronstadt, a son of Harold Kronstadt of Golden Beach, Fla., and Lillian Naiman Kronstadt of Washington.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sand, who is 30 and is known as Peggy, is a planner of affordable housing at the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in urban and regional planning from George Washington University.
Her father is a judge of the Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Her mother, Ann S. Sand, is a social worker in New York.


Where the Pig in a Poke May Be a Jaguar XJ6
AS 200 people watched intently, a snappy red 1986 Jaguar XJ6 sedan was wheeled into a barnlike garage in the Ironbound section here.
Mike Parnes, the auctioneer, whacked a black rubber hose against the podium.
"What do you want to pay for this car?" he bellowed. "Eight thousand! Nine thousand!"


As Washington Lives on Credit, States Live on Gruel
While President Bush politicked across the Great Plains early last week, handing farmers some $1.8 billion in Federal largess, Gretchen Tegeler was poring over the Iowa state budget in her Des Moines office, looking for ways to make ends meet.
It is a stretch.
Spending on major items like prisons and the state payroll is ballooning.
Medicaid alone already consumes one of every 10 state dollars and is pegged to rise by more than 20 percent as far as the eye can see.
State revenues, meanwhile, are projected to grow by about 4 percent a year, or barely enough to beat inflation.
Ms.
Tegeler, the state's top fiscal officer, figures she has about two years before the two lines converge and cross.


Ms. Wenniger, Mr. Kierstead
Susanna Marie Wenniger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mace L. de Buy Wenniger of Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass., was married there yesterday to Cornelius Rudd Kierstead, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilson H. Kierstead of New York.
The Rev.
Robert F. Drinan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Sacred Heart Church.
Ms.
Wenniger, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is the associate director of the Laurence Miller Gallery, a photography dealer in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Wesleyan University, she cum laude.
Her father and her mother, Mary Ann Wenniger, own Wenniger Graphics, a gallery in Boston.
Her father was formerly a city planner for the Boston Redevelopment Authority; her mother is a printmaker.


Westport Stages 'Park Your Car'
THE play "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard" is a throwback to a time when summer stock was thriving and audiences accepted slight, synthetic works just for the pleasure of good acting company.
Israel Horovitz's two-character exercise about a cranky, dying high school teacher and a young housekeeper who happens to be his former student, is fundamentally uninteresting and shamelessly contrived, but good actors can validate it as a display piece.
At the Westport Country Playhouse, one of the tenacious survivors of an eroded professional summer theater circuit, E. G. Marshall (as Jacob Brackish) and Maryann Plunkett (as Kathleen Hogan) are so fine that, for the moment, they muster the power -- call it sorcery -- to keep the lid on Mr.
Horovitz's manipulations.


Making Changes On Air Tickets
CHILDREN on trampolines had nothing on the airlines as summer closed.
Fares went up, fares went down.
In ads Northwest printed discount coupons that were valid until the end of August and then competing airlines said they would accept them, and printed coupons too..
On it went.
One of the most active areas of competition involved the fee for changing a nonrefundable ticket, a leopard that shed its spots at most companies in April when American Airlines proclaimed its new "simplified" four-tier structure and others followed.
Under American's structure, a nonrefundable ticket still could not be turned back into cash but could be turned in toward a different flight on a different date with the payment of a fee, set at that time at $25.
Other airlines followed suit.
USAir, which had been allowing this all along, but with a $75 penalty, lowered its fee to $25.


The Essence of Chekhov, Illuminated
Bonnie J. Monte's staging of "The Sea Gull" for the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival is as good and satisfying a Chekhovian production as has been seen in more than a decade of theatergoing in the state.
Don't expect trendy gimmickry in the manner of a recent Off Off Broadway retitling, "The Seagull: The Hamptons: 1990," wherein Constantine Treplev, the brooding poet, was remade into a performance artist.
Or the stock view of a Chekhov play as a glum confessional of boredom.
Or, for that matter, the opposite go-for-laughs extreme.


Where Pork Is the Highlight of the Menu
EARLY in 1991 a new barbecue restaurant in Stamford opened and in a few months was replaced by another, using much the same decor, some of the original ownership and a menu with some of the same items, but many new ones as well.
Thus Stick to Your Ribs became Circle J Texas Pit Barbeque and American Grille.
The first sight to meet your eyes on opening the door in the entry is a large, colorful mural of a cowboy on a rearing horse against a Texas landscape.
Inside, stainless steel equipment and take-out counter are on the left.
To the right is a small dining area with a bar in the rear and a flight of stairs in the middle, leading up to a larger dining room, where on weekend evenings there is live music.
In the early part of the week that roomy upstairs area is roped off.


Summer Fadeout: Let Nature Take Its Course
Although it may seem a far way off to many gardeners, in the plant kingdom winter is just around the corner.
Plants may seem to take their good old time in getting ready for the change of seasons.
But gardeners can respect this winding down, especially among the woody plants, and give them the best chance to accomplish this.
It is not a question so much of what to do, as it is what
not
to do.
To comply with this cycle, allow plants to settle down at their own pace.
That is, do not fertilize, prune or stimulate woody plants at this time of year.
Applications of fertilizer now are not considered wise.
Plant nutrients, especially those found in the quickly available water-soluble kinds, stimulate plants to grow.
This new growth will be succulent and green and subject to winter kill because it will not have time to mature, or "harden off" as it is described in horticultural lingo.
Even if no new growth appears above the soil line, the stimulation to the near dormant buds is not needed now.


Setting Up a New Wall Switch
A convenient way to install a wall switch, and thus be able to operate a floor or table lamp from a distance, is by wiring it to an existing wall outlet so that the switch controls the outlet's upper socket, not the lower one.
The technique is called split-wiring.
Needed are a single-pole electrical switch, a metal wall box and cover plate to contain it and 14-gauge, two-conductor plastic-sheathed electrical cable to link the switch and outlet.


Public &amp; Private; One View Fits All
My oldest kid invited the jock home the other day.
The jock's name is, of course, Kyle.
He is a nice kid with an awesome arm, the kind who can choose a tree halfway down the road, pick up a stone and -- bing! -- nail it while my son stands open-mouthed.
This is one of the great rituals of growing up, trying to puzzle out who you are by discovering who you are not.
Our children bring home familiar strangers, archetypes who will, by contrast, teach them what they're made of.
There is something bittersweet about watching this, something that makes you want to give them simple answers instead of time and space.
But figuring out who you are is the whole point of the human experience.
So we let them be.


Take It Away, Phil Simms, It's a New Day
For the Giants, the best thing about opening the National Football League regular season on Sunday is that their record is back to 0-0.
That means no losses, no mistakes, no disasters, at least not yet.
The start will not be easy.
The Giants will meet the San Francisco 49ers at 4 P.M. at Giants Stadium in a game to be carried by CBS-TV (Channel 2 in New York) and WNEW radio (1130 AM).


No Headline
Balloon Festivals
Q.
Can you inform me of any hot-air balloon festivals taking place this fall in the Northeast?
How does one get a ride in one of the balloons? -- Chris Tighe Jr., Kew Gardens, Queens
A.
Here are some balloon festivals.
At all of them, those who attend can arrange private flights directly with the balloonists.
The length of flights is usually 30 to 60 minutes.


Chess Players Excited: He's Back!
The chess game between Theodore Fouros and his longtime rival, a Chinese man who called himself Mr.
Rojas, had hit manic proportions yesterday afternoon in Washington Square Park, with insults flying as wildly as the queens and rooks.
"I thought Chinese were honorable people," said Mr.
Fouros, slamming down a white pawn.
"I'm playing with an idiot," Mr.
Rojas replied.


Thoroughbreds Rush Into Autumn Weekend
Thoroughbred racing began its autumn season this weekend with a rush of major stakes races that were expected to set the tone and probably the cast for the Breeders' Cup championships in eight weeks.
In the main events of the holiday weekend, half a dozen prime fillies will compete in the Go For Wand Stakes at Belmont Park this afternoon and a dozen of the ranking grass horses from Europe, America and Hong Kong will race in the Arlington Million near Chicago.


The Secret History of Queen Anne's Lace
To the Editor:
I'm sure I wasn't alone in my enjoyment of "The Queen's Carrot," your Aug. 22 editorial on Queen Anne's Lace.
However, I suggest that the Anne who lent her name to the white-blossomed wildflower predated Britain's Queen Anne (1665-1714) by more than a millennium.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 6, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
32
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
21
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
3
8
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
4 *
2
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
5
10
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
6
4
AGAINST THE WIND, by J. F. Freedman. (Signet, $5.99.) A lawyer undertakes to defend a gang of bikers against a ruthless district attorney.
7 *
2
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Life as lived by writers, critics and editors in the Pennsylvania Dutch country and New York.
8 *
9
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
9
12
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
10
2
EXCEPTIONAL CLEARANCE, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.99.) A New York police detective on the trail of a serial killer.
11 *
32
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
12
1
THE COLOR OF HER PANTIES, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) Continuing the "Xanth" fantasy series: women band together to stop a dreadful man from becoming family chieftain.
13
2
A TREASURE WORTH SEEKING, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman's quest for a brother she never knew.
14
1
SEE JANE RUN, by Joy Fielding. (Avon, $5.50.) A woman awakens not knowing who she is and with a premonition of horrors to come.
15
2
DANIEL'S BRIDE, by Linda Lael Miller. (Pocket, $5.50.) A woman is saved from the hangman's noose through a marriage of convenience to a rancher in the 19th-century Washington Territory.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
20
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
2
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
1
UNITED WE STAND, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $4.95.) A program for "rebuilding America" by the Texas billionaire.
5
68
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
6
60
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
7
11
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
8
461
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
9
3
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
10
16
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
56
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
104
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
85
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
20
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
5
5
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1992 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Surgical Heroism
To the Editor:
I was disturbed by "Nip and Tuck" (Aug. 9), in which six prominent plastic surgeons were glorified.


No Matter What's Said, Reinsdorf Can Be Found in Eye of Storm
While it is widely assumed that he has been the leading light in the move to topple the baseball commissioner, Jerry Reinsdorf sees it otherwise.
"A mischaracterization," he said earlier this week.
He acknowledges, though, that in what has been described as a coup attempt, he is a light, but not the primary one.


Auto Workers End Walkout Against G.M.
Striking workers at a General Motors parts plant in Lordstown, Ohio, overwhelmingly approved an agreement today to end the nine-day strike that had shut much of the auto maker's domestic production and idled more than 40,000 workers nationwide.
At a meeting in nearby Youngstown, Ohio, 98 percent of the workers voting approved the deal, officials of the United Automobile Workers union said.
Union and company spokesmen said they expected workers to begin returning to their jobs tonight.


Welfare Mothers Facing Time Limit for College
DONNA FUCCI has worked hard to maintain her nearly perfect 3.75 average and earn a coveted spot on the president's list at Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
But when students return to class on Tuesday, Ms.
Fucci will not be among them.
She is one of 74 women who either has been dropped from the college program for welfare recipients run by the county's Department of Social Services or told to switch to another academic discipline with fewer course requirements.


The D.A. Takes The Stand . . . er, Podium
As habitues of the New York jazz scene have long known, Michael Moriarty (in photograph), who plays District Attorney Ben Stone on the NBC series "Law and Order," is not merely a busy actor.
He has sung and played piano in Michael's Pub, Fat Tuesday's, J's and other clubs.
He has also recorded on his own label, aptly named after his poem "Evergrowth."
On Saturday evening, Mr.
Moriarty will branch out anew, conducting the Bacchanalia Festival Orchestra in his Symphony for Strings at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street in Manhattan.
Nina Beilina the orchestra's director, will conduct and play violin in the rest of the program, which consists of Bach concertos.


Killer Instinct


The New York Democratic Senate Candidates on the Issues
Robert Abrams ECONOMY AND TAXES
Favors a phased reduction in military spending to $145 billion in the year 2000, or roughly half the military spending forecast by the Bush Administration for that year.
Would use the estimated $900 billion to $1 trillion savings partly for deficit reduction and partly for investment in infrastructure, housing and schools.
Favors a tax credit of up to 20 percent for new investments in plant modernization or defense industry conversion, and of up to 30 percent for research and development.
HEALTH
Favors a national health insurance program that would provide benefits for all Americans.
The plan would be financed largely through employer payroll taxes and substitute a single, publicly administered program for the more than 1,500 private insurance plans now in place.
Favors needle exchange and condom distribution in the schools to combat AIDS.
MILITARY
Says military spending cuts will be used for a "victory fund" to revitalize the economy.
His proposed cuts in spending would reduce total troop strength to 1.1 million from 2.1 million, Army divisions from to 7 from 18, Air Force fighter aircraft to 800 from 1,728.
He also favors large cuts in strategic nuclear warheads.
ENVIRONMENT:
Favors increased Federal support for recycling programs and imposition of minimum standards for recycled content in packaging and paper.
Supports Earth Summit limits on emission of greenhouse gases, and favors stricter energy efficiency standards for automobiles and appliances.
Favors more stringent review of pesticides.
Favors stronger Federal open-space protections and conservation incentives.
CRIME
Opposes the death penalty, supports alternative statute of life imprisonment without parole for certain crimes, including murder.
Supports stricter handgun controls and ban on assault weapons.
Favors increased Federal support for state and local drug-law enforcement and for residential drug-treatment programs.
ABORTION
Favors abortion rights and opposes restrictions like parental notification for teen-agers or 24-hour waiting periods.
Supports Medicaid financing for abortions for poor women, although his office is required by law to defend a state law that provides money for prenatal care but not abortions for some women with incomes above the poverty level.
Would only support Supreme Court nominees who say that abortion rights are protected by the Constitution.
CIVIL RIGHTS
Favors Federal legislation providing benefits to domestic partners regardless of sexual orientation.
Favors a Federal law prohibiting discrimination against homosexuals.
Pledges to propose new Federal laws to punish bias-motivated violence.
Says he would vote against any Federal judicial nominee who is "hostile to civil rights for lesbians and gay men, freedom of reproductive choice, or civil rights." EDUCATION
Favors a loan program to allow every American student to borrow up to $10,000 per year to finance college education, with money paid back through future tax filings on a scale linked to income levels.
Opposes prayer in the schools.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Says that the United States "is the world's only remaining superpower, but we should not attempt to be the world's super-policeman." Says our European allies should take the lead in forging a peaceful solution in the former Yugoslavian states.
Was sharply critical of Bush Administration for holding up loan guarantees to Israel.
Geraldine Ferraro ECONOMY
Supports unspecified higher taxes on households earning more than $200,000.
Favors permanent tax credit for research and development, investment tax credit to reward small and medium-size businesses for investing in plants and equipment, national network to lend technological expertise to small businesses.
Supports infrastructure investment in roads and mass transit to create 30,000 new jobs.
HEALTH
Favors limited national health insurance plan, in which employers would either have to provide insurance for their workers or pay into a national fund.
Supports condom distribution in schools, under nurses' supervision as part of larger sex education plan.
Views needle exchange as "least desirable" option, but supports as part of larger drug education program.
MILITARY
Favors cutting $100 billion from military budget during next five years, or about one-third the amount favored by her opponents, under national conversion policy that would provide retraining to former arms-plant workers and loans to start new businesses.
Would end production of B-2 bomber, reduce "Star Wars" research and delay its deployment beyond 1996.
Favors new Government agency to shift research and development to civilian technologies, and retool defense laboratories.
ENVIRONMENT
Favors increased research into recycling and new waste and energy technologies, stricter fuel-efficiency standards for automobiles and greater mass transit.
Says incineration can't be ruled out but calls it a dangerous option.
Believes United States should commit itself to reducing carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by year 2000.
Supports restoring American financing to United Nations population control efforts.
CRIME
Favors the death penalty for heinous crimes like mass murder.
Supports gun control laws, national waiting period for purchase of handguns, and a ban on import, domestic manufacture and civilian sale of semiautomatic assault weapons and pistols.
Favors mandatory jail terms for crimes committed with firearms, supports alternatives to incarceration for nonviolent, first-time offenders.
ABORTION
Favors abortion rights and, as a Roman Catholic, has withstood criticism by John Cardinal O'Connor.
Did not go to Buffalo this year to oppose antiabortion demonstrations, saying she did not want to make herself a focus of controversy.
Opposes parental consent, spousal consent, waiting period.
Supports Medicaid financing.
CIVIL RIGHTS
Has favored local laws formalizing domestic partnership, but not uniform Federal law.
Supported Federal bill to track hate crimes, and favors stiffer penalties for bias crimes.
Supports voluntary moment of silence or private prayer in school.
EDUCATION
Favors extending Federal Head Start program to all eligible children.
Favors "intelligent, humane sex education." Favors parental choice within public school system but not vouchers for private schools.
Supports longer school day and year, improved teacher pay and recruitment of military personnel freed up by defense reallocations to teach math and science.
Backs college loan program for any qualified student, to be repaid through tax withholding or community service.
FOREIGN POLICY
Opposes linking Israeli loan guarantees to cessation of West Bank settlements and believes Israeli-Palestinian conflict must be worked out by parties on terms acceptable to Israel.
Supports United Nations intervention to insure flow of humanitarian relief to Bosnia and Somalia.
Elizabeth Holtzman ECONOMY AND TAXES
Favors using money from unspecified higher taxes on the wealthy and from cuts in military spending for investment in schools, roads and bridges, and a universal health-care system.
Favors new laws to encourage greater use of pension-fund assets for such investment.
Says she would reduce the deficit by "increasing economic growth, tightening the tax code, cutting unnecessary Federal programs and cutting waste and corruption in government." HEALTH
Favors universal national health-insurance program, financed by the Federal Government, that would provide insurance for all Americans.
Says system would be financed by administrative savings and by new taxes that would approximately substitute for what Americans now pay in out-of-pocket medical costs.
Says health-care system should "refocus on prevention," including regular government-financed mammograms for detection of breast cancer and mandatory measles vaccines for schoolchildren.
Favors needle-exchange programs and distribution of condoms in schools to combat AIDS.
MILITARY:
Favors $300 billion in military cuts over the next five years.
Would cut all money for "Star Wars," scale back space program and eliminate Seawolf submarine and other unspecified programs.
Favors planned conversion of the arms industry to civilian purposes.
ENVIRONMENT:
Favors recycling and supports a national moratorium on construction of garbage-burning incinerators.
Supports Earth Summit conventions, including timetables to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
Pledges to support creation of Greenway National Park along rivers from New York City to Buffalo and to clean up Long Island Sound.
Favors stricter automobile standards.
CRIME
Opposes the death penalty, but supports life imprisonment without parole for certain crimes.
Favors stricter handgun controls, including measure that would make gun manufacturers and dealers liable for injuries and deaths caused by illegally used assault weapons.
Says Government should consider economic sanctions against countries that supply illegal drugs.
Favors providing drug treatment on demand, financed in part by fines on drug dealers.
ABORTION
Favors abortion rights, opposes restrictions like parental notification for teen-agers or 24-hour waiting periods.
Supports Medicaid financing for abortions for poor women.
Opposes import ban on abortion pill RU-486.
On Supreme Court nominations, says she would "never approve a judge who is anti-choice, anti-civil rights or anti-right-to-privacy." CIVIL RIGHTS
Favors Federal legislation outlawing discrimination against gay men and lesbians.
Supports domestic-partnership legislation.
Has proposed legislation that would require judges who move the site of trials to designate areas of similar racial makeup.
EDUCATION
Favors significant but unspecified increases in Government money for student-loan programs.
Opposes prayer in the schools.
FOREIGN POLICY:
Says United States should support growth of democracy around the world, halt nuclear proliferation and slow down conventional weapons trade.
Favors embargoes to block oil and weapons shipments to Serbian-held areas in the Balkans, but would support military intervention only as a last resort and under the U.N.
Strongly critical of the Bush Administration for holding up Israeli loan guarantees.
Al Sharpton ECONOMY
Favors tax increase on couples earning over $200,000, simplified tax code, minimal deductions.
Seeks major public works program backed by employee pension funds to create jobs and repair infrastructure.
Proposes to use half of savings from military cuts to reduce Federal deficit.
"A jobs program would create new taxpayers." HEALTH
Favors universal national health insurance plan backed by Federal Government, plus limits on doctors' and medical fees.
Supports supervised condom distribution in schools and needle-exchange programs to slow spread of AIDS, if part of scientific study.
"I don't think we should look like we're advocating loose sex or drug use." MILITARY
Favors 50 percent cut in military spending over next five to eight years, with half going to reduce the deficit and half for urban programs.
Would cut budget for covert operations, "Star Wars" and the space program.
"We have an overabundance of equipment waiting for an invasion of Jupiter." ENVIRONMENT
Favors mandatory education programs on recycling in all public schools.
Would eliminate any Federal funding for incineration.
Favors Earth Summit proposal on limiting greehouse gases, and would support environmental measures even if they cost jobs.
"We should not exchange life for jobs." CRIME
Opposes death penalty.
Favors mandatory jail terms for drug offenses and crimes motivated by bias.
Favors greater border interdiction of drugs, ban on assault weapons and waiting period for handgun purchases, and sanctions for gun manufacturers who fail to control flow of their products to black market.
ABORTION
Supports abortion rights in all contexts.
Opposes parental notification, spousal consent.
Favors Medicaid financing for abortions.
"I come out of a community where we see too many tragedies because somebody couldn't afford an abortion." CIVIL RIGHTS
Favors domestic partnership rights for same-sex couples and Federal ban on discrimination based on sexual orientation.
Supports passage of Federal bias bill, stiffening penalities for hate crimes.
Favors passage of national standards defining excessive force by police officers.
EDUCATION
Opposes government vouchers for private schools.
Favors multicultural curriculums.
Favors voluntary prayer.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Says United States "ought to reduce the overall amount of foreign aid to reinvest more in domestic problems," and says greater percentage of foreign aid should be directed to the Third World.
Says United States should allow more Haitian refugees into the county.
Opposes any military intervention in Yugoslavia and Somalia "unless absolutely necessary." Has called United States holdout on Israeli loan guarantees anti-Semitic and says there should be "a more humane U.S. policy toward Palestinians."


Mixing Play And Administration
PLAYERS are players, officials are officials and never the twain shall meet.
That has always been the rule, since the strain of trying to win at the table does not mesh well with the cares of administration.
The rule was to be broken last night in Salsomaggiore, Italy, at the final ceremonies of the world team championships.
Ernesto D'Orsi of Brazil, after 17 months as president of the World Bridge Federation, was to bestow his mantle on Bob Wolff of Dallas.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
Wirth's complaint of too little Senate teamwork and too much time spent raising funds comes as no surprise to non-Beltway residents.
But who set that up?
Does the Senator forget that he and his party have controlled Congress for a generation?


HITTING THE WALL
I suggest that breaking a wall to "create a handsome testimony to your manhood" is only a subtle step away from bashing in a wife's, a girlfriend's or a child's face.
My advice to men who punch walls is to get professional help.
JAMES TACKACH
Narragansett, R.I.
ILS&gt;Drawing


Corrections
An article on Aug. 23 about Library Pond in Scarsdale misstated its depth.
It was dredged last fall to a depth of 7 feet in the center, not 17 feet.


Measure For Measure
At a benefit for the New Jersey Chapter of the Arthritis Foundation, on Aug. 29.


Salvaging Lives From the Wake Of the Storm
Nearly two weeks have passed since Hurricane Andrew turned much of southern Dade County into a wasteland.
Despite the best efforts of Federal troops, relief agencies, government workers and volunteers, it is hard to imagine how the needs of people in Homestead, Florida City and other ruined towns will ever be met.


U.N. SET TO DEBATE PEACEMAKING ROLE
The United Nations is preparing for a debate that many diplomats expect will open old divisions and jealousies in the world community, setting developing countries against the great powers and those favoring a stronger United Nations against those who fear it.
At issue are far-reaching proposals to strengthen the organization's peacemaking role in the post-cold-war era.
Last week the Security Council set up a working group to study the proposals, which the Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, first put forward in June.
The proposals are in a report entitled "Agenda for Peace." The Council asked the Secretary General in January to prepare the report, when it marked the end of Communism and the start of a more hopeful period in international relations by holding its first summit-level meeting.


Summer Fadeout: Let Nature Take Its Course
Although it may seem a far way off to many gardeners, in the plant kingdom winter is just around the corner.
Plants may seem to take their good old time in getting ready for the change of seasons.
But gardeners can respect this winding down, especially among the woody plants, and give them the best chance to accomplish this.
It is not a question so much of what to do, as it is what
not
to do.
To comply with this cycle, allow plants to settle down at their own pace.
That is, do not fertilize, prune or stimulate woody plants at this time of year.
Applications of fertilizer now are not considered wise.
Plant nutrients, especially those found in the quickly available water-soluble kinds, stimulate plants to grow.
This new growth will be succulent and green and subject to winter kill because it will not have time to mature, or "harden off" as it is described in horticultural lingo.
Even if no new growth appears above the soil line, the stimulation to the near dormant buds is not needed now.


Sylvie Otten, Kurt Sollod
Sylvie Otten, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Otten of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kurt Anthony Sollod, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert E. Sollod of Shrewsbury, Mass.
Louis Otten, the bride's grandfather and a retired New York State Family Court judge, officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.


Colombia Moves to End Vatican's Special Role
New religious freedom in Colombia, including the right to divorce, has pitted the state against the Roman Catholic Church and forced the country to revamp its antiquated treaty with the Vatican, one of the last of its kind.
The treaty, dating to the 19th century, was effectively overruled last year when a nationally elected assembly rewrote the Constitution.


First He Wrote It, Then He Lived It
THE DOUBLE LIFE OF STEPHEN CRANE
By Christopher Benfey. Illustrated. 294 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Suspension of Relief Makes Life Harsher in Sarajevo


Step on It!
When hemlines fall, how the feet are "dressed" becomes extremely important.
Shoes can play a pivotal role in balancing the newly attenuated silhouette.
Generally speaking, a chunkier shoe anchors the look -- but not always.
When a skirt has a flirty flip to it, a fine-boned, saucy shoe is a good idea.
And if the hemline levels off near the knee, a flat foot can work well, too.
Here are some fanciful versions designers are suggesting for this season.


Recent Sales
Millwood, N.Y. 234,200
48 Hidden Hollow Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old raised ranch; cathedral ceilings, skylights, deck; taxes $6,627.
New Castle, N.Y. 560,000
154 Devoe Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 47-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, sun room, formal dining room, family room, cathedral ceiling, playroom, wine cellar, 2-car garage; taxes $9,600.
South Salem, N.Y. 266,000
Old Post Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; living room, 2 fireplaces, deck, dining area, family room, pond, 1.3 acres; taxes $4,574.
Bristol, Conn. 120,000
31 Juniper Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; 1-car garage, 0.33 acre; taxes $2,243.
East Hartford, Conn. 94,100
70 Cross Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; replacement windows, patio, fenced-in yard, 70- by 118-foot lot; taxes $1,248.
Essex, Conn. 190,000
54 South Main Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; fireplace, enclosed porch, 1.3 acres; taxes $2,264.
OTHER AREAS Bergenfield, N.J. 162,500
293 East Johnson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old renovated colonial; front porch, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,570.
Massapequa Park, L.I. 165,000
114 Westwood Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Rocky Point, L.I. 106,500
61 Zenith Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 19-year-old high ranch; den, fireplace, deck; taxes $3,200.


A la Carte; An Ideal Time of the Year for Alfresco Dining
EVEN among alfresco aficionados, there is a realization that summer is not always the best time for outdoor dining.
The relentless heat and high humidity of July and August, combined with abundant insect life, often cause outdoor types, along with the more-squeamish, to seek out air-conditioned indoor comfort for their dining.


Cecilia T. Absher, David A. Katz
Cecilia Theresa Absher, a daughter of the late Lonnie and Faye Absher, was married yesterday to David Andrew Katz, a son of Arthur A. Katz and Dr.
Lois A. Katz of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Benjamin Piovan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Myra Clare Rogers Memorial Chapel at Tulane University in New Orleans.
Cantor Martin Port took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Absher, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in corporate law at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated summa cum laude from Loyola University and received a law degree from Tulane.


Apollo's Temple
To the Editor: My heart aches (mildly) for John Van Kirk and his disappointment over the temple of Bassae.
I was there on the last day of May 1984, on one of those splendid bus tours.
The temple wasn't wrapped in plastic, but it was under scaffolding and one couldn't go inside.
However, a scramble up a hillside gave a good overall view.


LITHUANIAN INDEPENDENCE
Budris's article raises an important question: Why does the West come to the aid of Russia and ignore the brave Baltic republics -- particularly Lithuania -- who faced Soviet tanks and economic blockades alone and now must contend with their renegade army, some 70,000 strong?
Lithuania should be rewarded for the billions saved as a consequence of helping to end the cold war and the arms race; instead, it is being ignored at a time in its history when its hard-won independence is still so precarious.
When will the West realize that the interests of these small democracies are our interests as well?
E.
K.
BURDEN
Naples, Fla.


On Sunday; Group Homes Are Invited Only to Leave
The Institute for Community Living, a nonprofit agency, recently proposed a group home for nine retarded adults in Coney Island.
The virtually all-white audience at the hearing complained of being picked on because they live in a a working-class area.
"It was scary," said Peter Campanelli, the agency director.
The whole time he spoke, he said, a guy in the front row gestured and shouted.
He said, "We got a police escort out." Community Board 13 has taken legal action to stop the house.
The same week a middle-class black-Carribean audience in East Flatbush complained that the agency's plan to build a group home there for 12 wheelchair-bound retarded adults was racially motivated.
Sheldon Naparstek, principal of Public School 208, which is across the street from the site, a vacant lot, warned that vans transporting the retarded would be a traffic hazard.
"Take into consideration the safety of our children," he wrote.
Community Board 17 has taken legal action to stop the house.


Patricia McAllister, Marshall Hilsberg
Patricia McAllister, the senior vice president of merchandising and design at Evan-Picone, the women's sportswear and dress manufacturer in New York, was married last evening to Marshall Hilsberg, the chairman and chief executive of the Lord &amp; Taylor stores.
Rabbi Howard S. Herman performed the ceremony at the Farmington Valley Jewish Congregation in Simsbury, Conn.


The World Has a Few Too Many Russian Vodkas
Selling vodka in the New World Order has not proved a simple matter.
Ask Kenneth L. Onish.
Several years ago, the Connecticut businessman began laying the groundwork to import Soviet vodka to the United States.
He hit on the perfect name, one that captured the excitement of the changes in the Communist bloc, and had thousands of labels printed.


Marching to the Beat of a Calypso Drummer


Data Bank/September 6, 1992
July
June
May
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.1
-0.3
0.6
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
-0.6
-0.4
0.7
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
-1.1
2.4
-0.9
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
-2.6
5.3
0.5
Aug.
July
June
Employment
In thousands
1,177
1,178
1,176
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
9,700 (7.6)
9,760 (7.7)
9,075 (7.8)
Economic Activity
Purchasing Managers' Report
53.7
54.2
52.8
Weekly Jobless Claims
Aug. 22
Aug. 15
Aug. 8
In thousands
386
383
474


Thinking of a Garden? The Time Has Come
September is the best time to start a garden.
Cooler weather invites the digging of new beds, the spreading of compost, the planting of evergreen trees and shrubs.
Dig a generous hole, mix in plenty of compost, water thoroughly and mulch.
Hold off on planting deciduous plants until they begin to drop their leaves, usually not until October.


We Have a Style of Child Custody Justice to Fit Every Purse; Allegations Often True
To the Editor:
Woody Allen has been misinformed by his lawyers.
Allegations of child sexual abuse are not typically brought as weapons in custody battles.
And such allegations are not typically false.
Studies show that most allegations are true.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Forgiving Tipper Gore but Not Quayle
Two of the most vocal critics of the entertainment industry in recent years have been Vice President Dan Quayle and Tipper Gore, wife of the Democratic nominee for Mr.
Quayle's job.
Perhaps it is partisanship, or call it a double standard, or consider it a result of a responsible campaign to bring about change; whatever the reason, the industry's response to these two could not be more different.
Recently, including this week at the Emmy Awards ceremony, Mr.
Quayle has been roundly criticized by many in the entertainment industry for his assertion that Hollywood has some responsibility not to encourage what he considers destructive behavior, like women bearing children out of wedlock.


No Headline
Within a circle of very frail friends at a Queens day center for the elderly, Virginia Huerlander stood up and, nervously, began to speak of love.
"I'd given up on life," she told the group, a collection of about 15 men and women too weak to join in the regular center activities for the elderly.
"I came here and got a lift, and then I went home and there was nothing."


Giant Roster Is Completed
The Giants completed their roster today by activating outside linebacker Carl Banks and nose tackle Erik Howard, two of their key defensive players.
To make room, they placed inside linebacker Corey Widmer, their seventh-round draft choice, and nose tackle George Rooks, their 10th-round choice, on injured reserve.
After missing training camp because of contract disputes, Banks signed on Aug. 24 and Howard on Aug. 26.
Neither played in a preseason game, and both had two-week roster exemptions from the National Football League.


Melanie F. Mayo, Martin J. West
Arlene Cumins of Alpine, N.J., and A. Dale Mayo of Chatham, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Melanie Felice Mayo, and Martin Joseph West, a son of Elsie West of Grosse Ile, Mich., and the late Robert C. West Jr.
Miss Mayo, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan, where she is a candidate in the joint law and M.B.A. degree program.
Her father is president of the Clearview Group, an investment firm in Madison, N.J.
Her mother teaches Spanish at the Yeshiva Samson Raphael Hirsch in New York.
Miss Mayo is a stepdaughter of Edward Cumins of Alpine and Sueanne Mayo of Chatham.


LEARNING TO TALK OF RACE
Cornel West's "Learning to Talk of Race" (Aug. 2) is an excellent analysis of what ails America.
The fraying of our social fabric, West argues, is due in large part to our failure to acknowledge our common bond -- "the basic humanness and Americanness of each of us" -- and our lack of commitment to the common good.
Nowhere has this become more evident than in our response to the AIDS crisis.
We have often chosen to characterize it as a plague visited upon "problem people" -- gay men, drug addicts and the sexually promiscuous.
As long as we refuse to recognize that we share a common blood, our national response to the AIDS crisis will continue to be inadequate.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
The Heart of the Sky Travels Among the Maya By Peter Canby HarperCollins. 368 pages. $25.


Overseas Gig


What About Satchmo?
To the Editor:
As a guitarist struggling to have his "voice" heard, I read Keith Jarrett's polemic with conflicting feelings.
I fully support his opposition to the music industry's obsession with rigid categorization.
But I must question his criticism of the choices jazz musicians face when trying to survive in the modern music world.


At Library and Farm, The Fall Season Begins
THE popular "Music, Wine and Cheese" series at the New Rochelle Public Library resumes at 4:30 P.M. on Saturday with a recital by 17-year old identical-twin violinists, Kuan and Lun Jiang.
On Saturday at 8 P.M. and again next Sunday at 3 P.M., members of the New Rochelle Opera are presenting two different programs at the library.
Called "Magnetic Moments in Opera," these musicales are also free, but donations are requested.
For a listing of library events, call the community relations office at 632-7878.


Solar Energy
To the Editor:
In addition to the equipment mentioned in your Talking column on solar energy on July 19, there are many design-related passive solar techniques that homeowners can use to capitalize on the power of the sun.


Bowa-Marlins Talks
Philadelphia Phillies third-base coach LARRY BOWA will be interviewed for the manager's job of the expansion Florida Marlins.
CARL BARGER, the Marlins' president, said Bowa was among 12 candidates he was considering, The Philadelphia Inquirer reported yesterday.
The Marlins, along with the Colorado Rockies, begin play in the National League next season.  (AP)


AUG. 30 - SEPT. 5: New Abuses Charged; More Democracy Activists Detained in China
The police in Beijing last week detained three more pro-democracy activists, including Shen Tong, a leader of the Tiananmen movement in 1989 and a graduate student at Boston University who had returned to China to set up a chapter of a pro-democracy organization that he heads.
Also detained were two associates, Qi Dafeng and Qian Liyun.
They were taken from the family home of Mr.
Shen about 4 A.M.
Tuesday.
Li Yixian, Mr.
Shen's mother, said the police passed her a note written by her son that said he was being questioned at a hotel but giving no location.


Judge Who Made Allegations Is Not Nominated for a 2d Term
No farewell banquet is planned for Judge Stuart Namm of the Suffolk County Court, the man some say toppled a district attorney, forced the police to reform and shook the Suffolk bench so hard other judges got splinters.
The 58-year-old former Army ranger has been dumped, everyone seems to agree, in a political cross-endorsement deal that left him without a nomination to run for a second 10-year term in November.


Sheila Baker, Gautam Gujral
Sheila Mary Baker, a daughter of Dr.
Isabel M. Baker and Charles A. Baker of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Gautam Singh Gujral, a son of Jaya S. Gujral of Chicago and Harinder S. Gurjal of Houston.
The Rev.
Paul Johnson performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Scanticon hotel.


Elizabeth Carter, Timothy Rooney
Elizabeth Babson Carter, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
D.
Martin Carter of New York, was married yesterday in Guilford, Conn., to Lieut.
Timothy Brian Rooney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Rooney of West Redding, Conn.
The Revs.
Anna and David Carter Florence, the bride's sister and brother-in-law, performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Rooney, 22 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is studying for a master's degree in education at the College of William &amp; Mary.
Her father is a professor of medicine and a senior physician at Rockefeller University.
Her mother, Anne Babson Carter, is a poet.


Delta's Bumpy International Ride
LAST Nov. 1, as Delta Air Lines celebrated the beginning of service on the international routes it had bought from Pan American World Airways, a huge red ribbon encircling an Airbus A310 plane was released by a work crew.
Instead of dropping to the side as planned, however, the ribbon fell on the heads of Delta executives and local officials standing on the tarmac outside the Pan Am terminal at Kennedy International Airport.


Glimpses of War in the Balkans; Where the Macabre Has Become Routine
The conflict in the fragments of Yugoslavia is a war that has developed a rabid quality all its own.
In it people can be killed for either showing or not showing their thumbs.
Serbs salute each other by raising the thumb and the first two fingers of the right hand; Croats by showing just the two fingers spread in a V. On alien turf, either gesture invites punishment.
The sight of soldiers on trucks flashing two fingers to civilians in Croat areas and three in Serbian ones is one of many disjointed images that convey the particular sense of war in a shattered Yugoslavia.


Getting Close to Nature: Just 7 to 12 Inches Away
IF you ask Ruth H. Smiley about the ferns you photographed on the woodland trails around the Lake Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y., she will tell you there are 30 kinds of ferns on the property, which her family owns in the Shawangunk Mountains.
There are 300 types of ferns in America, she will add, and 6,000 in the world.
A professional horticulturist and conservationist who has been taking photographs for more than 50 years, Mrs.
Smiley, who works in the fabled inn's front office, knows that ferns in northern areas turn color in the fall and that the most interesting side to photograph is the back of the leaf, where the spores hide.
She knows the secrets of plants and trees in every season, but her mind is focused now on nature in her own backyard, which is ready to explode into color.


Show and Tell For the Young at Art
When television meets the arts, the result is often a one-camera museum tour led by an Alistair Cooke knockoff ("This, then, was the Renaissance"), perhaps most useful for slowing a child's metabolism before bedtime.
But not this time.
"We use a lot of vermin," says Teller, the magician and a co-host of "Behind the Scenes," a new public television series about the arts for young people, which begins with a preview Tuesday at 8:30 P.M. on Channel 13.
Teller and his partner and co-host, Penn Gillette, also use motorcycles, elephants, frogs and buckets of paint to illustrate the ways the arts play with the eyes and ears.


Joanne M. Woolf, Brook Parker
Joanne Marie Woolf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Paul Woolf of Phillipsburg, N.J., was married yesterday in Norwich, Vt., to Thomas Brook Parker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Brooks Parker 3d of Weston, Mass.
The Rev.
Marcia Heeter officiated at the Norwich Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Parker, 29 years old, is the manager of corporate relations at the General Cinema Corporation in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
A Cornell University graduate, she received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College, as did her husband, a Dartmouth graduate.
Her father is a representative in Phillipsburg for Atkins Little Red Barns, a container company.


Corrections
A review of "Fatal Subtraction," by Pierce O'Donnell and Dennis McDougal, on Aug. 16 misidentified the chairman of Paramount Communications.
He is Martin S. Davis, not Marvin Davis.


Players Union Has Link to Commissioner's Situation, Too
Donald Fehr, head of the players union, will embark Tuesday on a three-week trip during which he will visit the players on all 26 major league baseball teams.
The purpose of the meetings is to answer questions players have been asking about the 27th and 28th teams, the two expansion franchises that will join the National League next season.
Fehr had planned to talk to the players and answer questions about the Nov. 17 expansion draft, the protected lists, the people who own and operate the Florida Marlins and the Colorado Rockies and assorted other matters related to the majors' first expansion in 16 years.


Recent Sales
Bergenfield 162,500
293 East Johnson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old renovated colonial; front porch, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,570.
Cresskill 207,000
99 Margie Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; family room, large lot, full basement; taxes $4,111.
Edison 127,000
31 Miko Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; brick fireplace, ceiling fans, family room; taxes $2,411.
Freehold 175,000
1 Plymouth Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; c/ a, in-ground swimmingpool, deck; taxes $3,142.
Metuchen 178,000
3 Alden Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; new kitchen, new bathroom, new double-tier deck; taxes $2,591.
Wayne 205,000
92 Chestnut Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old bi-level; h/ w floors, new deck, family room with bar, patio; taxes $3,863.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 266,000
Old Post Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; living room, 2 fireplaces, deck, dining area, family room, pond, 1.3 acres; taxes $4,574.
East Hartford, Conn. 94,100
70 Cross Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old ranch; replacement windows, patio, fenced-in yard, 70- by 118-foot lot; taxes $1,248.
Massapequa Park, L.I. 165,000
114 Westwood Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.


Jessica K. Vitkus, Eric D. Weeks
Jessica Karen Vitkus, the daughter of Paula K. Vitkus of San Francisco and Richard F. Vitkus of San Ramon, Calif., was married yesterday in New York to Eric Duane Weeks, a son of Robert A. and Georgiana C. Weeks of Summit, N.J.
Judge William Crosbie of the Tarrytown Village Justice Court performed the ceremony at Ristorante Barolo.


Setting Up a New Wall Switch
A convenient way to install a wall switch, and thus be able to operate a floor or table lamp from a distance, is by wiring it to an existing wall outlet so that the switch controls the outlet's upper socket, not the lower one.
The technique is called split-wiring.
Needed are a single-pole electrical switch, a metal wall box and cover plate to contain it and 14-gauge, two-conductor plastic-sheathed electrical cable to link the switch and outlet.


Tenement Testament
On Sept. 24 an old brick house on New York's Lower East Side will be placed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The building has no architectural distinction whatsoever -- there have been thousands like it in American cities -- and none of its residents ever grew up to be famous.
Even so, this tired, tattered tenement is far more emblematic of the American past than any number of log cabins, clapboard cottages and weathered farmhouses.
When the house was built in 1863, the backyard had two privies, one water spigot and a lot of clothes lines.
The people who lived there -- 20 families crammed into tiny three-room apartments -- were German and Irish.
They were succeeded by Russian, Romanian and Sephardic Jews, who were eventually overlapped by Italians.
The place must have been a Babel.
But, then, the entire Lower East Side was a Babel in those days.
In truth, it still is.
New York, as it has been for centuries, is very often the immigrant's introduction to America.


Sports of The Times; Citizen Ivan Still Gets No Respect
HERE is the first thing Ivan Lendl should do this weekend after he punches the time clock at the Open: He should ask for a tape of his match with Jimmy Connors Friday night.
No point in Lendl reviewing his strokes against the naughty old man from the dark ages.
Lendl knows how he wore Connors down with his forehand and his patience.
Rather, Lendl should review the tape in slow motion to find out just where those mass "Let's Go, Jimmy!" chants were coming from.


And Here We Thought We Knew Him
Woody and Mia look worn and beleaguered in "Husbands and Wives," and now that we know what was going on behind the scenes when the film was being shot last winter, no wonder.
Woody Allen and Mia Farrow showed up on the set to play a couple whose 10-year marriage is falling apart while he becomes infatuated with a 20-year-old student.
At the same time, their 12-year off-screen liaison was falling apart while he was becoming involved with her 21-year-old adopted daughter, Soon-Yi Farrow Previn.
"Husbands and Wives" is the movie tie-in to a scandal, a piece of merchandise being rushed to the market to take advantage of publicity.
Originally scheduled to open in eight cities on Sept. 23 and elsewhere later, the film will open in 800 theaters across the country on Sept. 18.


Masterworks Up Close But Never Too Personal
VISITORS familiar with the great art of Europe immediately sense something is a bit amiss when they visit the Slater Memorial Museum in Norwich.
Plaster cast reproductions of some of the legendary statues of Greek and Roman civilizations are on display but somehow they look a bit different.
Something has been added:
Fig leaves.


Capital Punishment
POLITICAL PUNDITS are predicting that this will be a good year for women running for office because this is the year of the outsider and women are outsiders.
Whatever.
But if it comes to pass, these women ought to beware.
They will be going to a mighty strange place.
Washington reminds me of the city I grew up in -- Milwaukee.
That is, Washington is just like Milwaukee was in the late 1950's.


Chamorro Dismisses Her Police Chief, a Sandinista
President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro removed her Sandinista police chief and 11 of his closest aides today, but the changes may not have met Bush Administration conditions for the renewal of economic aid.
Mrs.
Chamorro, trying to juggle the pressures of the United States with the resistance of the opposition Sandinista Front, replaced the police chief, Rene Vivas, with another Sandinista, though of much lower profile.


At Work; Different Tactics in Labor's Battles
IT may not be true that Joe Uehlein would do
anything
to advance the cause of labor, but he will push the envelope.
Earlier this year, for example, he traveled to the Swiss town of Zug, where he slipped inside a 9-foot puppet of the fugitive financier Marc Rich and allowed himself to be berated for the sins of capitalism by a 12-foot puppet of Mother Jones, the 19th-century labor hellraiser.
The performance, in front of the headquarters of Mr.
Rich's commodities empire, naturally drew a crowd, including television crews that beamed the story throughout Europe and back to the States.
Thus did street theater become part of the route by which the United Steelworkers of America brought to heel the Ravenswood Aluminum Company of Ravenswood, West Va., a company which Mr.
Rich is thought to control.


D'Amato Letter Appeared To Aid Reputed Mob Figure
Three months after the Senate Ethics Committee chastised Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato for failing to adequately supervise mailings from his office, he sent a letter to a Federal agency that appeared to lobby on behalf of a businessman with reported strong tries to the Gambino organized-crime family.
Peter Castellana, a cousin of Paul Castellano, the former head of the Gambino crime family, had been having difficulty buying a meat-processing plant on Long Island.
The Government had taken over the property from a failed savings and loan.


On Queens Strip, Response to Neighbors' Protests
Concerned about notoriety and a sharp drop in business after two highly publicized killings, bar and restaurant owners on a strip studded with nightspots in Queens have organized to respond to longstanding community protests about rowdiness and violence in the area.
About 30 businesses on Bell Boulevard in Bayside, the site of the recent slaying of an off-duty Housing Authority police officer and another man, have formed a coalition to change the atmosphere that many in the neighborhood say led to the kinds of brawls that prompted the slayings.


This Just In: You're Heading for a Traffic Jam
In their smog-choked, slam-the-dashboard struggle with congestion around the George Washington Bridge or Kennedy International Airport, motorists will soon get new help from a voice from above.
Early next year, three mini-radio stations near those sites will begin broadcasting 24-hour traffic reports that will include immediate alerts about trouble spots and ways to avoid them.
Motorists within four miles of the bridge and the airport will be able to tune their radios to a frequency at the bottom of the AM band to receive the signals.
Transportation officials say the reports will be similar to those from traffic services heard on commercial radio stations, with two differences: they will be broadcast around the clock and will focus on the area where the motorists are driving.


Time for Parents to Think on Their Feet
THIS year's late Labor Day gave parents an extra week to postpone a dreaded ritual: shopping for back-to-school shoes.
A very, very long time ago, the seasonal power struggle used to involve a choice between saddle shoes and penny loafers.
Now, with diminutive versions of every footwear fashion from engineer boots to Topsiders available, things are more complicated.


Money Abroad
To the Editor: Your Travel Advisory had an article on the expansion of the Plus system network ("Teller Network Grows in Asia and Europe," June 28).
I have a daughter in Sydney, Australia, who had planned to use her Chemical Bank card on the Plus system to get cash while traveling.
She had used her card in Turkey without problems, and a call to a Chemical bank seemed to indicate that the Plus system was in Australia as well.
However, when I finally called our local bank, also on the Plus system, a woman looked in a large directory and found no listings for Sydney.


EUROPEANS RETAIN CURRENCY VALUES
Faced with the possibility of a major setback to European unification if French voters reject the union treaty, the 12 European Community nations sought today to ease growing economic strains but ended up again confronting their conflicting domestic priorities.
European finance ministers, meeting in Bath, England, amid turmoil in monetary markets, reiterated their commitment to the current European Monetary System, under which their nations have agreed to keep their currencies linked in value within a relatively narrow range.


Bush Takes Economics Out Beyond Voodoo; Upper Income Burden
To the Editor:
I have voted in every Presidential election since 1932.
I read with great interest the "Erratum" on your Aug. 19 front page, which draws readers' attention to a "misquotation" of Lincoln's words by President Reagan.


A Hands-On History of Art
THE ART PACK
By Christopher Frayling, Helen Frayling and Ron van der Meer.
Illustrated.
Unpaged.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $40.


AUG. 30 - SEPT. 5: Hopes and Fears; Negotiators Propose Treaty To Ban Chemical Weapons By the Year 2005
After 24 years of painstaking talks, mostly out of the spotlight, negotiators completed an agreement last week to ban the production, use and stockpiling of chemical weapons.
The 38-nation Committee on Disarmament agreed in Geneva to send the treaty to the United Nations for endorsement.
If all goes according to plan, the General Assembly will pass a resolution this year urging nations to join the agreement, which is to be signed in Paris in January.


DIARY OF A DROPOUT
What Senator Wirth seems to have missed is the extraordinary desire of the electorate for change.
Witness the response of voters to the political campaigns of Paul E. Tsongas and Ross Perot.
Yet, when the going got tough, both men quickly exited.
In his article, Wirth tells us that he regards Senator Robert Kennedy, with his passion and intellect, as a model for public service.
What we need now are strong leaders, with similar passion and resolve.
Only then will we no longer feel as if we are voting for the lesser of two evils.
LOUIS R. MORRELL
Winter Park, Fla.


Bush Backs His Man Completely
George W. Bush strode into a hotel lobby in Rosemont, Ill., saw the gantlet of cameras and masses of reporters waiting, but did not duck, hide or run.
That in itself set the general partner of the Texas Rangers apart from just about every other major league baseball owner who had gone to that spot in that Chicago suburb last Thursday, gathering for what turned out to be an historic meeting as the owners made official their attempts to force Commissioner Fay Vincent from office.


HITTING THE WALL
Junger justifies hitting the wall by saying, "It's the one way a man has of showing anger without harming someone or appearing weak." Words, as a journalist should know, are a stronger tool.
FELICIA ROFF
Brooklyn


Leyland Turns Off Mike And Denies a Report
Pittsburgh Pirates Manager JIM LEYLAND, angered by a report that he disparaged New York Mets outfielder VINCE COLEMAN, announced last night that he will not speak to reporters.
The controversy started with a story in USA Today on Friday that quoted Leyland as saying Coleman was a "living, breathing mistake." Leyland denies making the statement.
The USA Today story, written by ROD BEATON, attributed the quote to The Village Voice, a New York-based weekly.
Leyland further said that he is banning Beaton from the Pirates clubhouse, according to the team's publicist, JIM TRDINICH.  (AP)


Ducking the Environment
Senator Al Gore says George Bush has "turned his back" on the environment.
The influential Sierra Club says the President has compiled an "anti-environment record that is the equal of Ronald Reagan's." Meanwhile, Republican spokesmen describe Mr.
Gore as an extremist whose "hysterical" views would strangle the country in regulation and cost thousands of jobs.
These are caricatures.
Mr.
Bush's record is mixed, but his efforts to clean the air, protect the ozone layer and preserve Antarctica suggest a level of concern far higher than Mr.
Reagan's indifference.


Western Sahara Yearns for Independence
To the Editor:
I am a student from Western Sahara, studying English and enjoying the opportunity to read United States newspapers.
Usually, I trust what I read, but your Aug. 16 report on Western Sahara compels me to respond.


Officials Say Somali Famine Is Even Worse Than Feared
Relief officials say that as their operations move into rural areas of Somalia, they are discovering that the country's famine is far worse than previously believed and that current efforts, including an American airlift, are falling far short of what is needed to ease the crisis.
The officials, representing the United Nations and private relief agencies, said the wider dimensions of the famine had become clear only in recent days as relief workers began to arrive in rural centers like this one, where streams of emaciated men, women and children have flocked from outlying areas on the word that food is arriving.


Georgia Newspaper Publishes Its Last Issue
The Daily News of Gwinnett County, Ga., published its last issue today.
The newspaper's owner, The New York Times Company, announced last month that it was closing the suburban Atlanta paper, which it acquired five years ago.
The printing plant and other assets of The Daily News, which has a weekday circulation of 50,000 copies and a Sunday circulation of 44,000, are being acquired by Cox Enterprises Inc., publisher of The Atlanta Journal and Constitution.
The paper has 290 employees, some of whom have accepted transfers to other newspapers owned by the Times Company.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton, in South Carolina, Shows He Is a Threat in the South
There was a sign in the crowd of people waiting to hear Gov.
Bill Clinton speak at the State Capitol here today: "South Carolina is Clinton Country."
If the Arkansas Governor saw it, he probably appreciated the sentiment, but it is doubtful that he believed the promise.
This state, where the Civil War began, has voted Republican in five out of the last six Presidential elections, giving George Bush 62 percent of its votes in 1988.


Summer Fadeout: Let Nature Take Its Course
Although it may seem a far way off to many gardeners, in the plant kingdom winter is just around the corner.
Plants may seem to take their good old time in getting ready for the change of seasons.
But gardeners can respect this winding down, especially among the woody plants, and give them the best chance to accomplish this.
It is not a question so much of what to do, as it is what
not
to do.
To comply with this cycle, allow plants to settle down at their own pace.
That is, do not fertilize, prune or stimulate woody plants at this time of year.
Applications of fertilizer now are not considered wise.
Plant nutrients, especially those found in the quickly available water-soluble kinds, stimulate plants to grow.
This new growth will be succulent and green and subject to winter kill because it will not have time to mature, or "harden off" as it is described in horticultural lingo.
Even if no new growth appears above the soil line, the stimulation to the near dormant buds is not needed now.


The Cologne Challenge: Is New York's Art Monopoly Kaput?
In Cologne not long ago, a party was held at the Ludwig Museum to celebrate a new exhibition.
As the guests milled for an hour or so, there was much smiling and handshaking and a clatter of German.
Everyone sipped not wine or Champagne, but the local party fare -- cold drafts of Kolsch beer.
Most of the guests were Cologne art collectors who are, as they say, "into contemporary." The exhibition, borrowed from their holdings, was organized as a tribute to their audacious taste.
Everything about the show was designed to provoke, most notably the cover of the catalogue.
It featured a photograph by the American Cindy Sherman, a self-portrait in which the artist is posed amid assorted condoms and dildos.
Despite its attempt at in-your-face outrageousness, "Art for the Home," as the show was jokingly entitled, included the usual fashionable names, and in the end seemed less to buck prevailing taste than to endorse it.


Ferraro's Lesson Plan
THE TELEVISION SCRIPT Ms.
ON THE SCREEN: Ms.
Ferraro in a classroom, standing, walking and sitting on a desk, looking squarely into the camera.
On the line, "Nothing prepares you to teach second-graders," she gives just the hint of a rueful smile.
In the final image, her slogan appears on the screen over silent footage of her talking with a little girl.
ACCURACY: From 1956 to 1961, Ms.
Ferraro taught second and fourth grades at Public School 85 in Queens.
The Federal Head Start early-education program now reaches only about one-quarter of eligible children; she has pledged to support extending it to all eligible children.
She favors creating a national trust fund to lend money to any student who qualifies for higher education, to be repaid through a small percentage of income collected by the Internal Revenue Service, or by performing a few years of community service as a teacher or police officer, for example SCORECARD: The title of this ad, Ms.
Ferraro's fifth, might be "Ms Chips Goes to Washington," and it is her strongest effort yet to deflect her rivals' charges about questionable business dealings.
It starts out gentle, sentimental, even witty - evoking the warm feelings and shiny apples any teacher ever won.
It ends with Ms.
Ferraro adopting her favorite stance of common-sense Super Mom, tough and warm at once, and vowing to fight on behalf of American families the way voters have already seen her fight for her own.
Her confident little nod at the end bespeaks a woman confident that she has things well in hand.


Making the Choice: A Co-op or a Condo
WHEN they started looking around their Greenwich Village neighborhood for an apartment to buy last spring, Jeffrey and Victoria Connell thought they had a handle on the distinctions between co-ops and condominiums.
But early in their search, an apartment they liked and could afford was scratched from their list when they discovered that the co-op had a 40 percent cash requirement.
"We were about to make a bid," said Mr.
Connell, "when we found out about the 40 percent down payment requirement. We could have done it, but it would not have left us much cash for other things, like closing costs, the move or improvements in the apartment."


A 50's Style Is Updated And Feminized
What goes around comes around.
Here, in miniature, are the round-toed suede bucks of the 50's -- not blue, like Elvis's, but in folk-singer tan, brown and hipster black.
A neat twist to feminize and update them: lace ribbons in turquoise, purple or pink, or wide chiffon ribbons in solids or flower prints.


There Is Hope Yet
To the Editor:
Keith Jarrett might view music and the musical industry as devoid of integrity and held captive by a pop market  [ "Categories Aplenty, but Where's the Music?," Aug. 16 ] .
But hold on: there might not be reason to grieve just yet.
Clearly, Mr.
Jarrett has a bone to pick with musicians like Branford Marsalis, whom he believes "sell out" rather than be true to an ideal notion of a musical "voice." His reasoning, however, does not take into account the challenges and realities that performing musicians face.


In the Central, Time to Fasten Seat Belts
The winds of change are blowing in the National Football Conference's Central Division.
Will the Chicago Bears be swept away by the breeze?
This black-and-blue, hit-till-you-drop division that the Bears have dominated in style and productivity for so long underwent major surgery last season when the run-and-shoot Detroit Lions toppled the Bears and swiped the crown.
It was only the second time in the last eight years that the Bears failed to claim it.


Bring Back Canseco! A's Lose 5th Straight
Red Sox 7, Athletics 3  OAKLAND, Calif., Sept. 5 (AP) -- John Valentin went 3 for 3 with two doubles and the Boston Red Sox sent the punchless Oakland Athletics to their season-high fifth straight loss, 7-3, yesterday.


How the New Charter Affects Land Use
DESPITE a dearth of construction in New York City, communities are feeling the impact of land-use review procedures that went into effect two years ago under the 1989 City Charter revision.
The new rules have stirred up greater land-use planning activity at the borough level.
And many community board officials say they are better informed now than they were in the past about prospective changes in their neighborhoods.


Money Abroad
To the Editor: On a recent trip to Southeast Asia we were able to use our Plus system automatic teller machine card with no problem in both Hong Kong and Singapore and the exchange rate was significantly better than credit card charges or traveler's checks exchanged at a bank.
While Plus was apparently not available in Bangkok, Visa A.T.M.'s were all over the place, and using a debit card (not a cash advance), we found the same currency exchange advantage.


The 'Devil' (or Is It Angel?) of Rap and Rock
If record industry legend is to be believed, Rick Rubin never goes to the office.
Rather, he prefers to conduct business over the telephone -- either from his black Rolls-Royce or while lying in bed at his home in Hollywood behind the famed rock-and-roll hangout, the Chateau Marmont.
But it's unlikely anyone in the music business would care where the 29-year-old Mr.
Rubin spent his time if he weren't constantly turning up in a third place: at the top of the pop charts.
Since producing his first record in 1984 while a student at New York University, Mr.
Rubin, the founder and head of Def American Records, has become one of the most influential record producers and executives in America.
In the last year, he has had a hand in the success of three dissimilar pop acts.
He produced the latest album from the alternative rock band the Red Hot Chili Peppers, "Blood Sugar Sex Magik," for Warner Brothers Records; it has sold more than two million copies and is now No. 9 on the pop charts.
His label released albums by the rapper Sir Mix-a-Lot and the Southern rock band the Black Crowes; Sir Mix-a-Lot's album contains the racy hit "Baby Got Back," which held the No. 1 position on the singles chart for six weeks this summer, while the Black Crowes' "Southern Harmony and Musical Company" made its debut at the top of the album charts and is currently No. 25.


POSTINGS: Seton Hall Library; A Bigger Bang for the Books
When the new Walsh Library at Seton Hall University in South Orange, N.J., opens in March 1994, the school will be getting more than it bargained for -- literally.
In July 1991, the university asked for a 125,000-square-foot building within a $20 million budget.
Instead, the developer, M. Alfieri Company of Edison, N.J., will deliver a building with 25,000 more square feet than the university requested without going over budget.


A Needless Whack at Needy Students
A Federal judge in Philadelphia has struck a needless, unpersuasive blow to the scholarship hopes of poor, bright college students.
By ruling that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has violated the law in making financial aid offers, Judge Louis Bechtle last week seized on the shell of antitrust law to mock its purpose.
The case raises issues of national policy and principle.
Judge Bechtle's decision merely waves them off.
All who hope that colleges may use their limited scholarship funds sensibly will hope for a wiser reading of the law on appeal.


Leaps and Bounds
On Aug. 30, at the grand finale of the Hampton Classic.


Ms. Needham, Peter E. Mark
Tara C. Kirk of Greenwich, Conn., and James W. Needham of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Elizabeth Eliot Needham and Peter Edward Mark, a son of Arlene and Reuben Mark of Greenwich.
Ms.
Needham, 26 years old, is a program manager in the conference division of Institutional Investor magazine in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is the chairman of the Florence Fearrington Corporation, an investment management concern named for the bride's stepmother, who is the company's founder and president.
The bride's mother is a securities analyst at the General Electric Investment Corporation in Stamford, Conn.
The bride's stepfather, Donald J. Kirk of Greenwich, is a professor of finance at Columbia University.


Results Plus
GOLF  Crampton's 11 Birdies Put Him in Lead Bruce Crampton made birdies on 11 of the last 14 holes for an eight-under-par 63 and a one-stroke lead yesterday in the Senior PGA Tour's First of America Classic in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Crampton's round tied the Elks Country Club Highlands course record set by Miller Barber at the 1987 Classic.
Crampton has a two-round total of 10-under 132, and with 18 holes left, he is a stroke in front of Tommy Aaron, who shot a 67, and the first-round leader, Homero Blancas, who followed his 65 Friday with a 68.
Crampton, winner of 14 PGA Tour events and 19 events on the Senior Tour, made bogeys on the second and fourth holes.
He followed with birdies on four of the last five holes on the front nine and seven holes on the back -- including five straight from No. 11 to No. 15. (AP) Brooks Is Ahead: Mark Brooks, the defending champion, took a one-stroke lead over Richard Zokol in the Greater Milwaukee Open in Frankin, Wis.
Brooks stands at 15-under-par 201 after shooting a 65 at the Tuckaway Country Club.
"The day started with a bad drive and a bad bunker shot on the first hole," said Brooks, who shot seven birdies and no bogeys yesterday.
"It sounds strange but a lot of times it's a good way to start. It maybe takes some of the pressure off being as precise as you'd like to be." Zokol, who won the Deposit Guarantee Classic in April, is at 14-under 202 after a 64 yesterday.
Jay Haas holds third at 12-under, and Nick Price, Dudley Hart and David Frost are bunched at 11-under-par. (AP) CYCLING United States Women Win 50K Race The United States made up for two successive disappointing years by winning the women's 50-kilometer team time trial yesterday in the world championships in Benidorm, Spain, edging the defending gold medalists from France.
Bunki Bankaitis-Davis, Eve Stephenson, Jan Bolland and Jeanne Golay were clocked in 1 hour 3 minutes 30.7 seconds, more than 12 seconds ahead of the French and just over 46 seconds in front of the third-place Russians.
The United States women won the silver medal in 1990, but wound up fourth last year when one of their riders was thought to have had an off day in her performance.
That rider, Maureen Manley, was later diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.
Yesterday, the Americans had the fastest time at 17 kilometers, the first checkpoint.
At the 30-kilometer mark, the United States was still up by just under 10 seconds over the French, who closed from fifth to second but could get no closer over a hilly course that was to the Americans' liking.
Henny Top, a Dutch national and the United States women's coach the last two seasons, said consistent speed training, high attitude training in Colorado Springs, and patience finally paid off.
The week-long championships end today with the men's 261.6-kilometer road race in which Spain's Miguel Indurain will be the favorite.
Indurain is shooting to become only the third rider to take the Tour de France, Tour of Italy and world title in the same year.
Ireland's Stephen Roche last pulled the triple in 1987.
Greg LeMond withdrew from today's 162-mile race.
Fred Mengoni, president of the United States Professional Cycling Federation said LeMond had a urinary tract infection.
The top United States riders are Andy Hampsten, fourth in this year's Tour de France, and Lance Armstrong, who turned pro after placing 14th a month ago in the Barcelona Olympics. (AP) VOLLEYBALL Japanese Women Rally to Defeat U.S.
Japan's national women's volleyball team lost the first game but rallied to beat the United States, 13-15, 15-4, 15-10, 15-4, yesterday for its second victory against no losses in a three-match series in Hiroshima, Japan.
Motoko Obayashi was Japan's highest scorer with 10 points, while Daiva Tomkus of West Hills, Calif., scored the most points for the United States with 11. (AP)


Education Cutbacks Arouse Barrage of Complaints
AS the 1992-93 New Jersey public school term opens this week, the focus is not on the classroom but in the courts and the State Legislature, where the fate of New Jersey's new system of financing public education is being determined.
All across the state, in urban, suburban and rural school districts alike, parents and educators are complaining of cutbacks in educational programs.


Glynis Karp and Scotty Greenberg
WHAT might it have been like to marry your high school sweetheart, to walk down the aisle with the person who took you to the senior prom?
"It's fun," Glynis Karp said.
"Scotty and I always have something to talk about. We can always say, 'Remember when.' "


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
Tuesday -- Aug. consumer credit, change in billions
-$1.0
-$0.8
Wednesday -- Aug. wholesale trade, percent change
2.4
1.0
Thursday -- Late Aug. jobless claims, thousands
386
390
Friday -- Aug. producer prices, percent change
0.1
0.2
Monday -- Labor Day holiday, all American markets closed Tuesday -- Survey of American retail sales is released Thursday -- Trans World Airlines bankruptcy hearing


Evelyn R. Swett, Donald Miller
Evelyn Randall Swett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven C. Swett of Norwich, Vt., was married yesterday to Dr.
Donald McElwain Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald F. Miller of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Peter E. Camp performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in Hanover, N.H.
Mrs.
Miller, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is an education consultant in Charlottesville, Va., for High Performance Systems Inc., a computer software company in Hanover.
Her father is the business and financial reporter for The Valley News in West Lebanon, N.H.
Her mother, Shiela Swett, is the technology director of the Woodstock (Vt.) Elementary School.


Frank White Retiring
FRANK WHITE, who won eight Gold Gloves in his 18 seasons with the Kansas City Royals, has decided to leave professional baseball.
The former Royals second baseman spent the summer as manager of the Boston Red Sox rookie team in Winter Haven, Fla.  (AP)


Elaine Eraklis, Mr. Lunsingh Tonckens
Dr. and Mrs.
Angelo J. Eraklis of Belmont, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elaine Katherine Eraklis, to Jaap Cornelis Warmolt Lunsingh Tonckens, a son of H. Frederieke Trouw of Utrecht and Nicholaas A. Lunsingh Tonckens of Haarlem, both in the Netherlands.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Eraklis, 32 years old, is a lawyer in Paris.
She graduated from Smith College, and she and her fiance received law degrees from Emory University.
Her father is a pediatric surgeon at Children's Hospital and an associate professor of surgery at Harvard University Medical School, both in Boston.
He is also a chairman and a founder of Health Care International-Scotland Ltd., which is building a hospital in Clydebank, Scotland.


Cynthia Sinnott, Daniel Offermann
Cynthia Marie Sinnott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Sinnott of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y., to Daniel Allen Offermann, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Offermann of River Forest, Ill.
Msgr.
Stanley G. Matthews performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Starts
1,151
1,036
+11.1%
Completions
1,165
1,104
+ 5.5%
Sales
578
513
+12.7%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
New York
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.18
8.03
9.37
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.44
5.40
7.01
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.03
7.90
9.22
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.21
5.18
6.94
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.07
7.95
9.26
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.12
5.14
6.90
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.24
8.03
9.47
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.96
5.92
7.58
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.52
3.40
5.74
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.78
8.04
9.12
Source: HSH Associates *Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.


AUG. 30 - SEPT. 5: Werner Heisenberg; New Clues, but No Certainty On the Nazis' A-Bomb Chief
Werner Heisenberg, a Nobel laureate who led the Nazi scientific drive for the atomic bomb, was in fact a saboteur who deliberately scuttled the project, according to advance copies of a forthcoming book.
In "Heisenberg's War: The Secret History of the German Bomb," to be released by Knopf in February, Thomas Powers writes that Heisenberg not only stymied the project out of scruples but also passed information to foreign scientists that alerted the Allies to the top-secret German effort.
In 1941, 1942 and 1944, Mr.
Powers says, Heisenberg disclosed secret information to foreign scientists who he knew were sure to be in contact with Allied intelligence.


Freddie Mac
To the Editor
It is good news for landlords that Freddie Mac is back in the multifamily loan market  [ "Welcome Back, Freddie Mac," July 26 ] .
But it is bad news for tenants of some Freddie Mac-financed buildings.
Freddie Mac stopped multifamily lending about two years ago because its multifamily portfolio was in poor shape.
A report by the General Accounting Office requested by members of the New York Congressional delegation details the problems.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ALL THE FUN OF THE FAIR
One of the few authentic country fairs easily accessible to Westchester residents will be held Wednesday through Sunday in Yorktown Heights.
The 68th Annual Yorktown Grange Fair, which evolved out of a local farmer's potato-judging contest in 1923, will be held at the Rochambeau Park Fairgrounds on Moseman Avenue.


And Dizzy?
To the Editor:
Musicians of an earlier time composed, more often than not, to fulfill some contractual obligation or another, or to curry favor with a wealthy nobleman, etc.
As for our own time, who courted fame, cultivated his public image or was a more savvy businessman than Keith Jarrett's idol, Miles Davis?
That Davis was a great artist with an entirely unique, deeply affecting sound is a totally separate matter.


Young Love


HITTING THE WALL
Despite its tongue-in-cheek mocking of male machismo, Junger's article legitimizes men's violent behavior by poking fun at it but not rejecting it.
Men must realize that articles like this only perpetuate the anger and violence their new "sensibility" claims to want to heal.
CRAIG SIEGEL
Cambridge, Mass.


Mummies' Home
To the Editor: I was happy to read that the Egyptian Museum in Cairo started on a renovation project that will give additional space to its mummies and to its Tutankhamen collection (Travel Advisory, July 19).
When I was in the Egyptian Museum in 1978, I was appalled to see such crowded conditions that large hieroglyphic tablets were stacked against walls and in some cases lying on floors.


Alexa Magna and Todd Yannuzzi
Alexa Magna, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Magna of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Todd Yannuzzi, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Yannuzzi of New York.
The Rev.
Katherine Cunningham performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Yannuzzi, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and will study law at St.
John's University this fall.
Her father is the chief executive of the Magna Group, an advertising agency in Hawthorne, N.J.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: President Bush  SUNDAY: 7-8 P.M., NBC, "The Brokaw Report."(Channel 4 in New York)
Gov. Bill Clinton  SUNDAY: 7-8 P.M., NBC, "The Brokaw Report."(Channel 4 in New York)
Senator Al Gore  SUNDAY: 9:30 A.M., NBC, "Meet the Press."
WEDNESDAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."


No Headline
These riots are the worst thing that has happened in Germany since 1945, a scandal for our whole country.
We are not neo-Nazis.
We want to live together with others.
PREMIER MANFRED STOLPE of the German state of Brandenburg.  [ 16:3. ]


Two Coaches Make History
Ray Rhodes said the chats would happen after practice, maybe in the locker room after watching film.
Sherman Lewis remembers them occurring on the golf course where Lewis, Rhodes and Mike Holmgren, who worked together for six years as San Francisco 49ers assistant coaches, often sought solitude.
"We would say," said Rhodes, " 'If the situation presents itself, let's go do it.' "


Networking; Compaq Taps on a Stronghold's Door
HEWLETT-PACKARD owns the laser printer market and thus the network printer market, but it has more company these days.
Last week, Compaq Computer joined the battle to capture a share of HP's laser printer market with two new network printers.
Known for its high-quality personal computers and network servers, Compaq has started a new peripheral division whose first two products are the Pagemarq 20 and the Pagemarq 15 network laser printers.
It's interest in the market is not hard to fathom.
By 1996, the entire network laser market will exceed $700 million.


Wheeled Beach Chair for Disabled
Wheelchair users who enjoy the beach may find it more accessible with the Surf Chair, a balloon-tired conveyance that allows them to ride across the sands.
Provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act encourage shore resorts to provide wheelchair access to beaches, and ramps and walkways are going up in many seaside towns.
But users of conventional wheelchairs, once they have traveled from the sidewalk through the dunes to the beach, often find that a long and arduous trip over the sand to the water remains.


Ms. Federman, Robert DeLong
Elizabeth Belle Federman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel M. Federman of San Francisco, was married on Friday to Robert Kevin DeLong, the son of Gay M. Boyer of Fairport, N.Y., and Dr.
Dennis R. DeLong of Albany.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard S. Monkman performed the Methodist ceremony at the Pound Ridge (N.Y.) Community Church.
Ms.
Federman, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Swarthmore College, and she and her husband are doctoral candidates at Johns Hopkins University, she in psychiatric epidemiology and he in molecular oncology.
Her father is the president of the Premenos Corporation in Concord, Calif., which develops communications software.
Her mother, Susan H. Federman, owns an interior-design company in San Francisco.


Supporters of AIDS Pledge Criticize Other Programs
A group of about 50 protesters marched in City Hall Park last week chanting, "No way, Jose, don't teach our children to be gay." A 7-year-old girl from Manhattan's Public School 199 carried a sign that said, "Gay is Not OK," while organizers of the newly formed, Brooklyn-based Concerned Parents for Education Accountability spoke of AIDS education and pedophilia in the same breath.
Coming only days after outside AIDS lecturers balked at a school board mandate that they sign a pledge promising to emphasize abstinence over safe sex, the demonstration at City Hall was only the latest sign that the long-running debate over AIDS education had broadened to include criticism of other school programs and spawned a full-fledged crusade against what some parent and church groups see as a hidden gay-rights agenda in city schools.


There Goes Nagle. Here Comes Blitz. It's Crunch Time!
If they had a mail-order catalogue and 12 months of lead time, the Jets could not have ordered a better season opener than the one they have with the Atlanta Falcons this afternoon.
What better way to test the mettle of a young, inexperienced quarterback than a baptism by blitz in front of a loud, hostile sellout crowd of 71,000 celebrating the opening of a sparkling new dome stadium?


For Victims Of Hurricane, The Crisis Is Here to Stay
More than just the landscape was irremediably altered two weeks ago when Hurricane Andrew smashed and swirled its way across southern Florida, blowing down thousands of houses, stores and offices and leaving 38 people dead.
Hundreds of thousands of people have had their lives shattered, and as they labor wearily in the ruins left by the biggest natural disaster in American history, one question looms above all others: how much longer before things return to normal?
The signs are not encouraging.
Even for those lucky enough not to be included in the estimated 250,000 homeless, the initial elation that came with survival and the discovery of a home that was merely damaged, not destroyed, has faded into a primitive and numbing routine.
By Friday, an estimated 350,000 residents of Miami's southern suburbs remained without electricity and potable water, forced to cook their meals and boil their water over propane stoves or open fires.
There are also generators to be filled, mosquitoes to be fought off, and roofing material, glass and plywood to be sought.


Rubin Stops a Maleeva and Ignites Her Own Career
Out on Court 16, in front of a few thousand set of eyes wide in amazement, Chanda Rubin seemed to grow well beyond her 16 years yesterday afternoon.
A disheartening third-set line call that might have been expected to send a young professional reeling out of a fierce struggle with Katerina Maleeva merely distracted her for a handful of points.
Rubin recovered in time to break the 23-year-old Maleeva in the ninth game and serve out what could be her breakthrough victory, a 6-4, 3-6, 6-4 third-round upset of the 15th-seeded player at the United States Open.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-22  AID FALLS SHORT IN SOMALIA  As relief officials move deeper into Somalia, they are discovering that the country's famine is far worse than they had imagined.
The current level of aid seems far short of what is needed to ease the crisis.  1  CHINESE DISSIDENTS GROW BOLDER  The campaign by Deng Xiaoping for faster economic change seems to be having an unintended effect in China: People are becoming a bit bolder in challenging the authorities.  3  A FORCEFUL PEACE FORCE?
STRIKE IS SETTLED  Agreement between General Motors and the United Automobile Workers ended a strike that had shut down much of G.M.'s production and idled more than 40,000 workers.  1  POLES APART IN BIG SKY COUNTRY  Montanans have no excuse for complaining that all politicians are alike.
A report of a visit from the Virgin Mary sounds like a wonderful event.


Helen Keller Landmark
To the Editor:
Ellen Jaffe McClain states (letter, Aug. 28) that Lionel Barrymore was the first visibly disabled actor to appear in a motion picture.
But Helen Keller, the blind and deaf author who learned to speak and became a lecturer, played herself in "Deliverance," a 1918 silent film of her amazing life.
It is believed to be the first film about physical disability.
Miss Keller received critical praise for her performance, but unfortunately, no prints survive.
PHIL HALL Bronx, Aug. 28, 1992


Hospital Merger: Right Rx for Meriden?
THE merger of a municipal and a private hospital in Meriden last year, though bitterly opposed by many, was finally approved because it was supposed to bring big savings in medical costs.
More than $1 million a month was saved in operating costs from the beginning of the merger, according to hospital officials.
And now the administrators of the Veterans Memorial Medical Center, as the merged hospitals are known, have come up with an idea to save more money: consolidate and expand the services offered in two aging buildings of the old hospitals and offer them in a single new building to be constructed on a new site.


Claudia Weithas, Conor Mullett
Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Weithas Jr. of Rumson, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Claudia Robin Weithas and Conor Timothy Mullett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roderick O. Mullett of Morristown, N.J.
Ms.
Weithas, 26 years old, is a teacher at the Studio Elementary School in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in education from New York University.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman and chief executive of Lintas Worldwide, the advertising concern, in New York.


Venturing Along a Remote Road
ALTHOUGH it gets a bit shorter and less forbidding each year as construction crews remove a few more of its most hazardous hairpin turns and steep hills, the 1,520-mile Alaska Highway seems in no danger of losing its claim as the last great driving adventure in North America.
Sure, there are other places to routinely spot moose, wolves and even bears wandering across your path amid majestic mountain scenery and pristine lakes.
But probably nowhere else do you get these in half-continent dimension and with the sense of isolation provided by this historic two-lane snake of a road that twists from Dawson Creek in northeast British Columbia through the Yukon gold-rush country to Delta Junction, a couple of hours short of Fairbanks.
Technically, Delta Junction is the end of the highway, since the final 98 miles existed before it was built.


Making a Difference; At Last, a Chief Scientific Officer's Chance at a Start-Up
VICKI L. SATO, a former vice president of research at Biogen, Inc., in Cambridge, Mass., resigned last week to join Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc.
She decided to leave Biogen to become vice president and chief scientific officer of Vertex, which is also based in Cambridge.
The chance to join Vertex "was an extremely unexpected opportunity," said Ms.
Sato, who added she has followed the company's success since its founding.


In Rush to Patent Genes, The Claims Get Smaller
Scientists always knew their quest for genes would likely lead to bitter disputes over property rights.
After all, among the estimated 100,000 human genes are ones that provide blueprints for making natural substances to fight the most deadly diseases.
Any company that could own such a gene could make billions.
Any scientist who found such a gene could become an instant millionaire.
But no one imagined the form the gene wars would take.
Eschewing the tedious process of finding whole genes and learning what they do, some scientists have found a shortcut.
They are fishing shards of genes from the mass of genetic material inside human cells.
And, arguing that these fragments uniquely identify the genes from which they came, they are applying for patents, which have not yet been granted.


Living at the Scene of The Crime
GRAY DAWN
The Jews of Eastern Europe in the Post-Communist Era.
By Charles Hoffman. 349 pp.
New York: Aaron Asher Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


The Big Push Toward Privatization in Argentina
FOR decades, Argentine business had been a kind of secret society.
The economy was dominated by huge state industries.
And amidst inflation and military coups, the big money was made by family-controlled oligopolies and monopolies that contracted with the Government.
Intense lobbying, close ties with the military and political groups and, of course, payoffs at almost every level reaped lucrative contracts to build power plants, roads, bridges and dams.
But the old ways are changing, as the Government of President Carlos Saul Menem sells off by the middle of next year a host of state-run businesses that were losing $5 billion a year.
And four of Argentina's major industrial concerns -- Perez Companc, Techint, Comercial del Plata and Astra -- have not missed the opportunity to buy and are expected to end up with the concentration of power.


Yugoslav Sanctions Taking High Toll
With its vast but vacant wharfs, idle cranes and empty warehouses, the largest port in the truncated state of Yugoslavia presents a poignant image of the economic paralysis that is gripping the country and leaves no doubt that United Nations sanctions are causing widespread suffering.
Although port officials and people living close to the nearby Albanian border say some smuggling of cigarettes, liquor and fruit has occurred since the imposition of sanctions three months ago, they describe the quantities as small and portray the overall effect of the United Nations embargo as disastrous.


The Death Mask Murder
To the Editor:
As the author of "Bag of Toys: Sex, Scandal, and the Death Mask Murder," I would like to respond to the letter from Edward J. M. Little (July 19), Andrew Crispo's "attorney and friend."


What Hollywood Learned at Summer School
WHILE NORMAL PEOPLE HAVE SPENT their vacations at the beach, Hollywood executives, who could never be accused of being normal, have been examining the moviegoing habits of the nation.
After all, nearly 40 percent of the movie business is conducted from the Memorial Day weekend to Labor Day.
But the lessons learned, as in previous summers, are fleeting.
These are Hollywood's
current
10 commandments.
Next summer, there will be others. 1.
The western is back -- as long as it has a dazzling script, a charismatic star and an innovative story line.
For years, Hollywood said the western was strictly for television.
Then in 1990 came "Dances With Wolves," directed by and starring Kevin Costner, which was an unexpected critical and financial success.
This summer, the brooding, elegiac "Unforgiven," with Clint Eastwood as producer-director-star, received the best reviews of the year (along with "Howards End") and turned into a box-office winner.
The mythic story of a reformed killer who confronts his past -- a violent movie that seeks to demythologize killing -- "Unforgiven" taught Hollywood that a western that doesn't insult the intelligence of its audience will find one.


The Executive Life; Forget Doing Lunch -- Hollywood's on E-mail
IN Hollywood, information is power.
That is why over the past year or so, the electronic computer-to-computer communication -- or E-mail -- has made swift progress in the entertainment industry.
"A cornerstone of our business is the quicker you get information, the quicker you can use it," said Mike Simpson, the co-head of the motion picture department at the William Morris Agency.
"E-mail has already given us an edge."


Steamy Magazine Coverage Steaming Up Actors in India
In India, where some movie actors are revered as demigods and millions of fans imitate their life styles, people have become fascinated by a furious clash between actors and movie journalists over the right to privacy and press freedom.
At the center of the furor is Anupam Kher, one of India's best-liked and most versatile actors, who slapped a reporter after being accused in print of molesting a girl.


Summer Fadeout: Let Nature Take Its Course
Although it may seem a far way off to many gardeners, in the plant kingdom winter is just around the corner.
Plants may seem to take their good old time in getting ready for the change of seasons.
But gardeners can respect this winding down, especially among the woody plants, and give them the best chance to accomplish this.
It is not a question so much of what to do, as it is what
not
to do.
To comply with this cycle, allow plants to settle down at their own pace.
That is, do not fertilize, prune or stimulate woody plants at this time of year.
Applications of fertilizer now are not considered wise.
Plant nutrients, especially those found in the quickly available water-soluble kinds, stimulate plants to grow.
This new growth will be succulent and green and subject to winter kill because it will not have time to mature, or "harden off" as it is described in horticultural lingo.
Even if no new growth appears above the soil line, the stimulation to the near dormant buds is not needed now.


Investigation of Police Won't Be a Witch Hunt, Counsel Vows
In his life as a prosecutor tracking the influence of organized-crime figures in labor unions, Joseph P. Armao made a reputation for taking isolated cases and turning them into building blocks for large-scale investigations.
Now, Mr.
Armao finds himself facing a similar but more complex challenge.
In his new role as chief counsel to the Mollen Commission investigating possible corruption in the New York City Police Department, he has been called upon to pick up the trails created by a smattering of allegations and see where they lead.


Amid the Fallen Buildings, a Host of Questions About How They Were Built
Along with a moonscape of devastation, Hurricane Andrew has exposed a record of shoddy construction and inadequate oversight throughout the ravaged areas south of Miami.
Experts, shocked by the wreckage in an area that has been known for some of the nation's toughest building standards, said the multibillion-dollar damage toll here reflected many factors.
Beyond the unusual ferocity of the storm, they included inadequacies in the South Florida building codes, changes in the kinds of buildings constructed and, perhaps most important, widespread construction, design and material deficiencies that apparently left thousands of buildings in South Florida below code standards.


The Hidden Minority: New Jersey's Thousands of Gypsies
AT the Living Hope Fellowship Church in Hasbrouck Heights some weeks ago, a group of French gypsies was addressing a meeting about the charismatic Christian movement, which is spreading among European gypsies.
At the end of the slide presentation, the group's leader looked around the crowded room and said: "I know that there are many gypsies in this part of the country, and I know why they are not here. They are afraid of the persecution that still goes on, even in the United States."
The absence of gypsies at the well-publicized event reflected the anomaly of gypsy life in New Jersey.
There are thousands of gypsies in the state, but the vast majority carefully guard their identity.
They keep to themselves, discouraging their children from spending too much time with schoolbooks or outsiders, trying to stave off assimilation.


Bridge
The NEC world team championships ended here Saturday, with the major awards going to France and Austria.
In the Open Series the French were victorious for the third time since the quadrennial team olympiads began in 1960.
What was most remarkable, in terms of stamina, was that in the playoff stage the French used only four players, Pierre Chemla, Michel Perron, Herve Mouiel and Alain Levy, who are all professionals.
Two French alternates were employed for part of the qualifying stage.


New York Grand Prix to Have Environmentally Benign Effects
To the Editor:
"New York's Deal on Grand Prix Race Glorifies a Proven Killer" (letter, Aug. 25) is filled with misinformation and misapprehension.
After long and arduous negotiations, the city entered into a 10-year contract providing New York with one of the world's premiere sporting events.
From the success of similar races in cities like Detroit and Toronto, the Marlboro Grand Prix of New York is expected to succeed as a sporting event and economic boost.
An economic impact study projects the race will add at least $56 million to the city's economy.


Those Birds of a Feather Are Clicking Together
In the middle of the afternoon, with a division race swirling all around them, the only thing that mattered was the football game on television.
Most of the Baltimore Orioles had gathered to watch, their collective interest heightened as the clock wound down, the sun fell and the teams marched quickly across the field.
This is a race?
The Toronto Blue Jays are just ahead of them and the Milwaukee Brewers are not far behind them, but the Orioles move merrily along, almost as if they are watching the American League East race, not necessarily participating in it.


Back to the Future for Easy Now
Shug McGaughey, who saddled only two winners in five frustrating weeks at Saratoga this summer, saddled a big one yesterday when his star filly, Easy Now, broke a losing streak of her own and won the $200,000 Go For Wand Stakes at Belmont Park.
But the moment of drama took place in the homestretch a few yards back of Easy Now when Julie Krone tried to break out of a traffic jam along the rail aboard Nannerl, the 6-5 favorite trained by Scotty Schulhofer.
The only way to daylight was to the right, and Krone took it.
But she swerved her horse squarely into the path of Chris Antley's mount, Serape, who was cranking up for a late drive on the outside.


Bonilla Doesn't Go Down Swinging in Private Finale
The game wasn't close, another loss to the Reds, by 6-1.
The personal box score entry for Bobby Bonilla was 0 for 3 and it included a strikeout in the seventh inning with the score at 2-1 and the tying run on second.
His batting average for the season stands at .248.
"I didn't have the year I should have," Bonilla said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Issues: Taxes; Clinton Painted as Taxer but Isn't Tarred
Last month, President Bush's political strategists rolled out a political weapon so fearsome that it had destroyed three Democratic Presidential candidates in 12 years, and pointed it squarely at Gov.
Bill Clinton.
On Aug. 20, on network television, Mr. Bush himself squeezed the trigger.


Review/Television; Amid the Fathers, Dissenting Sisters
Three Roman Catholic American nuns in conflict with their church are the heroines of "Faith Even to the Fire," tonight's offering from "P.O.V.," the PBS series of independent productions.
In their stories one can detect the influence of Vatican II and Pope John XXIII, of the liberation theology movement in Latin America, the civil rights movement in the United States and the women's movement around the world.
Sister Judith Vaughan, a Chicago woman who says nuns run in her family, found herself in trouble after signing a "Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion" that took exception to the Vatican's edicts against abortion.
She now heads the National Assembly of Religious Women, a Catholic feminist organization.


Cuba Cancels Atom Plant, Blaming Costs and Russians
Disclosing a major setback to his country's fast-shrinking economy, President Fidel Castro announced late Saturday that work on Cuba's largest industrial project, a Soviet-designed nuclear power plant intended to relieve the island's crushing energy shortage, had been halted indefinitely by rising costs.
Although the 1,600-megawatt Cuban reactor complex was of more modern design than the failed Soviet reactor at Chernobyl, its construction at Juragua, near the southern port city of Cienfuegos, had long been a source of tension between Havana and Washington.
Some American experts expressed concern that any accident could threaten Florida.
The Cuban Government repeatedly dismissed such concerns.


Lynne Fletcher, Gregory O'Brien
Lynne Margaret Fletcher, a daughter of Alan and Jean Fletcher of Basking Ridge, N.J., was married in Chatham, Mass., yesterday to Gregory Patrick O'Brien, a son of Robert and Joan O'Brien of Arlington, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Gallen performed the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church of Chatham.
The Rev.
Thomas Rossi, a Roman Catholic priest and the bridegroom's cousin, took part in the service.
Mrs.
O'Brien, 30 years old, is the manager of government affairs in Washington for the Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Company.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.


Foes Critical Of Ferraro On Abortion
Political opponents of Geraldine A. Ferraro yesterday seized on a report that, as an assistant district attorney in Queens, she prosecuted a woman in 1975 for performing an illegal abortion on a daughter who had been raped.
Her main rivals in the New York Democratic primary for the United States Senate used the report in their increasing effort to undercut the liberal credentials of Ms.
Ferraro, who is leading in both the polls and fund raising, and to question specifically her commitment to abortion rights.


Ms. Asbury, Mr. Fitzgerald
Elizabeth Gay Asbury, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Asbury of Miami, was married yesterday to Christopher Fitzgerald, the son of Dr.
Robert P. Fitzgerald of State College, Pa., and the late Eleanor S. Fitzgerald.
The Rev.
Donald F. Kokomoor, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony in Bay View, Mich., on the shore of Little Traverse Bay.
Ms.
Asbury, 35 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a lecturer on English as a second language at Georgetown University.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in English as a second language from Florida International University.
Her father is a professor of American history at Miami-Dade Community College, where her mother, Barbara Asbury, is a lecturer on English composition.


Victims of 1989 Earthquake and Hurricane Are Still Fighting for Federal Aid.
While President Bush has promised that the Government will pick up 100 percent of the bill for rebuilding much of South Florida and Louisiana, the Federal Government is still fighting requests for millions of dollars in repair work in communities struck three years ago by major natural disasters.
San Francisco officials are still feuding with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which oversees Federal disaster relief, over $100 million in repair bills for City Hall and other buildings damaged in the October 1989 earthquake.
It took two years to get the money to repair a water main, homeless shelters and community centers.


Robin L. Butner, Gary R. Weidy
Robin Leslie Butner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Butner of New York, was married yesterday to Gary Robert Weidy, the son of Harry Weidy of Honeybrook, Pa., and the late Rhoda Weidy.
Rabbi Irving Koslowe performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Weidy is a senior vice president and the general manager of Lawrence Butner Advertising in New York.
Her father is the company's chief executive, and her mother, Eleanor Butner, is the chief operating officer.
The bride graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband, and received a law degree from Emory University.


Homestead Journal; A Night in Tent City: Food, Shelter and Mosquitoes
At 3 o'clock this morning, the 14 single men assigned to tent A-14 tossed and turned on their taut, short cots.
A listless night breeze entered through a few open flaps.
So did many mosquitoes, along with the jarring noises of a military encampment: the banging doors of the portable toilets, the roaring of a supply truck.


RESULTS GOLF  Zokol Is PGA Victor


In Face of U.S.-Japan Split, Magazine Looks to Children
Defying the strained relations between the United States and Japan, a new magazine has emerged with the aim of bridging the cultural gap.
The magazine, Seesaw, seeks commonality in one thing universal to all people: the rearing of children.


Susanne E. Rosenberg, Peter S. Cane
Susanne Esther Rosenberg, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sol Rosenberg of Wynnewood, Pa., was married yesterday to Peter S. Cane, the son of Amy D. Cane of Huntington, L.I., and the late Wallace Cane.
Rabbi Gerald Wolpe performed the ceremony at Har Zion Temple in Penn Valley, Pa.
Ms.
Rosenberg, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is a doctoral candidate in English literature at Rutgers University.
Her father is a periodontist in Narberth, Pa.


Review/Music; Awards Are Made to the Minds And Notes of Four Composers
On the face of it, the Kennedy Center Friedheim Awards is a competition for composers.
But during its final phase last night -- with the National Symphony playing music by the four finalists -- winners and losers seemed a minor matter.
The prize money is modest: $5,000 for the winner, $500 for fourth prize.
The subject matter is broad, this year symphonic music in general.
It was, on the other hand, an opportunity to herd four of American music's more interesting minds into one room for a few hours and listen to what is currently going through them.
A lot of thinking about the past, it would seem, but before going into that, some scorekeeping is in order:


American Dream Put on Hold at Car Plant Doomed to Shut
The day a General Motors manager stood on a stage at the Willow Run assembly plant here and told 2,000 workers the line would shut down forever by the fall of 1993, Chuck Kehrer watched as the man next to him bolted for the nearest trash can and threw up.
"The two women next to me went white," said Mr.
Kehrer, who 22 years ago went from high school to a job as a spot welder in the body shop.
"People were crying and running out. I didn't cry. I just had an empty feeling. I felt very, very sad. I felt as if the Titanic was going down, and everyone was running for the lifeboats, and the lifeboats had holes."


Henry Ephron, 81, Screenwriter For 'Desk Set' and Other Works
Henry Ephron, a playwright, screenwriter and producer whose work spanned three decades, died yesterday at the Motion Picture Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 81 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of natural causes, said his daughter Nora Ephron, the writer.


Books of The Times; Looking Back on Homestead, Labor's Big Loss
The Battle for Homestead, 1880-1892  Politics, Culture and Steel By Paul Krause Illustrated. 548 pages.
University of Pittsburgh Press. $39.95 ($19.95 in paperback).
The River Ran Red
Homestead 1892
Edited by David P. Demarest Jr. and Fannia Weingartner
Illustrated. 232 pages. University of Pittsburgh Press. $39.95 ($19.95 in paperback).


Review/Pop; When the Rap Is Adult And the Rappers Aren't
In the 1940's a young pianist named Frankie (Sugar Chile) Robinson had a brief fling with fame.
Mr.
Robinson, who started performing when he was about 6 years old, played boogie-woogie piano and made his way into a few films and shorts.
He'd sing lyrics meant for a man and people clearly enjoyed the contrast, because Mr.
Robinson had a few years when he and the box office were friends.
That contrast, between the pop formula for adult knowledge and childhood, when such knowledge is probably impossible, is being worked out in the music, videos and concerts of the rap group Kris Kross.
A 50 percent teen-age group -- one of the boys is 12, the other 13 -- it has had two hits on the charts and an album, "Totally Krossed Out" (Columbia), that's lodged in Billboard magazine's top 10.
Kris Kross performed at the Paramount on Saturday night, and the duo's constituency ranged between the ages of 2 and 15, parental escorts acting as bemused, mildly gyrating observers.
When the bands asked the guys in the house to make some noise, a whisper was heard; when the girls in the house were asked to contribute, the sound of pre-teen-agers' adulation, expressed in screams, threatened to level the building.


Family Outing in Chinatown


Cynthia Ceresney, Jonathan E. Cohen
Cynthia Leigh Ceresney, a daughter of Ian and Elinor Ceresney of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Jonathan Evan Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Cohen of Tappan, N.Y.
Rabbi David Novak officiated at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mr. and Mrs.
Cohen both graduated from Columbia University, she magna cum laude and he summa cum laude, and both were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Mrs.
Cohen, 25 years old, is a medical student at New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Herzfeld &amp; Rubin.


Bills From Past Disasters
Even as appeals for hurricane relief pour in, the Government wrestles with aid requests from natural disasters of three years ago.
Page 7.


French Cultural Events
These are among the more than 30 French cultural events in New York City this fall:
*"Henri Matisse: A Retrospective," the first full-scale exhibition of Matisse's works since 1970, to be at the Museum of Modern Art from Sept. 24 to Jan. 12.
The show, sponsored by the Philip Morris Companies Inc., includes 400 works, including 275 of the artist's most important paintings.
Major loans are from the State Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg, the State Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts in Moscow, the Pompidou Center in Paris.
Works also come from the Museum of Modern Art's own Matisse holdings and other private and public collections from around the world.


Hy, Who Knows About Survival, Now Knows About Winning Big
The journey to the United States Open quarterfinals began for Patricia Hy in Cambodia in 1971, after the American bombs had fallen and before the Pol Pot Government had wreaked genocide.
Hy, 6 years old at the time, fled the volatile Southeast Asia nation with her mother, joining her father in Hong Kong.


INCOME DATA SHOW YEARS OF EROSION FOR U.S. WORKERS
Several new economic reports demonstrate starkly the extent to which Americans' incomes have stalled, painting a depressing picture of workers struggling to crawl up a down escalator.
Together they give the Democrats fresh ammunition for what they hope will be a potent weapon in the election campaign.


The Mills Weren't Made of Marble
Youngsters who are made to troop through America's historic landmarks might reasonably conclude that in the past, rich was typical.
Ordinary people are shown mainly as servants, or as slaves, in the sumptuous mansions and town houses that predominate in what are grandly called "heritage tours."
Labor Day is a powerfully apt occasion to celebrate an exception: the Lowell National Historical Park, set in a gritty Massachusetts city.
Here America's working men and women have starring roles in the epic called "The Industrial Revolution." A thundering score sets the mood, provided by 88 belt-driven looms in an unusual factory museum run by the National Park Service.


Now About Job Training for the Other Workers
To the Editor:
It was good news for a country battered by a faltering economy when the Presidential candidates began debating job training (Aug. 25, front page).
It would be better news, however, if their job training and education proposals addressed the needs of all Americans who need assistance, not just a select group.


Taiwanese Want Independent Nationhood
To the Editor:
In "Beyond Cold War, and Old Wars, in Asia" (editorial, Aug. 25), you discuss the new diplomatic relations between South Korea and China.
Yes, these will heighten the isolation of North Korea and Taiwan.
But you are wrong to call Taiwan "the clearest loser," and to state that "in real life, there are now two Chinas."


A Jagged Shard of Fairness Slices Apart Voting Communities
Only the dumb dispassion of a computer could have carved New York's 12th Congressional District, which hops, skips and jumps across three boroughs, touching the ranch homes of Corona, Queens, the tenements of Manhattan's Lower East Side, the row houses of Brooklyn's Sunset Park.
The computer was given one immutable rule: sculpt a district of precisely 580,337 people that has as many Hispanic residents as possible.
The aim was to give New York a second Hispanic Representative.


'Uh, Hi, This Is Aaron From Michigan'
Talk radio should always be like this:
CHRIS RUSSO, a WFAN-AM host, spent Saturday morning venting a substantial portion of his spleen on Connors.
Among other things, Russo said that Connors had an easy draw at the United States Open in 1991, when he reached the semifinals and won heaps of praise at age 39.


Larger Issues Overshadow Solarz Race
In a senior center on the Lower East Side, where the sounds of Chinese and Spanish collide in the humid air, Presida Baco hugs a yellow plastic bag, a trinket from a Congressional candidate, and explains why she won't vote for Representative Stephen J. Solarz.
"This is a Spanish district; I'm going to vote for a Spanish candidate," the 68-year-old retired nurse said cheerfully and a touch defiantly.


On Football's Opening Day, Giants and Jets Lose


Marjorie Esterow, Michael J. Levine
Marjorie Lynn Esterow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Esterow of Paramus, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Michael Jay Levine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Levine of Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi Irving J. Block performed the ceremony at the Plaza.
Mrs.
Levine is the associate general counsel of U.S.
News &amp; World Report magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of the Ideal Metal Products Company, which makes parts for pens and mechanical pencils in Oradell, N.J.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; If Voters Won't Love Bush, He Hopes They Fear Clinton
After all the oddities and subplots of the 1992 campaign, from the boomlet for Ross Perot to the challenges of Patrick J. Buchanan and Edmund G. Brown Jr., from the street theater of the New York primary to the morality plays of the Houston convention, the final 57 days will center on a few political basics.
Can President Bush, presiding over a sluggish economy and a nation that two-thirds of Americans say is "off on the wrong track," persuade a majority of the voters that things would be worse under Gov.
Bill Clinton?


First and Din, and Atlanta Hopes to Do It Again
The music in the Atlanta Falcons' locker room blared at full blast.
Towels were being waved, there was laughter at every cubicle and victory was so sweet.
Getting that first one in the Georgia Dome was critical.
Beating the Jets here today capped a perfect ending to a new beginning.


Rusty-Looking Fischer Is Outwitted by Spassky
The rust of 20 years without formal competition showed yesterday as Bobby Fischer lost Game 4 of his exhibition match with Boris Spassky in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
Mr.
Fischer, in the course of building toward his own attack, underestimated a powerful sacrifice by Mr.
Spassky and was flung back on the defensive.
Once in that uncomfortable situation, he still had reasonable chances to get a draw, but the insight required to reintegrate his formation eluded him.
Toward the end, he was moving aimlessly, whereas Mr.
Spassky slowly and relentlessly extended his control of the board.


Life on Fringes of Ruin Makes Cautious Comeback
Well north of the worst hurricane damage to Dade County, Shawna Drew, a beautician, sat in bumper-to-bumper traffic on Interstate 95 for 90 minutes, six times as long as her usual commute.
Tears streamed down her face, as rain fell in sheets around her car.
"At first, after the hurricane it was like, 'I'm alive, I'm alive, Heaven be praised,' " Ms.
Drew said Thursday.
"Now it's like, 'I'm alive and I have a home, but I'm stressed and I'm sad and it seems real trivial to paint ladies' fingernails for a living.' "


Sports of The Times; Blandly Handleys' 'Team'
It's not losing so much as how a team loses.
Yesterday the Jets lost grandly while the Giants lost blandly.
In his National Football League debut, Browning Nagle, a virtual rookie, dug the Jets out of a 17-0 hole in the glossy Georgia Dome, completing 21 of 37 passes for 366 yards and two touchdowns with no interceptions before the Atlanta Falcons hung on for a 20-17 victory.
Suddenly the Jets had introduced a young quarterback for the franchise to hang its future on.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In Prime Time; Bush and Clinton Go After Each Other on NBC
In what amounted to a televised kickoff for the fall campaign, President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton used a pair of back-to-back live interviews on NBC to elaborate their core ideological differences, attack each other in relatively genteel terms and defend their records.
To what seemed the clear annoyance of both men, the center section of each interview with Tom Brokaw focused on issues of personal credibility that each man intensely wishes would be gone.


Janet M. Winick, B. J. Rubinstein
Janet Michele Winick, a daughter of Eugene and Ina Winick of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bernard Jacques Rubinstein, the son of Daniel and Rose Rubinstein of Toulon, France.
Rabbi Edward Schecter performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Rubinstein, 31 years old, was until recently an associate product manager in New York at the Van den Bergh Foods Company.
She graduated from Emory University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is the president of McIntosh &amp; Otis, a literary agency in New York.
Her mother is the psychologist in the Hendrick Hudson school district in Montrose, N.Y.


Mentally Ill: Unmet Goals For Albany
Homeless and mentally ill, sometimes addicted and even violent, the combination is all too familiar in New York City.
But behind the individual cases -- most recently dramatized by the troubles of Larry Hogue, the man who terrorized 96th Street for years -- lies a history of collective failure in Albany.
Legislative gridlock, budget shortfalls and not-in-my-backyard lobbying have left New York State tens of thousands of beds short of what is needed more than two decades after a pledge was made to treat the mentally ill outside of large hospitals.


Cunningham and Walker Prove That They're Back in Style
They are two men here who know much about the weight of expectations.
Randall Cunningham must be Superman.
He must run and throw and score and stay healthy and somehow take the Eagles to the Super Bowl.
It used to be like that for Herschel Walker.
He would bring the Vikings a championship.
He would remake an entire team.
Lately, though, the expectations have been different, more cynical.
Walker will look lackluster.
He will fumble.
He will fail another team and another uniform.


Heated Debate Expected on Appeals Court Choice
When the Senate takes up President Bush's nomination of an Alabama prosecutor for an important Federal appeals court judgeship on Tuesday, the debate will probably feature the kind of passions not seen for a judicial nomination since Clarence Thomas was narrowly confirmed to the Supreme Court last fall.
Mr.
Bush has nominated Edward E. Carnes, a state Assistant Attorney General widely known for his skills in prosecuting death penalty cases in Alabama, to a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta.
Mr.
Carnes would fill the seat being vacated by Judge Frank M. Johnson Jr. of Alabama, widely revered as a hero of the civil rights era.


Murray Takes Shower And the Mets Cry Foul
Eddie Murray had a bat in his hands, preparing to go out and earn another day's pay swinging it.
There was no anger in his tone, no rage in his eyes.
It hadn't been that way 15 hours earlier when Murray had the bat taken out of his hands by the umpires.
Murray was ejected Saturday night in the ninth inning of what became an infuriating and controversial 6-5 loss to the Reds.
Murray, after engaging the umpires in a dispute about the repositioning of the second-base umpire, Terry Tata, was ejected by the home-plate umpire, Ed Rapuano, for allegedly swearing at Tata with the bases loaded and the Mets ahead, 5-4.


Nagle's Tenacity Matches His Arm
The start, well, Browning Nagle can forget about that fumble.
The finish, that will take him a little longer to accept.
The start for Nagle, the Jets' quarterback, was an awful fumble on his first snap.
During the finish, he stood on the sideline watching the Atlanta Falcons' offense run out the last 5 minutes 46 seconds in their 20-17 victory over the Jets here yesterday at the Georgia Dome.


James O. Brown, 82, Retired Literary Agent
James Oliver Brown, a prominent literary agent from the 1940's to the 1980's, died Sept. 1 at the home of a daughter in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He was 82 years old and had lived in Manhattan since 1936.
Mr. Brown died after a long bout with cancer, said his son, James Oliver Brown Jr.


Air-Conditioner Sales Hurt by a Mild Summer
Labor Day pretty much brings down the final curtain on what has been a dismal summer for manufacturers and retailers of air-conditioners, who rank high among the very few people who pine for the sweltering dog days.
Despite a late-August wave of brow-wiping heat and humidity, most of the summer in the Northeast and Midwest -- which constitute 60 percent of the air-conditioner market -- has had mild temperatures.
And that, coupled with the continued weak economy, has held back sales.


Inseparable Teen-Agers Will Split Up
American teen-agers CHANDA RUBIN and LINDSAY DAVENPORT have toured together this year as part of the United States Tennis Association's development program.
Both are 16 years old and have become best of friends.
"We talk together, eat together, do everything together," Davenport said.
"It helps because I'm a rookie and I don't really know anybody else."


Albert Rees, 71, Labor Economist And an Adviser to President Ford
Albert Rees, a labor economist who was the chief inflation monitor in the Ford Administration, provost of Princeton University and president of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, died on Saturday at the Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 71 years old.
He died of cancer that had spread from his kidneys to other parts of his body, said Justin Harmon, a spokesman for Princeton University.


No Easy Fix For Somalia
As relief officials scramble to organize food, workers and logistics to alleviate the suffering in Somalia, they are uncovering a disaster that many believe was allowed to spin out of control through international neglect.
But now that attention has been focused on the eastern African country's devastating famine, it is proving difficult to provide the remedies needed to deal with hunger on so great a scale.
Despite a stepped-up United Nations effort, an American airlift and planes from several European nations joining the International Committee of the Red Cross -- for 18 months the only major relief agency working in Somalia -- the gap between what is required in the country and what is being offered remains large.


How to Bring Silence To Suburban Lawns
To the Editor:
Under the headline "Curse the Peace-Shattering Lawn Mower!" (letter, Aug. 20), Hans Koning points to the motorless reel mower as the way to quietness.
Surely, he knows that few lawn owners will agree -- for several reasons, some reasonable and some not.
But there's another way that should be looked into.


Little Gain for Union
It is hard to see what the United Automobile Workers union gained from the nine-day walkout at the Lordstown, Ohio, plant that idled more than 40,000 workers nationwide.
When the auto workers struck, they said their goal was to force the company to keep open a tool-and-die shop that provides 240 jobs and that G.M. wanted to close.
Under the agreement overwhelmingly ratified on Saturday, the company agreed to keep the shop open only for a few additional months.


Essay; Dollie And Johnnie
This is the story of a poignant romance between a couple of young science students, recently revealed in a trove of letters that bear some lessons for us today.
She was 21, comely, and signed her letters "Dollie"; he was 17, cut a dashing figure with his curly hair and mustache, and often signed his passionate missives "Johnnie."


Taiwanese Want Independent Nationhood; Nothing's Changed
To the Editor:
"Beyond Cold War, and Old Wars, in Asia" (editorial, Aug. 25) states that humoring Beijing's diplomatic illusions over Taiwan could tempt Chinese leaders to seek reunification with Taiwan by force of arms.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; PRESIDENT'S KINDER, GENTLER PITCH CONNECTS
President Bush took no chances today, not with his team behind and struggling in the final going, and voters waiting to see if he can finally connect.
With the election only 57 days away, the newly revamped Bush campaign is determined to do everything right.
It has brought in a new coach, James A. Baker 3d.
It has rewritten its play book.
And today, the team captain did his part.


Corporate Elite A Fading Force Over Hartford
Rumors floated through Hartford for months this summer that the financially troubled Hartford Whalers hockey team would be rescued by a familiar white knight: Aetna Life and Casualty.
As Hartford's largest employer and longest-running local booster, Aetna would simply not allow the city's only major-league sports team to go under or be wooed away, or so people said.


INSIDE
Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.
SportsMonday begins on page 27, Business Day on page 37.


Review/Country; Garth Brooks, Genial Superstar, Plays for the Folks Up North
When Garth Brooks performed tonight at the Brendan Byrne Arena, his cowboy hat held a headset microphone; on the back of his cowboy shirt was its wireless transmitter.
That's the homey high-tech costume that has grown familiar as Mr.
Brooks has become the biggest new star of the 1990's, selling tens of millions of records and barnstorming the arena circuit.
His tour itinerary made a rare northern swing on Saturday night, and while tickets were still available at show time -- a rare event for someone who's used to sellouts -- Mr.
Brooks was greeted by the squeals and shouts reserved for superstars, from an audience that mixed couples in their 30's and 40's with teen-agers.


A Shaker And Mover Of Things French
"I love it when things are impossible!" said Annie Cohen-Solal, clapping her hands and straining forward from her perch on a couch on the third floor of the French Embassy on Fifth Avenue in New York City.
Ms.
Cohen-Solal, a scholar, the author of a best-selling biography of Jean-Paul Sartre and a tireless partygoer in New York, has been the French cultural counselor here for the last three years.
She was effervescing last week about her last-minute efforts to find sponsors for one of the main events in a burst of more than 30 French cultural activities coming to New York this fall.
The concurrence of most of these museum shows, a festival of movies, theatrical productions and lectures is largely coincidental, she said, although one or two of them might not have made it without a little coaxing from her.
For example, although she had nothing to do with the major Matisse retrospective opening at the Museum of Modern Art this month, she was deeply involved in the transformation of the museum's garden cafe into a French-style cafe for the duration of the show.


Brooke Harmon, Alex Berryman
The marriage of Brooke Ann Harmon and Alex Richard Berryman was celebrated yesterday at the home of Ms.
Harmon's mother and stepfather, Millie Harmon-Meyers and Stephen Meyers, in West Cornwall, Conn.
Judge Diane Wayne of Los Angeles County Superior Court conducted the ceremony.
Sarah Chinn read Jewish blessings.
The couple were married on May 15 at City Hall in Manhattan.
Ms.
Harmon, 24 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wesleyan University in June.
Her father, the late Ellis J. Harmon, was a partner in the Los Angeles law firm of Irell &amp; Manella.
Her mother is the New York State volunteer coordinator for the Clinton-Gore Presidential campaign.
Ms.
Harmon's stepfather is a founder of and a partner in the law firm of Jacoby &amp; Meyers in New York.


Bystanders Among 8 Hit In Gunfire At 2 Projects
Eight people, including a minister handing out pamphlets and a woman walking home from the store, were wounded in gunfire that erupted from disputes outside two Brooklyn housing projects on Saturday, the city and housing police said yesterday.
Two of five victims in the first shooting, which occurred about 4:30 P.M., were later arrested, and the police said they were among three youths who began firing into a crowd outside the Louis Armstrong project in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Brother vs. Brother, Patriot vs. Patriot, Lendl vs. All at Open
Struggle, struggle everywhere on the men's side, but not an upset seeded player in sight.
There was a mean theme yesterday at the United States Open, where Ivan Lendl invoked the Fifth Amendment againsts persistent rumors that his game has gone geriatric, Boris Becker and Stefan Edberg crushed challenges from underdog countrymen, and in a match that transformed fond siblings to strangers, the Sanchez brothers of Spain were forced to take up arms against one another.


Tow Truck Smashes Car, Killing Brooklyn Woman
A Brooklyn woman was killed and three people were injured early yesterday morning when a tow truck, driven by a man whose license had been suspended 50 times in seven years, plowed into their compact car at more than 75 miles per hour, the police said.
Investigators said the tow truck might have been drag racing with another tow truck from the same company, Sunset Auto Enterprises of Brooklyn, when it collided with the 1980 Datsun hatchback yesterday morning on Fourth Avenue in the Sunset Park section.
Witnesses told the police and reporters that they saw a second tow truck leave the scene just before the police arrived.


Linda Magee, James Valentino
Linda Magee, a daughter of Laura Plewes of Madison, N.J., and the late Leslie B. Magee, was married yesterday to James Jude Valentino, the son of Livia Valentino of Philadelphia and the late James P. Valentino.
The Rev.
Keith Jones, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at Christ Church in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Valentino, 28 years old, is the owner of Creative Classics Inc., an architectural design company in Arlington, Va.
She graduated from Princeton University.
She is a stepdaughter of John T. Plewes.


Job Rights for Homosexuals Backed in Poll
An overwhelming majority of Americans suppport equal employment opportunities for homosexuals, according to a poll in this week's issue of Newsweek magazine.
The survey said 78 percent of Americans favored equal job opportunities for homosexuals, while two-thirds of the 547 registered voters interviewed by phone approved of inheritance rights and health insurance for gay spouses.


Polly Rottman, Peter A. Appel
Polly Elizabeth Rottman, a daughter of Benjamin and Myrna Rottman of Woodbridge, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Austin Appel, the son of Mel and Sandra Appel of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Martin Freedman performed the ceremony at Congregation Mishkan Israel in Hamden, Conn.
Mrs.
Appel, 28 years old, is an associate product manager in New York for the Van den Bergh Foods Company.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is the owner of Econopol, a marketer of economic and political research in Woodbridge.
Her mother is a member of the State of Connecticut Teachers' Retirement Board in Hartford.


Quarterbacks Play Now And Don't Sweat Future
Phil Simms, who wears the ring quarterbacks dream about, is not beyond hoping at the age of 36.
But Steve Bono is more realistic about his chances of starting in the National Football League.
Bono, elevated to backup from third-string quarterback on a 49er team doing without Joe Montana, today came off the bench in relief of Steve Young to help generate a 31-14 victory over the Giants.


Topics of The Times; Clean English
Some years ago, an offbeat American publisher by the name of Steam Press came out with a waterproof "Shower Songbook." On plastic pages roughly the size of an ordinary paperback, it reproduced the lyrics to such shower-tenor favorites as "O Sole Mio" (in Italian and English) and "Danny Boy." It was a cute idea but, let's face it, trivial.
Trust the Japanese to take an American idea and do it better.
They've now waterproofed the English language, in a book designed for the hours they spend in hot tubs.


Now About Job Training for the Other Workers; Schooling and Earnings
To the Editor:
In "Twins Study Shows School Is Sound Investment" (Education page, Aug. 19), you report that Orly Ashenfelter and Alan Kreuger found a 16 percent rise in earnings for each additional year of schooling.
Readers should not too quickly conclude that keeping this country's youth in school for ever lengthier periods will bring us out of our economic morass.


Only the Hearty Brave the Cloudy Beaches


Latest Rides on the Coaching Carousel
The winds of coaching change continue to blow at the Open, where job security has been made even more tenuous by Becker's decision to go it more or less alone in this tournament.
While Tiriac has been running around to line up practice partners for Becker, other players are watching the eighth-ranked player's progress here with a good deal of curiosity.
BOB BRETT, one of Becker's many former coaches, was a bit prickly about the whole concept of a no-coach player.


China Rushes From Mao to Markets
Perhaps the best-performing financial instrument in the world in 1992 has been a slip of white paper entitling the bearer to buy newly issued stocks on the Shanghai stock exchange.
Sold early in the year for $5.50, by the summer these forms fetched nearly $300.
The soaring prices reflect the growing enthusiasm, bordering on desperation, of ordinary Chinese to become shareholders -- preferably rich ones.


European Plane Plan Is in Trouble
This year's Farnborough Air Show, which opened today, was supposed to be an opportunity for Europe's aerospace industry to show off the European Fighter Aircraft, the region's most ambitious attempt yet to set aside national rivalries and cooperate in the development of an advanced warplane.
But only a mock-up of the fighter is here.
The real thing has not yet flown, is months behind schedule and is suffering from a hemorrhaging of political support.
And after spending six years and several billion dollars to design the aircraft, the four-nation European consortium behind the plane may never get a chance to produce anything but a handful of prototypes.


Arazi Is Ailing and Absent
The customary supporting cast was in attendance today at the Hippodrome de Longchamp: jockey Steve Cauthen, trainer Francois Boutin and the co-owners, Allen Paulson and Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al Maktoum.
Unfortunately, the lead actor was missing.


DISPUTE OVER LAND BECOMES OBSTACLE TO SALVADOR PEACE
Seven months into El Salvador's difficult peace, extensive land claims by the former insurgents have become a major impediment to the demobilization of the nearly 8,000 Salvadoran guerrillas.
Leaders of the former rebels say their people will give up their weapons only if several hundred thousand acres of land is legally turned over to them, their families and sympathizers, either individually or collectively.


Topics of The Times; Andrew's Siblings
Weather is uncertain, but not the names of hurricanes that will follow Andrew.
The World Meteorological Organization, a United Nations agency, has already chosen the names for any hurricanes arriving through 1996.
What has changed is the ethnic flavor of the names.
The U.N. is making a determined effort to be more diverse, more multicultural.


Elections to Unify Lebanon Threaten to Divide It
Lebanese leaders like to compare their country to a free bird with one Christian wing and one Muslim wing.
But just as the country is poised to take flight after years of civil war, its wings have been clipped.
Two years after the end of the war, which was rooted in religious differences, Lebanon is rebuilding.
Its survival depends on harmony between Muslims and Christians, enforced by a new national charter both sides agreed on.
But the old tensions are surfacing again during the country's first parliamentary elections in two decades, and they threaten to prevent the formation of a new government and even to tear Lebanon apart.


Lynn Buzbee, David Forshee
Lynn Elizabeth Buzbee, the daughter of John and Ellen Buzbee of New York, was married yesterday to David Scott Forshee, a son of Frederick and Kathleen Forshee of Burton, Mich.
Rabbi Robert Shapiro officiated at the home of Elizabeth Breuhaus in Marblehead, Mass.
Ms.
Buzbee, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She attended the University of Vermont and is completing undergraduate requirements and is studying for a master's degree in human services at Lesley College in Cambridge, Mass.
She is a consultant on adolescent violence and is the production coordinator for the International Music Network, a music booking agency in Marblehead.


Corrections
An article in some copies on Aug. 28 about the New York City Board of Education requirement that AIDS educators sign a pledge promising to stress abstinence quoted a portion of the pledge inaccurately.
The passage reads: "The undersigned has read the above and understands that the rules govern all public school instruction on prevention of H.I.V.-AIDS, including prevention instruction provided by outside individuals and organizations. The undersigned agrees to comply with such rules to the extent the undersigned's participation in the New York City public school H.I.V.-AIDS prevention instructional program is covered thereby."


Mimi E. Geibel, Jonathan I. Feil
The Rev.
Mimi Eleandra Geibel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar L. Geibel of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Jonathan Ira Feil, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris J. Feil of Westbury, L.I.
The Rev.
Lisa Jankenich, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony aboard the Skansonia, a ferry moored on Lake Union in Seattle.
The bride, 37 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a Presbyterian minister in Seattle.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a Master of Divinity degree from Yale University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president and chief executive of Stamford Hospital.
Her mother, Dorothy Geibel, is a watercolorist.


Educational Virtuoso or Villain?
In many ways Joseph A. Fernandez's first days as Chancellor of New York City's ailing school system were reminiscent of the breathtaking sweep and buoyant promise of Franklin D. Roosevelt's first 100 days as President.
In a matter of weeks, Mr.
Fernandez stripped principals and administrators of their jobs, shut down a congested teacher-licensing bureau, overturned the hoary tenure system for principals and prescribed a host of offbeat remedies.
Soon, the eyes of the nation were upon him as he made condoms available in high schools and shifted power away from principals to committees of teachers and parents.


Annette D. Jolles, James van Bergen
Annette Debra Jolles, a daughter of Jerome and Susan Jolles of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to James Edward van Bergen, the son of Harmannus and Margaret van Bergen of Kiawah Island, S.C.
Rabbi Stuart Berman performed the ceremony at the Marriott Financial Center Hotel in New York.
Mrs. van Bergen is a theater director in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a music teacher and composer.
Her mother, a member of the Jubal Trio, is first harpist of the New York Chamber Symphony and the American Composers Orchestra.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Awkward Moments in Video Politics
What happened here today, in the slightly awkward meeting between Gov.
Bill Clinton and 70,000 stock-car fanatics, was an almost perfect example of what a political scientist might call the Dislocation Effect of Video Politics.
Driven by the need for visual symbolism, Presidential candidates travel the country looking for appropriate settings.
This often produces effective television pictures that have almost nothing to do with what is going on immediately outside the camera's view.


Harold Curtis Fleming Dies at 70; Tirelessly Fought for Civil Rights
Harold Curtis Fleming, a white Southerner who became an early leader in the struggle for racial justice in a "new South," died Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 70 years old.
Friends said he died suddenly after a brief illness.


Linda Adams, Gilad E. Troy
Linda Adams, a daughter of Marcel and Aviva Adams of Westmount, Quebec, was married yesterday to Gilad E. Troy, a son of Bernard and Elaine Troy of Queens Village.
Rabbi Dan R. Ehrenkrantz officiated at the weekend home of the bride's parents in Val David, Quebec.
Ms.
Adams, 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the Montreal law firm of Heenan Blaikie.
She graduated from Hebrew University at Rehovot, Israel, and received common and civil law degrees from McGill University.
Her father is the president of Iberville Development Ltd., a real-estate company in Westmount.
Her mother is a retired psychologist.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY ONE MAN, ONE VOTE, ONE BIG PROBLEM


Elena F. Rand, Adam S. Weiss
Elena Francesca Rand, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Archie Rand of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Adam Samuel Weiss, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Stephen G. Weiss of North Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Silverstein officiated at the Excelsior, a catering hall in Manalapan, N.J.
Ms.
Rand, 24 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and is a law student at Georgetown University.
Her father, a painter, is a professor of visual arts at Columbia University.
Her mother, Maria Catalano Rand, is the director of the Art Gallery at Brooklyn College.


2 Killed in Palisades Park Brawl
A verbal sparring match among teen-agers congregating on a street corner in Palisades Park, N.J., escalated into a knife fight last night, leaving two people dead and two more wounded.
Stunned neighbors said the four victims were on the football team at Palisades Park High School, where classes are to resume this week.


Abigail Weinstein, Richard J. Burns
Abigail Min Weinstein, an advertising manager at Gourmet magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Richard Jonathan Burns, the president of International Media Partners in New York, the publisher of CEO magazine and a producer of business seminars.
Rabbi Leonid Feldman performed the ceremony at the Breakers in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Burns graduated from Brandeis University.
She is a daughter of Richard and Pearl Weinstein of Palm Beach, where her father is a lawyer.
He is the chairman of the Nature Conservancy in Arlington, Va.


BUSINESS DIGEST
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 7, 1992  The Economy
New economic reports demonstrate starkly how Americans' incomes have stalled, painting a picture of workers struggling to crawl up a down escalator.
Together they give the Democrats fresh ammunition for what they hope will be a potent weapon in the election campaign.
"Stagnation in wages is at the heart of this election," said Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker.  [ Page 1. ]


McEnroe's Disregard For Age
Now that Jimmy's gone, John McEnroe is the oldest player left in the draw.
When he makes his 12th career appearance in the United States Open Round of 16 today, he will face No. 1-ranked Jim Courier, the player who pulled the plug on Connors's sprint to the semifinals last year.
McEnroe, 33 years old and sounding it, has indicated that he will approach the match with a certain amount of reverence.


Gains Are Reported in Talks on Haiti
Negotiators for Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and the Government of army officers who overthrew him tentatively agreed last week in their first meeting here to send an international peacekeeping mission to Haiti, a representative of Father Aristide said.
Father Aristide's backers and diplomats from the region say the Bush Administration's support is vital to the success of the proposal to deploy unarmed neutral observers to Haiti's nine administrative regions to reduce the level of political violence and prepare the way for the restoration of an elected government.


Who Else but a Throwback To Catch All Those Passes?
With his close-cropped hair, dirty uniform and thick neck, 232-pound Tom Rathman looks like a fullback of another era -- the guy they gave the ball when the team needed 3 yards.
"I do," he said, "whatever it takes."


Turkey Opts for Raw Force in Fight Against Kurds
As its conflict with Kurdish separatists enters its ninth year, with ever greater casualties and on ever broader fronts, the Turkish Government has opted squarely for what it sees as its only means of crushing the revolt: raw military power.
In the process, though, Turkey is embarrassing its Western sponsors, notably the United States and Britain, and is complicating their effort to define a new role for this vast, strategic land in the post-cold-war era.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Where a Best Seller Is 2,000 Copies
At 7:30 the other morning, Debbie Allen tied a red bandana to a post on the porch of her combined office and home here in the northern Catskill Mountains.
It was a sign for the United Parcel Service driver to stop and pick up four packages of books for delivery to bookstores in the region.
The bandana signal is one of the innovative ways that Ms.
Allen and her partner, Suzanne La Rosa, have developed to distribute books for their Black Dome Press Corporation.
It is one of a growing number of small presses throughout the country.


Victory Two-Fold for Inspired Miami
As the University of Miami football teams of recent years have built a staggering level of success, the Hurricanes have reached for sources of inspiration ranging from the inventive to the childish.
But after the Hurricanes began their 1992 season on Saturday night with a 24-7 victory over Iowa, they mentioned a different sort of inspiration: They were not playing for themselves.


Again, the Grasshopper Cries for Aurora
To the Editor:
According to Greek mythology the sound of the katydid and his fellow-family member, the grasshopper, will be forever with us despite your doubts in "Silent Summer" (editorial, Aug. 16), and in concurrence with "Voice of the Katydid Is Heard in the Land" (letter, Aug. 23).


Tennis World, as Mapped by Tiriac
There were more Spaniards (12) than Swedes (10) in the men's draw this year at the start of the United States Open, and only four Czechoslovaks compared with nine Germans.
The geographic swings in tennis dominance are the grist for all tennis analysts, among whom ION TIRIAC counts himself a weighty member.


Fed Action Is Limited By Dollar
In cutting a key interest rate on Friday, the Federal Reserve was seeking to walk a tightrope, trying to nudge the nation's economy gently forward without pushing the dollar off a cliff.
The dollar has slipped to record lows against the German mark in recent weeks, principally because short-term interest rates are so much lower in the United States than in Germany.
And some analysts fear that the Fed's quarter-point reduction in the Federal funds rate -- the rate at which banks make overnight loans to each other -- could accelerate the dollar's decline.


Recipient of Baboon Liver Dies After Severe Stroke
The world's first recipient of a baboon liver died last night, about seven hours after suffering a massive stroke at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, hospital officials said.
The patient died at 9:45 P.M. at the hospital where the 11-hour transplant operation was performed on June 28.
The stroke occurred suddenly about 3 P.M., while doctors were trying to wean the patient from a mechanical ventilator, Dr.
Howard R. Doyle, a surgeon on the transplant team, said in an interview.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore
WEDNESDAY: 9 P.M., CNN, "Larry King Live."


Robin Neiterman, Adam T. Puritz
Robin Neiterman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Neiterman of Lexington, Mass., was married yesterday in Boston to Adam Todd Puritz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elliot Puritz of St.
James.
L.I.
Rabbi Bernard Eisenman performed the ceremony at Le Meridien Boston Hotel.


A Last Laugh for Punch Magazine?
For one of Britain's most venerable publishing institutions, Punch magazine, there may yet be life after death.
Bill Tidy, a longtime Punch cartoonist, has made a bid to buy the celebrated satirical magazine, which put out its final issue in April after more than 150 years of continuous publication.
His partner in the bid is Dr.
John Cocker, a Canadian physician who publishes Punch Digest for Canadian Doctors, a humor and life-style magazine that is allowed to use the Punch name.


Lauren B. Sinai, Daniel Aaronson
Lauren Beth Sinai, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Sinai of Lexington, Mass., was married there yesterday to Daniel Robert Aaronson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Aaronson of Lexington.
Rabbi Cary Yales performed the ceremony at Temple Isaiah.
Ms.
Sinai, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a writer at Proof Positive/Farrowlyne Associates, an educational publishing service in Evanston, Ill.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the chief economist at the Boston Company, an investment-management concern in Boston, and the president and chief executive of the Boston Company Economic Advisers, a subsidiary there.
Her mother, Lee Sinai, was the cultural coordinator for Tufts University and is now a writer in Lexington.


No Headline
"The general idea in America that kids can live better than their parents -- people just don't think that's working anymore. It's giving up the American dream to some extent." -- LARRY HUGICK, an executive with the Gallup Organization.  [ 39:3. ]


Lavea Brachman, Andrew Orkin Smith
Lavea Brachman, a daughter of Merom and Judith Brachman of Columbus, Ohio, was married there yesterday to Andrew Orkin Smith, a son of Shirley Kantor of Cincinnati and the late Dr.
James O. Smith.
Rabbi Roger Klein performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Brachman, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University, received a law degree from the University of Chicago and is a candidate for a master's degree in urban planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is a co-chairman of the Yenkin-Majestic Paint Corporation in Columbus.
Her mother, a former Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, is the director of the Ohio Department of Aging in Columbus.


Non-Aligned Movement Decides It Is Still Relevant
The Non-Aligned Movement managed today to pull off what had once been thought unlikely.
It survived.
An organization of 108 nations that together account for more than half of the world's population, the movement seemed bound for extinction when the cold war ended, making non-alignment largely a non-issue.
The weeklong summit meeting -- the first since the collapse of the Soviet Union -- drew scores of heads of state and government.
At its closing session today, the movement's leaders insisted that the organization was still relevant.


Allison Linneman, John Strawn Jr.
Allison Claire Linneman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest W. Linneman of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Robert Strawn Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Strawn of Houston.
The Rev.
John M. Derasmo performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Strawn, 27 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Baer Marks &amp; Upham.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is the senior vice president of planning and development at the Allied-Signal Aerospace Company in Torrance, Calif.
Her mother, Sandra V. Linneman, retired as an English teacher at North Shore High School in Glen Head, L.I.


The Future of Europe
If French voters reject the Maastricht Treaty for closer political and economic union in Europe -- a distinct possibility according to recent polls -- financial markets will be disrupted and progress toward West European integration will slow.
But it would not necessarily destroy the Community, or foreclose an even better treaty.
By their increasingly apocalyptic warnings, Community leaders risk magnifying the damage of a defeat in the Sept. 20 referendum.
Win or lose in France, the Maastricht agreement is already out of date and needs to be significantly revised.


INSIDE
Baboon-Liver Patient Dies
The world's first recipient of a baboon liver died after suffering a massive stroke, his doctors in Pittsburgh said.
He had lived 70 days after the transplant operation.
Page 10.
A Blow to Cuba's Economy
Cuba suspended work on a costly nuclear plant, and President Fidel Castro blamed the economic setback on the Soviet bloc's demise.
Page A5.
Upset in Chess Match
Outwitted by a sacrifice and a trap, Bobby Fischer lost to Boris Spassky in their fourth game.
Page 14.


Labor Day
NEW YORK
PARADE: Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.
The West Indian-American Day Parade begins at 10:00 A.M. at Utica Avenue in Brooklyn and goes along Eastern Parkway to Grand Army Plaza.


Chronicle
Although its premises at the University of Miami Medical Center in Jacksonville are currently being used as a relief center for Hurricane Andrew victims, the Miami Project to Cure Paralysis will hold its Seventh Annual Great Sports Legends Dinner as planned, on Sept. 22 at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
Senator BILL BRADLEY, Democrat of New Jerseyand former basketball all-star of the New York Knicks, and the Knicks coach, PAT RILEY, are among this year's legends.
The other honorees are: PHIL RIZZUTO, the former Yankee shortstop, KEN NORTON, former heavyweight boxing champion, TONY TRABERT, the former tennis champion, KATARINA WITT, who twice won an Olympic gold medal in figure skating, BOB BEAMON, former track and field star, BILLY CASPER, former golfing champion, and GUY LAFLEUR, hockey hall of famer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  LAND ISSUE HAUNTS SALVADOR


Practicing Forehands and Icy Attitudes
The demand for autographs at the National Tennis Center can be wearing here on even the most patient player.
After a recent match, MALIVAI WASHINGTON spent at least 10 minutes dealing with ballpoint pens that would not write and with pushy adults who did not bother to say, "Thank you."
JIM COURIER has never been known for such forbearance around the practice courts, where crowds form in great numbers with assorted scraps of empty, waiting paper.
When Courier finished a practice session earlier this week, he sprinted back to the locker room and ignored all pleas.


Lewis Gillenson, 74, A Magazine Editor And Book Publisher
Lewis W. Gillenson, a former president of Dodd, Mead &amp; Company publishers and a prominent figure in book and magazine publishing for 45 years, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and also lived in Ghent, N.Y.
Mr. Gillenson died of cancer, said his brother, Irwin.


Abroad at Home; Weakness At The Top
A Conservative member of the British Parliament, vacationing in America, watched the Republican Convention on television.
Afterward, he said he understood the far-out character of the speeches, their right-wing extremism.
"There are speeches like that at our party meetings," he said.
"Labor has its 'loony left.' We have the hangers  [ demanding restoration of capital punishment ] . But no Prime Minister -- no Government -- adopts their policies."


Topics of The Times; Clean English
Some years ago, an offbeat American publisher by the name of Steam Press came out with a waterproof "Shower Songbook." On plastic pages roughly the size of an ordinary paperback, it reproduced the lyrics to such shower-tenor favorites as "O Sole Mio" (in Italian and English) and "Danny Boy." It was a cute idea but, let's face it, trivial.
Trust the Japanese to take an American idea and do it better.
They've now waterproofed the English language, in a book designed for the hours they spend in hot tubs.


Dancing in the Street the Latin Way


Chronicle
For his "courageous spirit and unrelenting efforts" resulting in the freeing of Western hostages from Lebanon, GIANDOMENICO PICCO, former United Nations Assistant Secretary General, will receive the first Platinum Celebration International Achievement Award.
This special presentation will be made by the Platinum Guild International during an awards ceremony Thursday at the U.N.
Mr.
Picco is "a natural choice" for this year's award, which celebrates the spirit of Christopher Columbus, said DAVID CULLEN, managing director of the Platinum Guild International, a trade association based in Lausanne, Switzerland, with offices in the Unted States, Germany, Italy and Japan..


Howard Davis, 73, Founder and Coach Of Harlem Wizards
Howard Davis, founder and coach of the Harlem Wizards comedy basketball team, died on Thursday at Palisades General Hospital, in North Bergen, N.J.
He was 73 years old and lived in North Bergen.
Mr. Davis died of a heart attack, said a son, Todd.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; A Monopoly Once More, Nielsen Is Still Unloved
As a new television season is set to begin, the continually maligned Nielsen ratings continue to perform the role of the gambling saloon in the Old West outpost:
You may not like the way the card game is played, but it's the only game in town.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today for the Labor Day holiday.
Government offices, banks and many businesses will also be closed.
Most foreign markets will be open.


Kamieniecki Gets Hot and Freezes the Rangers
The situation for the Yankees was dire.
Jose Canseco was batting with a 3-0 count, the Rangers had runners on every base and Scott Kamieniecki was desperately trying to protect a 1-0 lead.
With nowhere to put Canseco, he threw a strike.
Then Kamieniecki tossed another fastball that Canseco belted to left field.
It was a towering shot that fought the wind while it sailed for the seats at Yankee Stadium.
The wind and Kamieniecki won the battle as Roberto Kelly corralled the ball on the warning track to end a torturous fifth inning.


And When in Bronx, Do as Yankees Do
Don Mattingly has helped teammates with their hitting.
During the weekend, he gave a fan advice about fielding.
In Saturday's game between Texas and the Yankees, which was won by the Rangers, Mattingly batted in the first inning and popped a foul ball behind the plate, near the screen.


A Giant Collapse: Breakdowns by the Bushels
When the Giants took the field today for the opening play of the game, the crowd of 74,519 at Giants Stadium gave them a standing ovation.
Early in the fourth quarter, when the San Francisco 49ers had just made a first down on the Giants' 1-yard line, the crowd started chanting, "Ray Must Go."
Ray Handley, the Giants' second-year head coach, said he did not hear any fan reaction.
He did watch his team make countless mistakes and waste opportunities as the 49ers won, 31-14.
The 49ers' offense outplayed the Giants' defense, even with a third-string quarterback, Steve Bono, playing most of the game and a blocking fullback, Tom Rathman, catching three touchdown passes.
The 49ers' active defense kept the Giants from making game-breaking plays.


Beijing Journal; Tiny Counterrevolutionaries Facing Reform From 200,000 Fly Swatters
A few months ago, the authorities started noticing something very strange, scratched their heads and called in specialists who also scratched their heads but couldn't come up with an explanation to the mystery: why, all of a sudden, does China have so many flies?
No one seems to know the answer, but with the same Communist zeal that the Government hunts down "counterrevolutionaries," it has launched a grand campaign to wipe out flies.


At Least Jets Get a Kick Out of Nagle
ATLANTA, Sept. 6 -- The New York Jets discovered a quarterback this afternoon inside the new Georgia Dome.
Unfortunately, their new kicker misplaced his accuracy.
Second-year quarterback Browning Nagle, making his first start in the National Football League, distinguished himself by shaking off a fumbled snap on the first play from scrimmage, fighting back from a 17-0 first-quarter deficit and rallying the Jets to within striking distance of the Falcons.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Issues: Free Trade; Clinton Is Pressed to Take Stand on Pact
Gov.
Bill Clinton, who is fond of seeking compromise where it did not previously exist, may yet be forced into a corner as President Bush works to push him toward taking a firm stand on the North American Free Trade Agreement that was announced last month.
It is a delicate problem for Mr.
Clinton that could expose one of his weakest traits: his penchant for trying to have it both ways.


Francesca Grifo, William J. Hahn
Dr.
Francesca Theresa Grifo, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Richard D. Grifo of Easton, Pa., was married yesterday to William James Hahn, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James Hahn of St.
Louis.
Judge Grifo performed the ceremony at the family's home in Easton.
Dr.
Grifo, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Smith College and received a Ph.D. degree in systematic botany from Cornell University.
She is the senior program officer for Central and Eastern Europe in the Biodiversity Support Program in Washington, a conservation consortium of the World Wildlife Fund, the Nature Conservancy and the World Resources Institute.
Her father is a senior judge of the Court of Common Pleas in Easton.
Her mother, Leonarda T. Grifo, is the chairwoman of the State Theater and Center for the Arts in Easton.


With G.O.P. Faltering, Senator Is on His Own
John Seymour faces two unanticipated obstacles in seeking election to the United States Senate seat that Gov.
Pete Wilson appointed him to 19 months ago: The collapse of the Republican Presidential campaign in California and the plunge in popularity of his mentor the Governor.
Mr.
Seymour insists that coattails mean nothing in this quirky state of ticket-splitters and that Mr.
Wilson's nose-dive is temporary and of no consequence.
But this relentless good cheer is drowned out by a chorus of prophets who say that a bland former State Senator plucked from obscurity needs all the high-powered help he can get.


Undeterred by Pleas, the Faithful Again Seek Out a Vision of the Virgin
Ignoring appeals by the Bishop of Trenton and the local Mayor to stay away, thousands of people today streamed into Joseph Januszkiewicz's backyard, with its statue of the Virgin Mary at the end of the patio.
Drawn by Mr.
Januszkiewicz's claim that a vision of Mary appears to him on the first Sunday of each month, the devout and the curious gathered on blankets and lawn chairs between the deck outside the modest beige ranch home and the woods at the edge of the lawn.


Bonnie Sherman, Robert Feibelman
Bonnie Lee Sherman, a daughter of Donald and Carole Sherman of River Vale, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert F. Feibelman, a son of Ralph Feibelman of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Ilse Feibelman.
Rabbi Frederic Pomeranz performed the ceremony at the Pearl River (N.Y.) Hilton.
Ms.
Sherman is a product manager in the fixed-income division of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in Tokyo.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president of the Tridon Sales Company, an engineering concern in Cresskill, N.J.
Her mother is a travel agent for Township Travel in Washington Township, N.J.


GPA Founder Takes Over Chief's Post
Three months after a $1 billion worldwide stock offering fizzled for lack of investor support, the GPA Group P.L.C. of Ireland, the world's largest aircraft leasing company, said yesterday that its founder, Tony Ryan, would take over the post of chief executive.
Mr.
Ryan, currently executive chairman, will replace Maurice Foley, who, as deputy chairman, will be in charge of strategic planning, personnel and investor relations.
Mr.
Foley was made chief executive in the months leading up to the stock offering, which was canceled on June 18.


AC&amp;R Is Hoping Creativity Can Stimulate Its Recovery
DID AC&amp;R Advertising hire Paul Cappelli to provide a next generation of leadership for the turmoil-racked agency, or was it to spur provocative debate on pressing industry issues among its top executives?
A recent visit to AC&amp;R's office in midtown Manhattan suggested that the answer, to paraphrase the old Certs commercials, is: Stop!
They're both right.


Quayle and Cancer
To the Editor:
Dan Quayle told the Republican convention that he and his wife have been active supporters of increased funds for breast cancer research.
He did not present all the facts.
The National Institutes of Health reauthorization bill included $300 million more for breast cancer research, and President Bush vetoed it.
The Administration is far from supportive of more money for breast cancer research, no matter what Mr.
Quayle says.
SUE MCCAIN  New York, Aug. 26, 1992


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Tuesday
Consumer Credit July


Focus on That 12-Year Waiting List for Public Housing
To the Editor:
In "A Half-Hearted Homeless Policy" (editorial, Aug. 24), you criticize the policies of Mayor David N. Dinkins's administration toward New York City's homeless population.
You are correct, but your reasoning is wrong -- and ultimately dangerous.


Wiltek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Dreams Intact, Newark Youths Resist Violent Surroundings
From his apartment window, Al-Malik Williams can hear the thunder of revving engines as young people in stolen cars get set to race.
But Al-Malik, a 13-year-old eighth grader who wants to become a wildlife scientist, says he has better things to do.
As he waits for the school year to begin, he spends his days at a youth club, playing pool and basketball, and going on trips to museums and parks.
He also sings and tours with a church choir.
And because he is the oldest child in his family, his parents, who both work full time, expect him to do household chores.


Why Rush to Silence Democracy?
Fifty years ago, the U.S. became a global radio power.
"This is a voice speaking from America," promised the Voice of America's first broadcast in February 1942.
"The news may be good or bad -- we shall tell you the truth."
The V.O.A., originating in Washington and operated by the U.S.
Information Agency, now broadcasts in 47 languages.
Along the way, it helped spawn Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.
These are administratively distinct "surrogate stations" based in Munich and covering Eastern Europe and the former Soviet republics.


Review/Television; A West Texas Family With Troubles Aplenty
Horton Foote's latest work for television is the sort of dish that might be served up in a Texas diner run by a third-generation Greek family; you can't tell whether the stuff on the plate is moussaka or chili.
Although the title, "The Habitation of Dragons," is drawn from Isaiah, no blame for this hodgepodge attaches to the Hebrew prophets.
Mr.
Foote's inspiration seems to come from Euripides ("The gods visit the sins of the fathers upon the children"), by way of Eugene O'Neill.
One finds oneself in a noisy household in West Texas in the 1930's, home to other of Mr.
Foote's characters over the years.
The two Tollivar brothers (George the wandering lawyer, played dimly by Brad Davis, and Leonard, the successful businessman, played perspiringly by Frederic Forrest) feud.
A Tollivar uncle (Pat Hingle) shows up for no particular reason, except to serve as a drifting chorus.
A family skeleton rattles around.


Continental Health Affiliates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Will The Beatles get back to the top of the charts?
Tomorrow never knows, but they will have the chance next year when a collection of songs that have been in their recording company's vault will be released for the first time, according to The Sunday Times of London.
One of the recordings is called "If You've Got Trouble." The Times of London describes the song, written by John Lennon and PAUL McCARTNEY in 1965, as "one of RINGO STARR's early attempts at singing."


Troubled Children Flood Ill-Prepared Care System
New York City's child welfare system, like many others across the nation, has been flooded with thousands of emotionally traumatized children, products of families ruined by crack, AIDS and homelessness.
But the system, already overburdened by the sheer volume of children, has often failed to diagnose, let alone treat, troubled youngsters who range from depressed to suicidal, defiant to violent.


CHRONICLE
With its self-styled queen already in exile, the Helmsley Palace Hotel underwent a quiet, bloodless revolution last week when new management assumed control of the hotel and began plotting to remove her name from the marquee.
LEONA HELMSLEY, who is serving a four-year sentence in a Federal prison in Danbury, Conn., for tax evasion, will not be able to run the hotel by telephone from her cell.
A group of limited partners, including PAUL NEWMAN, turned management of the hotel over to the Interstate Hotels Corporation after two years of legal squabbling in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Vincent, Bowing to Owners' Will, Resigns as Baseball Commissioner
Acting one final time in what he called the "best interests of baseball," Fay Vincent resigned as baseball commissioner yesterday, precluding a potentially long and bitter legal battle with the owners who wanted to oust him.
In announcing his resignation, Vincent urged the owners to maintain a strong role for the commissioner and not make him a "figurehead," as he said some owners would like.
"People have said, 'You're the last commissioner,' " Vincent said by telephone from his summer home in Harwich Port, Mass., on Cape Cod.
"Well, if I'm the last commissioner, that's a sad thing." Change of Heart
Although Vincent told the 28 major league club owners last month and reiterated last Thursday that he would never resign, he changed his mind over the weekend in the face of an 18-9 vote by the owners asking him to step down.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Packaging Clinton and Gore as One
It is Labor Day, the traditional beginning of the fall campaign and does Gov.
Bill Clinton know where his Vice-Presidential running mate is?
Darn right.
All he has to do is look to his side and there is Senator Al Gore -- where he is much of the time.
They are to Presidential politics what Bartels and James are to wine, Ben and Jerry are to ice cream and Click and Clack, the Tappet brothers, are to silly but sage advice about cars: two men packaged as a single product.


Summer Pop Circuit Sees No End to Recession
Some of the biggest names in rock took their acts on the road this summer and pumped a bit of vitality back into the ailing pop concert scene.
But even their spark fell far short of a full revival.
Genesis, for instance, was unable to fill large sections of some stadiums, and tickets for megastar acts like U2, Bruce Springsteen and the joint tour by Guns 'n' Roses, Metallica and Faith No More were selling more slowly than expected in some cities.
"The recession hit everybody at every level," said Gary Bongiovanni, the editor of Pollstar, a magazine that covers the concert industry.


Rabin Says Syria Spurned Any Ties
Despite optimistic assessments of progress in the Middle East peace negotiations by Israeli and American officials, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel said today that Syria has made no offers to establish diplomatic, cultural and commercial relations even if Israel returns the entire Golan Heights.
In an address transmitted from Jerusalem to delegates at the B'nai B'rith International convention here, Mr.
Rabin said the general mood has improved in the peace negotiations involving Israel, its Arab neighbors and the Palestinians.


Review/Television; Education Exam, in Profession's Own Language
The attractive youngsters, conscientious teachers and innovative school administrators celebrated in "A Cry From the Edge" deserve something better.
Virtuous intentions aside, this major offering of "It's Back to School on Public TV" week -- the latest in sophomoric scheduling from PBS -- seems to have been cobbled together by a committee at a second-rate teachers' college.
The ponderously delivered narration is sheer educationese: "Teachers must integrate their interpersonal skills into tangible classroom interventions." Administrators and teachers tend to talk in slogans about caring and sharing and self-esteem.
Even some of the students have been infected.


Winners Wear Smiles and Frowns
Their results were similar, but their reactions to crushing fourth-round opponents in straight sets at the United States Open yesterday were as polar as their personalities.
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, seeded fifth, brimmed with self-congratulation after eliminating 14th-seeded Zina Garrison, 6-0, 6-1.
But Steffi Graf, seeded second and fixated on following her 1992 Wimbledon championship with a third Open title, seethed with self-deprecation after her 6-2, 6-2 domination of Florencia Labat.
Those two disparate souls will meet in the quarterfinals, and although Graf holds a commanding 15-2 edge in their career rivalry, Sanchez Vicario has a definite attitudinal edge.


Croatian Militia Denies Issuing a Broad Challenge to Bosnia
A leader of the Croatian Defense Council, an ethnic Croatian militia fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, said today that a demand that pro-Government Muslim militiamen withdraw from Croatian neighborhoods in six Sarajevo suburbs was not a general threat to Government forces throughout the country.
"It appears to affect the Stup area only," Jadranko Prljic, the militia's civil affairs chief, said to a Reuters reporter, referring to part of a predominantly Croatian Sarajevo district captured by Muslim militiamen last week.


Williams, The Man Of the 13th Hour
The walk to Andy Stankiewicz with the bases loaded in the 13th inning made the Orioles' fans slump in their seats.
Bernie Williams's subsequent triple forced them to storm for their cars as Baltimore's pennant chase wasted another day without gaining any ground.
Though a 3-1 pitch from Alan Mills to Stankiewicz certainly resembled a strike, it was called ball four, scoring Danny Tartabull and giving the Yankees a 3-2 lead.
But it was Williams's long blast off the right-field fence that cemented the issue and let the Yankees finally emerge with a 6-2 victory on a long night at Camden Yards.


Business Scene; Even Words Fail In This Economy
THE question is, what to call these hard times.
What has been happening to America since 1989 seems momentous enough to enter history as a major economic event of the 20th century.
But none of the words and phrases that described hardship in the past seem adequate today.
And the nation awaits a name, a label that will evoke the nature of these times.
The name problem comes up often in conversations with economists.
There is a pause in the conversation while they grope for a phrase, often producing a euphemism that masks the growing national alarm, including their own, over the persistently weak American economy.


Saving the Elephants
Wildlife biologists are using new technology to track the elusive African forest elephant in the hope of finding the best way to insure the animal's survival.
Wildlife Conservation International, a division of the New York Zoological Society, put collars that emit ultrahigh-frequency signals on two African elephants this summer; the signals are picked up by weather satellites, and the information is relayed to the Bronx Zoo.


Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 10


Bonray Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Transactions
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Fined Tim Harris, San Francisco 49ers linebacker, $20,000 for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Labor Day.
Government offices, most banks and many businesses were also closed.


Environmental Rules May Spur Innovation
Do strict environmental standards enhance or harm America's ability to compete in the global economy?
Conservatives typically insist that the standards hurt.
Environmentalists and their allies argue that the standards force companies to develop more efficient practices and technologies, thereby gaining an edge in the worldwide marketplace.
Some economists say neither point of view is wholly correct.
Environmental regulation can spur innovation and enhance competitiveness, they say, but only when regulations provide the right incentives.


Orion Pictures reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Timothy Egan Lenahan Architect, 34
Timothy Egan Lenahan, an architect who had practiced with Robert A. M. Stern, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 34 years old and lived in Greenwich Village.
He died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


Donahue Badgered Clinton on Allegation
To the Editor:
In "Infidelity Is a Valid Campaign Issue" (Op-Ed, Aug. 26) Phil Donahue speaks of having been booed by his studio audience after asking his guest, Bill Clinton, about alleged infidelity.
I saw the show.
Mr.
Donahue truly badgered Governor Clinton, despite Mr.
Clinton's repeated requests to go on to more substantive issues.


35 BMW Dealers Form Association
BMW of North America in Woodcliff Lakes, N.J., said that its 35 dealerships in metropolitan New York had formed an autonomous advertising association and were seeking an agency.
In a telephone interview, Thomas O. McGurn, BMW's general manager of corporate affairs, confirmed a report of the review last week in Adweek, though he declined to discuss billings.
He said that dealerships in other regions might form similar associations.


Managua Seesaw: U.S. vs. Sandinistas
By removing her most feared police officials, but not her army chief, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has gambled that she can win back support from the Bush Administration and the people who elected her without risking an outpouring of rage and possible violence from the Sandinista Front.
Saturday's action, in which the Police Chief, Rene Vivas, was replaced by a less controversial officer, albeit also a Sandinista like Mr.
Vivas, showed that Mrs.
Chamorro is trying to reduce the power of the Sandinista Front in a very gradual way.
Mrs.
Chamorro defeated the front at the polls in February 1990.


Advatex Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


South African Homeland's Troops Fire on Protest March, Killing 24
Soldiers of the black South African homeland called Ciskei rained machine-gun fire today into a fleeing throng of African National Congress supporters who marched on the enclave vowing to topple its military ruler.
The three-minute volley left at least 24 black marchers dead and scores more wounded or trampled in the panic.
It also dashed any hope of a rapid reconciliation between blacks and whites on South Africa's political future, because while South Africa insists Ciskei is an independent country beyond its control, almost everyone else here and abroad regards it as a province, if not a puppet, of South Africa.
A.N.C.
Blames de Klerk
"We are blaming de Klerk for this, and we do it without hesitation," said Cyril Ramaphosa, secretary general of the African National Congress, one of several black leaders who dived to the ground alongside journalists and mediators to avoid the intense gunfire.
"The Ciskei is the creation of the apartheid regime and they are responsible for the atrocities committed in its name."


Patricia P. Buckley, Psychotherapist, 61
Patricia Phipps Buckley, a psychotherapist practicing in Manhattan and Queens, died in an accident on Aug. 30 in Southington, Conn.
She was 61 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
A police report said she died of multiple injuries received in a fall while on a hiking trip.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Drawing a Line in the Shifting Politics of Abortion
As Senator Al Gore discovered on "Meet the Press" on Sunday, the shifting politics of abortion has given rise to an unforgiving line of questioning: Where do you stand on the issue?
Where did you stand in the past?
If you changed, why?
The Democrats, both Mr.
Gore and Gov.
Bill Clinton, find themselves explaining positions they took in the past that were not as wholeheartedly supportive of abortion rights as the positions they hold today.
The frequent implication, of course, is that they embraced the cause for political expedience.


Little Film That Could: A Hollywood Cinderella Goes to the Festival
This town thrives on Cinderella stories, and there's probably not a better one this year than that of "Zebrahead."
It is not scheduled for theatrical release until late October, but this film, which cost only $2 million and has a first-time director and writer, and a cast of largely unknown, even untrained, performers, has been gathering momentum for months.
It won a top prize at the 1992 Sundance Film Festival, is an entry in the New York Film Festival, as well as those in Deauville, France, and in Toronto, and has been promoted by film makers as diverse as Peter Guber, the chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment, and Oliver Stone, who hardly needs an introduction.


The Giants' Unsettling Problem? Indigestion
Through the years, the Giants have thrived on defense.
Now, they are being strangled by defense -- by a new system many players dislike and distrust and have not yet mastered.
At the same time, these players say they have to learn and accept the system and will do it.
The system was introduced by Rod Rust, who became the Giants' defensive coordinator this year.
He started with the basic Giant defense put in by Bill Parcells and Bill Belichick in the 1980's, then added a pass-coverage system that requires linebackers and defensive backs to read keys and react.


Plane of Sky Divers Crashes In Illinois, Killing 12 Men
A small plane carrying student sky divers crashed into a soybean field minutes after taking off from a postage-stamp-sized airfield here this afternoon.
All 12 people on board were killed.
A witness, Stephen Lee, said the plane was flying low and moving slowly through the clear, warm air when it began to "wiggle."


HOCKEYAt Devils' Practice, Two Early Standouts
Forty-three players divided into two groups today and skated in two sessions apiece on the first day of practice for the New Jersey Devils.
But despite the crowd, the focus of attention was on Scott Niedermayer, a 19-year-old defenseman, and Coach Herb Brooks.
Brooks and Niedermayer will be the two most closely scrutinized during the early stages of the Devils' training camp, at least until the veterans take to the ice for the first time Saturday morning.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; BUSH AND CLINTON PULL NO PUNCHES IN HOLIDAY RALLIES
President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton opened their fall campaigns yesterday with a struggle over the mantle of Harry S. Truman: Mr.
Bush said Mr.
Clinton lacked the character to claim it; Mr.
Clinton asserted that Mr.
Bush was destroying the very middle class that President Truman had helped to create.
Mr.
Clinton chose Truman's hometown, Independence, Mo., for the Labor Day kickoff to his campaign, presenting himself as the committed champion of "the great American middle class" in the Truman tradition.
In a rousing speech delivered on the courthouse steps in a heavy rain, Mr.
Clinton assailed Mr.
Bush as a man who did not recognize the nation's economic suffering, its aspirations or its needs, and who had no right to claim political kinship with the Democratic President from Missouri, as Mr.
Bush has done in recent weeks.


International Airline Support Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Books of The Times; How Ben Sachs Came to Blow Himself Up
Leviathan  By Paul Auster  275 pages. Viking. $21.


Finally, a Facade to Fit Stuyvesant; A High School of High Achievers Gets a High-Priced Home
On the threshold of a new academic year, the rows of battered old desks lie empty at Stuyvesant High School on the East Side, and the great abstruse formulas that inspired genius have gone to dust on the blackboards.
In ghostly classrooms, cracked windows are nailed shut against a prowling wind, and the dim hallway globes that burned for 87 years have winked out.
Tomorrow, as the 1992-93 school year begins, a reincarnated Stuyvesant High opens across Manhattan at Battery Park City for 2,700 students and 103 faculty members: a new, lavishly appointed, 10-story futureschool with state-of-the-art computers and 12 science labs, Art Deco lights, five gyms, an Olympic-sized pool, banks of escalators, glassed-in studios, an auditorium worthy of Broadway and stunning Hudson River views from the classrooms.


CHRONICLE
LIZ TILBERIS, the new editor of Harper's Bazaar, will be feted this evening with a cocktail party at the Metropolitan Club given by her new boss, FRANK A. BENNACK JR., the president of the Hearst Corporation.
September's issue of Harper's Bazaar invites readers to "Enter the Era of Elegance," and the party for Ms.
Tilberis promises to be very elegant indeed.


Ruin in the Groves of Florida: Growers May Never Recover
Harvey Bullis stepped through the hole where his picture window used to be and stared out at 18 acres where $2 million worth of bromeliads, spiky pineapple-like plants, once bloomed.
Now thousands lay scorching in the sun, amid the rubble of eight collapsed shade houses.
"There isn't a salable plant on the property," Mr.
Bullis said of his crop.
"But see this pup here?" He picked up a battered specimen and pointed to a little green shoot poking out of the crusted potting soil.
"I could get 25 new plants off this one -- if the sun and the salt from the storm doesn't kill them. In a year, I might have something to sell."


On the Digital Bias: Making Left-Handed Compliments Count
ALL right, the re-education of America starts here left now.
Everyone may be born right-handed.
But only a small number of gifted and truly creative people -- 10 to 15 percent, according to right-handed calculators -- overcome that malady to become lefties.


World Economies


Donahue Badgered Clinton on Allegation
To the Editor:
Phil Donahue claims that the marital fidelity of candidates is a legitimate character issue (Op-Ed, Aug. 26), and the press has the right to pursue it.
Character is important.
But politicians commit far more serious sins with political bedfellows than with private ones.
The real character issues are leadership, willingness to take unpopular stands when necessary, concern for the public as a whole and keeping one's paws out of the public till.
Our political leaders demonstrated colossal lack of character in the savings and loan scandal and in their failure to confront the budget deficit.
CRAIG ROSEN  Hoboken, N.J., Aug. 31, 1992


Town Gropes for Answers To Fatal Stabbings of 2
Broad Avenue, the commercial heart of Palisades Park, was abuzz with rumor and innuendo today, as the police and neighborhood residents tried to piece together the events leading to a bloody knife fight Sunday night that left two high school football players dead and two others wounded.
The fight, which erupted 50 yards from the police station at 8:30 P.M. on the corner of Broad and Central Boulevard, started as a verbal skirmish between the four Palisades Park youths and another crowd of teen-agers from nearby Ridgefield Park, the police said.
Two of the Ridgefield Park youths were arrested and one was charged with the two killings.


Donahue Badgered Clinton on Allegation
To the Editor:
Phil Donahue is convincing when he insists on the right of the mass media to ask the infidelity question, but he does not state the vital reason that "Infidelity is a Valid Campaign Issue" (Op-Ed, Aug. 26).


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: TUESDAY
Capstead Mtg Corp  Cincinnati Bell Co  CRI Insd Mtg Assn Inc  H J Heinz Co  Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec Co  St Joe Paper Co  Tri Contl Corp


Accounts
*
Reebok International Ltd., Hong Kong, to Leo Burnett, Hong Kong, to handle its account in China, Hong Kong, Taipei and Korea, previously at Bozell Hong Kong.
Burnett was chosen over Lintas Hong Kong in a review that excluded the incumbent.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Stanback Co., Salisbury, N.C., to Trone Advertising Inc., Greensboro, N.C., to handle the advertising for its consumer products like headache powders and lip conditioners, previously at Leslie Advertising, Greenville, S.C.
Trone was awarded the account in a review that excluded the incumbent.
Billings were not disclosed.


Teen-Agers' Mural of Beating Angers Boston Police
Four months after the riots in Los Angeles, teen-agers in a neighborhood 3,000 miles away have had a hands-on lesson about how differently people interpret history.
In the Dorchester section of this city, 10 teen-agers painted a mural that depicts what happened to Rodney G. King.
Wrapping around the walls of an abandoned building, its series of panels -- a man driving a car, a videocamera, four white police officers clubbing the black motorist, a courthouse and jury, a tipped scale of justice, a city burning in bright orange flames -- tell a story in boldly colored Egyptian-style pictographs and symbols.
In the background bordering the final panel, in huge white letters, is the word "History."


Touched by AIDS, Minister Finds Doors Shut
he Rev. Scott Allen was, in every particular, the ideal Baptist.
He was a minister with a lovely family, and he had dedicated his life to the church.
His father and grandfather were ministers; his father, the Rev.
Jimmie Allen, was president of the 17-million-member Southern Baptist Convention until 1979.


Fine Line for Congress: Politics vs. Legislation
As the Democratic-controlled Congress returns from its recess on Tuesday to complete a session noted more for scandal than lawmaking, legislators will have to walk a fine line, maneuvering between President Bush's campaign attacks while demonstrating to voters that they can enact important legislation.
The agenda is overflowing, and much will depend on the twists of the campaign.
But there is a good chance Congress and the White House can surmount election-year partisanship to enact a few substantial, and less political, measures, including those providing aid to the cities and setting new energy conservation standards.


Deutsch Given Colt 45 Brand
Concluding a review that began in July, the G. Heileman Brewing Company last week moved its Colt 45 Malt Liquor account, with an estimated $6 million to $8 million in billings, to Deutsch Inc. in New York from Della Femina, McNamee Inc. in New York.
Henry Gerfen, Heileman's executive vice president of marketing in Rosemont, Ill., said that while Della Femina would retain large regional Heileman brands like Old Style and Henry Weinhard, a creative shootout on another such brand, Rainier, would be held between Della Femina and Deutsch.


Metro Tel Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Summer Was Here, but Time Wasn't Right; Labor Day Letdown Seems Just as Great Though the Season Was Rainy
The tomatoes at Henry Balsamo's fruit stand along Route 202 in Bantam, Conn., "haven't been quite right" this summer, he says.
But neither has much else, in a season already being remembered throughout the Northeast as the summer that wasn't.
As the summer vacation season drew to a close yesterday, with pools closing and parents preparing reluctant children for school, many people were lamenting that a season expected to be hot and sunny instead turned out cool, overcast and rainy.
The weather made for a luxuriantly verdant landscape, with rivers running high and butterflies abounding; but the succession of soggy weekends left would-be beachgoers sour and pale, and disappointed many fishermen, vintners and others whose livelihoods depend on the outdoors.


European Treaty Evokes Fear and Suspicion at Grass-Roots Level in France
The French flag flies from the local school, chilled rose wine is being served at the Bar Lions and a score of men are playing petanque at the bowling patch.
It is hard to imagine that this mountain village behind the French Riviera is under threat.
But mention the Treaty on European Union that French voters are being asked to consider in a referendum on Sept. 20, and brows furrow darkly.
To many villagers here, indeed to most, it represents change -- change of a kind that is certain to be unpleasant.


American BioMed reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


How South Africa Delays Democracy
To the Editor:
In "How to Judge South Africa" (editorial, Aug. 13) you describe the differences between the African National Congress and President F. W. de Klerk as "technical." But since when is arguing about the right to vote in a democratic election technical?
That is what is at stake.


Iraq Accepts Radiation Tests of Water
Iraq has accepted a United Nations proposal for a nationwide water sampling program to insure that Baghdad does not covertly rebuild a nuclear arms program, the head of a United Nations inspection team said today.
But a Bush Administration official involved in nuclear nonproliferation policy said environmental monitoring of this kind could not substitute for a continuing program of on-site inspections like those the United Nations has imposed on Iraq since the Persian Gulf war.


On the Way Out, Vincent Finally Gets a Consensus
Fay Vincent himself has emerged as the only winner in the dispute between the commissioner and a sizable group of club owners, George W. Bush, owner of the Texas Rangers, declared yesterday.
"If anybody can find any winner in this mess," Bush said in a telephone interview, "it's my friend because he showed that among the rubble, there rose a dignified human being with a lot of class. He's clearly the winner as far as I'm concerned."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FAILING TO HELP TROUBLED CHILDREN


Teaching a Child All About Computers
It is never too early to teach the children the facts of life about computers, unless you want them to learn from their friends, in the digital gutter, the way we did.
Fortunately, help is available, and it can spare adults some embarrassment.
A conscientious parent could hardly do better than buy Tic Tac Type: A Child's Computer Writing Kit, by Marta Partington, a $19.95 book-disk combination published by Sams of Carmel, Ind.
The book is a clear and colorful introduction to computers in general and word processing in particular; the accompanying disk contains a simple but quite respectable word-processing program, as well as files to use for practice as the child works through the book.
Tic Tac Type is intended for children at least 8 years old.


Truck May Have Been Racing Before Crash
Police investigators believe that a tow truck was drag racing at more than 80 miles an hour when it collided with a compact car in Brooklyn on Sunday morning, killing a 27-year-old woman, a law enforcement official said last night.
The official, who insisted on anonymity, said witnesses told the police that they saw two tow trucks from the same company, Sunset Auto Enterprises of Brooklyn, speeding through Sunset Park right before one truck slammed into a 1980 Datsun hatchback on Fourth Avenue at 34th Street.


A Preview Helps in Seeking Best Software for a Child
Buying a computer for your child is less than half the fun.
Then comes the task of trying to find the best software.
Software is expensive, and no one wants to pay a lot of money for a program that a child may use for a few minutes and banish to the closet.
On the other hand, the right program can keep a child challenged and entertained for months.
But how does one tell the difference between good and bad?


A New Era for Windmill Power
A new generation of windmills that Don Quixote could never tilt at is ready to take its place as an economical and important source of the nation's energy.
Because of striking improvements in technology, the commercial use of these windmills, or wind turbines as the builders call them, has shown that in addition to being pollution free, they can now compete with fossil fuels in the cost of producing electricity.


Charter Power Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mets Win One Over Phillies
The Mets are 10 games under .500; the Phillies have reached sub-27.
The Mets are 15 1/2 games behind the National League East-leading Pirates; the Phillies are a whopping 24 games back.
The Mets have six players on the disabled list; the Phillies have eight.
These two teams met tonight at Veterans Stadium.
Needless to say, scintillating September baseball was not on display.
The Mets' starter, Pete Schourek, battled through mechanical problems and a questionable curveball.
Terry Mulholland, the Phillies' starter, just battled.
Schourek and the Mets won, 6-3.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Lopez Beats Davies in Playoff
Nancy Lopez earned her first L.P.G.A. victory of the year and the 45th of her career yesterday when she tapped in a par putt on the first playoff hole to beat Laura Davies and win the $450,000 Rail Charity Classic in Springfield, Ill.
Davies, the leader entering the final round, bogeyed the playoff hole, missing an 8-foot par putt.
Lopez, who shot an eight-under-par 64 in the final round, and Davies, who had a 67, were tied at 17-under-par 199 after 54 holes.
Florence Descampe of Belgium shot a 66 to finish another stroke back.
Lopez birdied No. 17 to tie Davies for the lead at 17 under.
Lopez left a 15-foot birdie putt two feet short on the 18th and settled for par. (AP)


World's Top Aircraft Lessor Is at Financial Crossroads
Ever since its planned initial stock offering flopped spectacularly in June, the GPA Group P.L.C., the world's largest aircraft-leasing company, has faced a potential crisis: how to pay for the billions of dollars worth of new aircraft it has ordered over the next few years.
With no easy solution in sight, GPA's chairman and founder, Tony Ryan, disclosed on Sunday that he would again take over as chief executive, consolidating his control of the company, which is based in Shannon, Ireland.
Mr.
Ryan said that Maurice Foley, who had been appointed chief executive in March as the company prepared for the share offering, had been named deputy chairman.


Leveled Tropical Garden Is Botany's Paradise Lost
Scientists from all over the world are converging on the Fairchild Tropical Garden, in the wake of Hurricane Andrew, which destroyed 75 percent of the garden's 5,000 species.
Before the storm, it held the world's largest collection of palms and cycads, tropical shrubs as ancient as dinosaurs.
Botanists and arborists from more than a dozen botanical centers, including the New York Botanical Garden and the Royal Botanic Garden at Kew, near London, are racing to save the few plants that remain.
They are also there to gather material from damaged roots and growing tips, bark and fallen fruit.
Hidden in the downed tropical trees and uprooted cycads, they believe, may lie a cure for cancer, or an insight into how plants grow.


After Week of Turmoil, Tajik President Is Forced Out
In a violent airport confrontation, the President of Tajikistan, Rakhman Nabiyev, was forced to resign today after more than a week of armed protests against his rule.
Mr.
Nabiyev, 61 years old, emerged from hiding after talks with the opposition.
On the way to the airport in the capital, Dushanbe, his motorcade was fired upon.
At the airport, he was surrounded by tanks and troops, and he and members of his Government were detained by opposition militiamen before being they finally allowed him to fly to his native northwestern region, Khodzhent, formerly Leninabad.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Tent City for Homeless That Politicians Ignore
"What's wrong with our tent city?" Charles Campbell asked under the stars, an open fire shadowing his anger in the night.
He had to wonder loud above the noise of a freight train that rumbled past his corner of America, a muddy patch in a tent encampment for the homeless in back of the old Aurora incinerator plant.
Grizzled men were silhouetted against the half-moon horizon at the end of another idle day.
The camp gathering of a few dozen homeless people seemed a time-warped tableau from bindlestiff Depression days -- a scene that smacked of the old Hoovervilles more than of the fresh changes that the politicians are promising troubled voters again out beyond the hard times swathing Mr.
Campbell's tent.


RECIPIENT OF LIVER DIES AFTER STROKE
The world's first recipient of a baboon liver died Sunday night, 70 days after his transplant and seven hours after suffering a massive stroke at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.
The patient, a 35-year-old man whose identity was withheld at his request, died at the hospital where the 11-hour transplant operation was performed on June 28.
The stroke occurred suddenly about 3 P.M., while doctors were trying to wean him from a mechanical ventilator, Dr.
Howard R. Doyle, a surgeon on the transplant team, said in an interview.


Salomon Still Struggling To Diversify Its Business
In its yearlong struggle to recover from the scandal involving its illegal bids in Treasury auctions, Salomon Brothers Inc. swept almost every senior executive from office, built a management team with virtual unknowns, settled charges with $290 million in fines and regained profitability through its trading prowess.
Now comes the hard part.


Krone Suspended for Careless Riding
JULIE KRONE, the leading jockey at Belmont Park this year, was suspended yesterday for the first time in more than three years for careless riding during the Go for Wand Stakes on Sunday.
The 29-year-old rider will sit out seven calendar days starting Friday and will be eligible to resume riding Sept. 18, the day before the Woodward Stakes.
The three stewards at Belmont Park also disqualified her mount, the filly Nannerl, the favorite in the race, and demoted her from second place to last place.


Yes, F.D.A. Wants to Block Sale of Vitamins
To the Editor:
I am one of the millions of Americans outraged by the Food and Drug Administration's unwarranted efforts to keep me from purchasing the nutritional supplements I desire (front page, Aug. 9).
My outrage is in no way mitigated by the unconvincing protestations of innocence and good intentions of David A. Kessler, the F.D.A.
Commissioner, in your Aug. 16 "correction" article.


Meadowbrook Rehabilitation Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Final Push Begins in Race For the Senate
From the soggy legions of organized labor on Fifth Avenue to the bubbling calypso crowds of a Caribbean festival in Brooklyn, the four candidates for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York scoured the city for voters yesterday, kicking off the final, frantic week of their campaign.
Even her rivals concede that former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro has been leading in all the polls.
But with two televised debates and hundreds of thousands of dollars of tough television advertising still to come, the candidates said that 18 months of stumping for the right to challenge the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato, could all depend on the next seven days.


Bridge
The start of the NEC World Team Championship final between the United States and France in Salsomaggiore, Italy, on Friday made it clear that some shrewd card players were at work on both sides.
On the second deal of the playoffs, which France won, Herve Mouiel, sitting South for France, had to struggle in three diamonds after an artificial two-diamond opening on his left, showing a weak two-bid in one of the major suits.
Whether he would lose 100 or 200 hinged on the number of trump losers.


Baby's Death Investigated
An 18-month-old Manhattan baby who was having difficulty breathing was brought last night to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, where she was declared dead on arrival, the police said.
The police called the death of the baby, Kenya McPherson of 467 West 166th Street in Washington Heights, suspicious, and said they were investigating.
Paramedics brought the baby to the hospital about 6:15 P.M.
"The child was cold and in arrest and not breathing and had no heartbeat," said Capt.
Fred Villani of Emergency Medical Service.
The police had no other information on the cause of death or why it had been termed suspicious.


Scientists Using Plants to Clean Up Metals In Contaminated Soil
A forest once grew here in the bend of the Delaware River.
Now a multibillion-dollar plant where the Du Pont Company manufactures 750 different chemicals sprawls under the span of the Delaware Memorial Bridge.
After 75 years of manufacturing toxic materials like tetraethyl lead, an anti-knock gasoline additive, at the Chambers Works, E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company is trying to cleanse some of the contaminants from this now-barren land.
Dr.
Scott Cunningham, a Du Pont researcher, has an idea for reclaiming it with plants.


HOCKEYAt Devils' Practice, Two Early Standouts
Forty-three players divided into two groups today and skated in two sessions apiece on the first day of practice for the New Jersey Devils.
But despite the crowd, the focus of attention was on Scott Niedermayer, a 19-year-old defenseman, and Coach Herb Brooks.
Brooks and Niedermayer will be the two most closely scrutinized during the early stages of the Devils' training camp, at least until the veterans take to the ice for the first time Saturday morning.


SEOUL IS REPORTING SPY RING ARRESTS
In an unexpected series of arrests that could threaten faltering reconciliation talks with North Korea, South Korea's intelligence agency said today that it had broken up a large, well-financed espionage ring that was seeking to "communize the Korean Peninsula."
The arrest of four dissidents and a roundup of more than 40 other suspects underscored the South Korean Government's continued fears that North Korea, despite pledges of national reconciliation, is still seeking to destabilize the far more prosperous South.


Limits Are Urged on Insurers After Storm
The consumer advocate Ralph Nader and J. Robert Hunter, president of the National Insurance Consumer Organization, today called for Federal and state action to stop any unwarranted insurance-rate rises.
They are seeking to head off any effort by insurers to use the damage caused by Hurricane Andrew as justification for higher rates.
Mr.
Nader and Mr.
Hunter were reacting to an internal memorandum from Jeffrey W. Greenberg, executive vice president of the American International Group, the big insurer, to his company presidents.
In the memo, dated Aug. 24, the day the hurricane hit southern Florida, Mr.
Greenberg described the storm as "an opportunity to get price increases now."


Q&amp;A
Rotten Peaches
Q.
Peaches seem to go bad faster than other fruits. Why?


HIGH LEVEL OF IRON TIED TO HEART RISK
Surprising new findings from a large study in Finland show that high levels of iron are a strong risk factor for heart attacks.
The study, which is being reported today in a leading scientific journal, provides the first empirical evidence for a theory advanced 11 years ago that high amounts of iron promote heart attacks and low levels protect against them.


Builders and Foes Using Bronx Incinerator as Test
Daniel Politi's eyes beamed from under his white hard-hat as he pointed to two 80-foot smokestacks at the top of a new $20 million medical waste incinerator in the South Bronx.
"My first question," he asked proudly, "is which stack are we emitting from?"
Mr.
Politi, an official of Resource Management Technologies, a New York City company that built the plant with Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, wanted to show that the incinerator was clean and safe.
And in fact, there were no visible signs of smoke from either stack, even though ton after ton of bloody bandages, surgical supplies and other hospital waste was being consumed in a double furnace below.


Sports of The Times; The Worst Interests Of Baseball
FAY VINCENT's reason for resigning yesterday symbolized his reign as a commissioner who put the game ahead of the accountants who had hired him.
He did it in the best interests of baseball.
"A fight based solely on principle does not justify the disruption when there is not greater support among ownership for my views," his statement explained in part.
"Resignation -- not litigation -- should be my final act as Commissioner, 'in the best interests' of Baseball."


Saberhagen to Close Year in Bullpen
Bret Saberhagen is back.
Again.
This time he's minus the curveball, minus a starter's job and looking at a little spot work out of the bullpen.
And, in what could prove to be an interesting kink at the end of this highly twisted Mets season, Saberhagen could be showcasing his power as the Mets' closer -- at least in a few appearances.
The Mets activated Saberhagen from the disabled list today with plans to use him out of the bullpen for the remainder of the year.
Saberhagen, who has sat out most of the season with an injured right index finger, could be used as early as Tuesday night, in the second game of the Mets-Phillies series.
Manager Jeff Torborg, who is looking at a seriously strapped bullpen, said he hadn't ruled out using Saberhagen in the closer's role.


Agassi Has Earned Sport's Top Billing
More evidence that Andre Agassi has grown from a teen-age hairdo with an outfit that glows in the dark into someone who is capable of revealing much more than the middle of his stomach: He issued the strongest rebuke of Jimmy Connors, the 40-year-old sore loser who departed the United States Open last week with a graceless invective against a man who had beaten him for the 17th straight time.
Other players, like John McEnroe and Boris Becker, defended Ivan Lendl and his brainy game plan for Connors, but it was Agassi who seemed to take the lead when he suggested that 20,000 of Connors's "closest friends" in the Stadium and millions more in television land can continue to make a hero out of this guy, but enough is enough.


Tea Leaves Favor Hostetler
Coach Ray Handley of the Giants declined to say today who would start at quarterback Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys at Giants Stadium.
All signs point to Jeff Hostetler rather than Phil Simms.
Hostetler, normally the starter, is recovering from a bruised back and pelvis and did not play Sunday in the Giants' 31-14 opening-day loss to the San Francisco 49ers.
Simms played the entire game.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article in Business Day yesterday about the end of the United Automobile Workers' strike at the General Motors plant in Lordstown, Ohio, misidentified a union official, Stephen Yokich.
He is vice president for the union's G.M. department.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Merck's decision to market lower-priced generic versions of its products signals that even the most powerful drug companies cannot ignore the possibility of sharp drops in revenue when important drugs lose patent protection.
Merck is creating a generic drug division, West Point Pharma, that will market a lower-priced exact copy of Dolobid, an analgesic.  [ Page D1. ]
GPA Group has faced a potential crisis ever since its planned initial stock offering flopped in June.
With no easy solution in sight, GPA's chairman and founder, Tony Ryan, will again take over as chief executive, but he still faces a difficult fight to bring the company's finances under control and maintain its position as one of the aerospace industry's most influential companies.  [ D1. ]


Defiance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday with a chart outlining the positions of New York Democrats running for the United States Senate misstated the name of Robert Abrams's wife in some copies.
It is Diane.


Homeless and Out of Sight
In a patch of Aurora, Ill., grizzled men pass idle days in tents and makeshift hovels, accustomed to being ignored by political leaders.
Page A16.


It Takes Just a Game To Miss the Replays
In the first week of The Year of Living Without Instant Replay Review, NBC's Marv Albert and Bill Parcells witnessed three plays that deserved to be reversed.
Not a bad way to start the Albert-Parcells partnership.
First came Jets quarterback Browning Nagle's fumble on his first snap, then the fumble recovery (that wasn't) by Jets cornerback Erik McMillan and then an interception (that wasn't) by Falcons cornerback Tim McKyer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  24 DIE IN SOUTH AFRICA HOMELAND


Parades and Protests for Independence Day in Brazil


Observer; Not in Church, Guys
The newspapers say the baseball owners pressured the baseball commissioner into resigning.
I want to say, "Hold it right there, newspapers. How can baseball be owned?"
I have been thoroughly soaked, marinated you might say, in the propaganda of baseball.
When you say "baseball" to me, I think of church, and not just because the average baseball game nowadays lasts longer than a month of Sundays.
It's "baseball owners" that puzzle me.
Church can't be owned, can it?


By Design; Vests Come Into Their Own
The vest has come out of hiding.
It's no longer just something to wear under a jacket, but a fashion on its own.
This summer, young men and women sported vests over T-shirts or bare chests.
For fall, we should see both sexes wearing them over pullover sweaters as well as over dress shirts (neckties optional).
And they won't be restricted to traditional flannel or tweed.


Market Place; Geneva Steel Sees A Return to Profits
THERE WAS NO shortage of doubters, five years ago, about the prospects of a shuttered steel operation in Vineyard, Utah, that was bought from the USX Corporation and resuscitated by a group of investors operating under the name Geneva Steel.
The plant had none of the efficient steelmaking technology known as continuous casting, and it was still capable of producing steel in open-hearth furnaces not unlike those built at the turn of the century.
But in the years since that acquisition, Geneva Steel has made a name for itself, not only as the only integrated steel mill operating west of the Mississippi River, but also as a company that remained profitable during much of a recession that has largely battered its counterparts in the steel industry.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Attack; CLINTON ACCUSES REPORTERS OF BIAS
Gov.
Bill Clinton, who has grown increasingly frustrated and angry over questions about his draft status during the Vietnam War, lashed out at the press today, saying reporters had made no similar effort to query President Bush on his involvement in the Iran-contra affair.
Mr.
Clinton for the first time brought up reported comments by former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger suggesting that Mr.
Bush may have known about the arms-for-hostages deal.
Mr.
Clinton said Mr.
Bush's actions may have demonstrated "support for illegal conduct."


For New York State Senate
This year's rearrangement of New York State Senate district lines, drawn to protect incumbents and enhance minority voting strength, has produced many oddly shaped districts.
Some fragment neighborhoods, others plunge back and forth across borough or county lines.
That creates a difficult but necessary task for voters in next Tuesday's Democratic primary.
They have to figure out what district they now live in, and then decide which candidate they prefer.
Here are our recommendations in five of the livelier State Senate races, where, because of overwhelmingly Democratic registration, victory is tantamount to election.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Artagraph Reproduction Technology Inc., 300,000 common shares. J. Gregory &amp; Co.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Dayton Hudson Corp., Minneapolis, is offering $100 million of 7 1/4 percent notes due in 2004 at 99.9 to yield 7.262 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Patterns
Rediscovering Italy
The Italians are coming.
In force.
To celebrate the quincentenary of Columbus's landing in the New World, an army of designers, jewelers, artisans and manufacturers will be taking part in a series of fashion shows, parties and exhibitions to spur Americans' interest in things Italian.
Not that Americans don't know about Italian products, but there is something called a recession going on, and Italy is feeling it, too.
Although exports of wine and machinery to the United States are growing, sales of clothing, shoes and jewelry have all declined in the last five years.
For the first six months of this year, Italy's share of the American import market was just 2.3 percent, down from 2.6 percent in 1990.


Winners and Losers Emerge in Vincent's Wake
Major league baseball, as it has been constructed since the aftermath of its darkest days, the 1919 White Sox gambling scandal, has evolved again.
For this is the first day since Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis helped design the office that the commissionership is dead.
When Fay Vincent resigned yesterday, for all intents, the office expired with his term.
Now, much like people situated at the base of a erupting volcano, baseball -- its lords, its players, its umpires, its fans -- must sift through the ashes to see what emerges and who benefits most from this turbulent metamorphosis.


Resigning 'in the Best Interests of Baseball'
Following is the text of Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent's letter of resignation:
As requested in the owners' resolution of Sept. 3, 1992, and in accordance with its terms, I tender my resignation as Commissioner of Baseball, effective immediately.


Furiously Shows Stuff, Putting Saratoga in Past
Remember the colt named Furiously, the blueblood son of Danzig, the prodigy of the New York racing season who won his first three races by a combined total of 31 lengths?
That's right, the colt who took his rave reviews to Saratoga this summer, challenged the big horses like Dixie Brass and Thunder Rumble and ran fourth and sixth in his first trips in the big leagues.


MUSLIMS ARRESTED ON ARMS CHARGES
The arrest in Jordan of a number of Muslim fundamentalists, including two Parliament members, indicates that they might have been stockpiling weapons for a campaign to thwart a possible agreement on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories, diplomats and reports published here said today.
Amman's state security court on Saturday charged a Muslim fundamentalist legislator, Laith Shbeilat, with possessing and transporting firearms, Arab radio quoted Jordanian officials as saying today.
Another Islamic member of the lower house, Yacoub Qarrash, was arrested on Aug. 26 on suspicion of possessing explosives.
Mr.
Qarrash was also questioned about possible links to a previously unknown underground fundamentalist faction, Vanguards of Islamic Youth.


3 Killed and 3 Hurt in Triborough Bridge Crash
Three people were killed and three were seriously injured when a speeding car struck a divider on the Triborough Bridge before dawn yesterday, the police said.
The accident forced the closing of the four Queens-bound lanes from about 6 A.M. to 8:39 A.M. and prompted another accident caused by rubbernecking that shut the opposite lanes from 8 to 8:30 A.M., said Lieut.
Jerome McCloskey, operations superintendent of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority Police.
Because traffic was light on the bridge, which connects Queens with the Bronx and Manhattan, no major delays resulted, he said.


Economists Strive to Find Environment's Bottom Line
Does environmental protection hurt the economy or help it?
The question is under hot dispute in the Presidential campaign.
The Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, Senator Al Gore, argues that environmental protection boosts the economy and creates jobs; Vice President Dan Quayle, whose White House Council on Competitiveness has sought to reduce environmental regulations, says the Democrats' environmental policies would cost jobs.


Labor Fight at Kosher Store Turns Violent
A simmering labor dispute at a kosher supermarket in Brooklyn turned violent yesterday when members of a food workers' union pushed past police barricades into the store and fought with nonunion workers, leaving four people injured, the police and witnesses said.
The union, Local 342-50 of the United Food and Commercial Workers, has been trying to enlist the workers at the Kosher Plaza Supermarket since it opened in March.
But many workers were not interested, according to employees interviewed yesterday, prompting the union to regularly picket the store at 1223 Coney Island Avenue in Flatbush.
The store is one of the few kosher supermarkets in the New York metropolitan area and caters to the large Orthodox Jewish population in Brooklyn.


NASA Plans an Economy Flight to the Solar System's Last Stop
Out in the twilight toward the edge of the solar system, Pluto is receding deeper into space.
Three years ago, the planet came as close as it ever gets to the Sun in 248 years, and astronomers managed to catch their best glimpses ever, imperfect views of an odd little world.
Smaller than Mercury or even Earth's Moon, Pluto is covered with ice and enveloped by a thin atmosphere of methane.
It is tipped over on its side and travels an eccentric orbit, crossing the plane of the other planets at a 17-degree angle and ranging out a lonesome 4.6 billion miles from the Sun.
Pluto's recently discovered companion is a satellite half its own size, Charon, forming what scientists characterize as a double-planet system.


Jerusalem Journal; Gold for Dome's Glitter, But Brass for Its Leaks
Jerusalem's most distinctive landmark, the gold-colored Dome of the Rock, is undergoing an expensive facelift, and, as with most things in this city, the work involves religion, politics and occasional dispute.
The problem with the 1,300-year-old shrine is that, for all its splendor, it leaks -- and rather badly at that, says Issam Awad, an architect in charge of the renovation project for the Waqf, the committee responsible for Islamic holy places here.


Mutant L-Tryptophan
To the Editor:
I was glad to see your Aug. 9 and 16 articles on the Food and Drug Administration.
I have waited months for coverage of these developments.


Gulf War's Cost to Arabs Estimated at $620 Billion
The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the resulting Persian Gulf war have cost Arab countries $620 billion, according to an authoritative report issued on Sunday.
The Arab Economic Report, an annual study by the Arab Monetary Fund, the Arab League, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries and other leading institutions, said the destruction of oil wells and pipelines, telecommunications, roads, buildings and factories cost Kuwait $160 billion and Iraq $190 billion.


2 Crown Heights Deaths Are Still Deeply Mourned
Since his brother, Yankel, was killed on a Brooklyn street 13 months ago, Norman Rosenbaum has traveled to New York City from his native Australia seven times, hired a team of lawyers and investigators and combed the streets in search of witnesses to the slaying.
He has vowed to find justice for his brother, a rabbinical student who was stabbed to death on a hot August night in Crown Heights.
Yankel Rosenbaum was the victim of youths seeking revenge for the death of a 7-year-old black boy, Gavin Cato, who was hit by a car in the entourage of the Lubavitch Grand Rabbi.


Charles O. Kates, 80, Writer and Publisher
Charles O. Kates, a writer and magazine publisher, died on Sunday at the Rosary Hill hospice in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson.
He died of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Jackson and Clinton Planning to Meet Soon
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson will head a nationwide voter-registration drive and will meet soon with the Democratic Presidential nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton, officials of Mr.
Clinton's campaign and the party said today.
Mr.
Jackson, who has been critical of the Democratic nominee and has asserted that he neglects black voters, said in a telephone interview today from New York that Mr.
Clinton had called him and that he hoped the call "represents a new strategy that will be expansive and inclusive and will bring all parts of the party together under one tent."


Beverly Hills Fan Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Clear Prejudice
To the Editor:
You quote David A. Kessler, Food and Drug Administration Commissioner, in an Aug. 16 "correction" to your Aug. 9 article, saying that nothing in the agency's proposed food-labeling regulations would affect sale of high-potency vitamins "as long as they do not pose a health hazard or make misleading health claims."


Ross Systems INc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BioSpecifics Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Treasury Will Auction Bills This Week
Treasury financings during this holiday-shortened week are limited to the regular auction of new three- and six-month bills.
The auction is normally held on Mondays, but because of Labor Day it has been rescheduled this week for today.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 2.9 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 2.95 percent.
Government agency issues due this week include a $500 million floating-rate note issue that will be priced today.
The notes mature March 3, 1993, and will be priced off the three-month Treasury bill, with the interest rate adjusted the day after each weekly Treasury bill auction.


Dorothy D. MacKaye Dies at 88; Ladies' Home Journal Columnist
Dorothy Disney MacKaye, who chronicled marital woes and dispensed advice for 30 years through a column in The Ladies' Home Journal, "Can This Marriage Be Saved?", died on Saturday at her summer home in Guilford, Conn.
She was 88 years old and lived in Guilford and Washington.
She died of a heart attack, said her son, William R. MacKaye of Washington.


Cowboys' Constant Pressure Crushes Redskins
There is something about the Washington Redskins that makes the Dallas Cowboys see red.
There is something there that brings out the bully in the Cowboys.
It happened here again tonight, when Dallas blocked a Washington punt out of the end zone for a saftey, returned a punt 79 yards for a touchdown and scored on a running play and on a passing play, too.


Merck Sets Generic Drug Sales
An announcement by Merck &amp; Company that it would market lower-priced generic versions of its products signals that even the world's most powerful drug companies cannot ignore the possibility of sharp revenue declines when important drugs lose patent protection.
Merck said Friday that it was creating a generic drug division, West Point Pharma, based in West Point, Pa., that would market diflunisal -- a lower-priced exact copy of its analgesic Dolobid, which has $100 million a year in sales.
Dolobid lost its American patent protection in 1989 but has not yet faced a generic competitor.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore


Maxwell Set To Sell a Unit
The merchant banking division of the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation has agreed to buy Nimbus Records from the Maxwell Communication Corporation.
An executive who knows of the negotiations said yesterday that the price was about $40 million, or roughly equal to the record company's estimated 1992 sales.


The Carnes Nomination: Talk It Down
On its return to work today, the Senate will confront the nomination of Edward Carnes to the U.S.
Court of Appeals that hears cases from Georgia, Florida and Alabama.
Mr.
Carnes, a 41-year-old prosecutor who specializes in enforcing Alabama's death penalty, would replace a giant of the bench, retiring Judge Frank Johnson.
The senators have agreed to a brief debate, then a vote on whether to close debate and proceed to a final tally.
The opposition's best hope is to defeat cloture and kill the nomination with a filibuster.
Their biggest challenge will be to find enough to say about a lawyer who seems to have chosen a career in executions.


On My Mind; Iraq: Hope for Rebels
They do not like to talk about it too much, or show their hopes too plain.
They have been disappointed so often.
They have seen so many of their countrymen die when the hopes turned to ashes in the mouth and bitterness in the heart.
But for the first time since the United States allowed Saddam Hussein to survive after the gulf war, Iraqi civilian rebels who use this city as one of their gathering places are beginning to believe that they can see his end in sight.
Not immediate, not inevitable, but strategically and logically in sight and achievable within a year, or less.


Pants to Dress Up In
Pants are bursting on to the fashion scene with the same force they had more than 20 years ago when they came out of the garden and the country roads to make an impact on city dressing.
Their new eminence is apparent in the resort collections: designers who specialize in dressy clothes have joined the producers of sportswear to endorse trousers for all times of day and night.
Why the sudden resurgence of interest in pants?
Although they haven't disappeared since Andre Courreges and Yves Saint Laurent first introduced them in the mid-1960's, they have not occupied fashion's center stage for more than a decade.


Ultra Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


On Day After, No One Escapes Coslet's Wrath
One night was not enough to ease the sting Jason Staurovsky felt from having missed two field-goal attempts in the Jets' 20-17 loss to the Falcons Sunday afternoon in Atlanta.
But it did appear to be enough time for the Jets' head coach, Bruce Coslet, to become more steamed about his team's performance.


No Headline
"I cannot govern as Commissioner without the consent of owners to be governed." -- FAY VINCENT, resigning as baseball commissioner.  [ A1:1. ]


Appeals Court Voids Millions in Damages In '86 T.W.A. Blast
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan has overturned a multimillion-dollar damages award, ruling that Trans World Airlines was not guilty of willful misconduct in failing to prevent a midair bomb explosion aboard a 1986 T.W.A. flight in which four people were killed.
The bomb exploded aboard the Boeing 727 jet as it approached Athens on April 2, 1986, on a flight from Cairo.
The pilot made an emergency landing.


Philadelphia Teachers Approve New Contract


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the Republican primary for the United States Senate in Connecticut misidentified the winner of the party endorsement at its convention in July.
It was Chris Burnham, not Brook Johnson.


INSIDE
U.N. to Sample Iraq's Water
Iraq has accepted a United Nations plan for water sampling to insure Baghdad does not covertly rebuild a nuclear arms program.
Page A8.
Tajik President Resigns
In a violent airport confrontation, the President of the former Soviet republic of Tajikistan was forced to resign after armed protests.
Page A3.
A School's Success Story
Stuyvesant High has a lavish new home, but its excellence owes more to aspiration than expense.
Page B1.
Sing a Song of DNA
Exotic music and more: the basic genetic material is entering the popular culture.
Science Times, page C1.


Review/Pop; The Many, Many Styles of Caetano Veloso
One of the greatest strengths of Brazilian pop is the ease with which so many of the country's best-known performers blend the yin and the yang aspects of music.
Where American hard-rock musicians are loath to show a sensitive side and softer pop sentimentalists rarely rock out, Brazilian musicians like Caetano Veloso, who performed at Town Hall on Saturday and Sunday, move between hard-edged percussive chants and dreamy ballads as though such changes of pace were the most natural transitions in the world.
Mr.
Veloso, who opens a five-night engagement at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea) this evening, is a Renaissance man of music in the way his songs span many genres.
They range from aggressive carnival songs that have a fierce percussive drive to ballads that are as wistful as the gossamer laments of Antonio Carlos Jobim, the bossa nova pioneer whom Mr.
Veloso credited on Sunday evening as his biggest influence.


Cowboys Rush Past Redskins


A Caribbean Party; Crown Heights Parade Spreads Joy
First, there were the drums.
Before the West Indian-American Day parade had even begun yesterday, you could hear them a mile away, pounding low and deep like an approaching storm.
Steel, snare, conga and bass, a controlled percussive chaos hinting at the dancing to come.


Courier Finally Slams Open Door on McEnroe
He bared his teeth like Cujo, but his opponent, No. 1-ranked Jim Courier, betrayed no fear of being bitten.
He slammed his racquet onto the resilient rubber Decoturf, but it merely bounced back into his hand instead of breaking.
For lack of anything better to punish, he singled out a photographer with a noisy camera and had him evicted from this inevitably anticlimactic fourth-round match on the United States Open's Stadium Court.
Cantankerous to a fault, John McEnroe, a four-time United States Open champion, went out just the way he came on the tennis tour, back in 1977: right in the middle of a self-generated maelstrom.


Lewis Freedman Memorial
A memorial service for Lewis Freedman, a television producer and program executive for CBS and PBS, is to be held on Friday at 11 A.M. at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
Mr.
Freedman died on June 25 at age 66.


Lead Levels Force Closing Of a School
School officials yesterday ordered a Greenwich Village elementary school closed for the first day of school today after tests by the teachers' union indicated that there were high levels of lead in the dust on the floors.
Dangerously high concentrations of lead were found in dust samples taken in the spring.
Those samples were analyzed by a laboratory hired by parents from Public School 3, at 590 Hudson Street, at Grove Street.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The White House and Congress squared off on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
President Bush released the text of the pact with Mexico and Canada and sent his top trade official to the Senate to begin lobbying for it.  [ Page A1. ] Companies
Ford's executive vice president for North America has emerged as the favorite to succeed Harold A. Poling when he retires as chairman next year.  [ D1. ]  Chrysler said it would move its corporate base from Highland Park, Mich., to Auburn Hills, about 50 miles north.  [ D3. ]


Bowne &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Vending Machines, the Next Generation in Dining
IT'S not hard to see the flaws in vending machines.
They swallow money and never return it.
They promise to drop a package of candy but freeze in mid moment, cruelly dangling something that cannot be reached.
Or they offer food that is appealing only to the desperate.
But there are visions of what a vending machine can be: a quick, easy way to get fresh, nutritious food, valued not as a last-ditch choice but as an appealing alternative.
There is a growing belief in the food industry that the next few years will witness the transformation of vending from a static, change-resistant business into one that will provide food anywhere people happen to be: in trains, in airports, on beaches or in offices.
The food would be what many people want but often can't get from a machine, things like fresh pasta cooked on the spot, perfect cappuccino or the finest frozen yogurt.


Virus Threat Is Overstated, An I.B.M. Study Concludes
The threat of a computer virus infecting tens of thousands of personal computers has been significantly exaggerated, according to a new study by an I.B.M. computer scientist, which was released yesterday.
Viruses are potentially disruptive programs that secretly spread between computers by hiding on floppy disks or attaching themselves to files and other data processed by computers.
There has been heightened concern in recent years that millions of personal computers could lose data after becoming infected with such programs.


Blue Range Resource reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Control the Tow Truck Cowboys
The fatal collision of a speeding tow truck and a car in the Sunset Park neighborhood of Brooklyn fully warrants aggressive investigation of the truck driver and the towing company involved.
Initial reports suggest that he had a long record of reckless driving that the company ignored.
But tough action in this case is not enough.
A serious effort to prevent future accidents will require new city legislation.


Yount Stirs Crowd but He's One Hit Away
He doesn't know most of the names.
On the day Robin Yount of the Milwaukee Brewers came within one hit of becoming the 17th major league player to reach 3,000, he sat before his locker and tried to think of the names.
"Clemente," Yount said.
"Hank Aaron's probably on that list. Kaline, I think. I'm about 13 short, I guess. Pete Rose, obviously."


Surprising Portrait Of Psychotherapists As Abuse Victims
A SURPRISINGLY high number of psychotherapists have been victims of sexual or physical abuse, a new study shows.
Results from a national survey of clinical and counseling psychologists showed that 70 percent of the women and one-third of the men had experienced some form of abuse, including milder forms like sexual harassment, according to an article to be published next month in the journal Professional Psychology: Research and Practice.


Check-Off for Debt Lets Citizens Fight Back; Clinton's Taxes
To the Editor:
George Bush proclaimed in his acceptance speech that his opponent, Bill Clinton, was responsible as Governor of Arkansas for 128 tax increases (transcript, Aug. 21).
Such a willfully false and misleading assertion invites refutation.
Three of the 128 so-called tax increases listed by the Bush-Quayle Committee are simply a miscounting of lines of text (Nos. 31, 86 and 91), according to Michael Kinsley's analysis of the list in The New Republic for Aug. 21.
No. 78 is a verbatim repeat of a 25-cent-a-gallon increase in the tax on "light wine" (No. 74).
Other "increases" include a court cost imposed on convicted criminals (No. 92) and a license fee for abortion clinics (No. 48).
Objecting to these as "taxes" makes George Bush look pro-criminal and pro-abortion.


Yeltsin Heading for Tokyo and an Unfinished Battle
Most countries responded to the collapse of Soviet Communism last year by abandoning years of hostility to support the new Government in Moscow.
Japan's response was more complex: the Government insisted that, until a World War II territorial dispute was resolved, Japan would not recognize that anything had really changed in Moscow.
Neither the passage of time nor the end of the cold war has softened Japan's insistence that it was robbed by Stalin.
The contested property is a group of bleak, lightly populated islands in the far north.
Until they are returned, Japan insists it will not normalize relations with Russia or even sign a peace treaty for World War II.


Quentin N. Burdick, 84, Is Dead; U.S. Senator From North Dakota
Quentin N. Burdick, who had represented North Dakota in the United States Senate for the last 32 years, died yesterday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Fargo, his hometown.
He was 84 years old.
His Washington office said Senator Burdick, who had been afflicted with heart disease for months, died of heart failure.


Court Allows Damage Lawsuit Over a Disputed Imprisonment
A man who spent 19 years in prison in an armored-car murder he apparently did not commit can sue New York City for damages, a Federal appeals panel in Manhattan ruled yesterday.
The unanimous ruling by the three-member panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit addressed the issue of the liability of municipalities for the wrongful and unconstitutional acts of the police and public officials.


Crime Figures Continue to Decrease


Campus Journal; Incoming Students Find Lessons in Reaching Out
A new footbridge over the Genesee River makes it a snap to get from the University of Rochester to the city's well-worn southwest corner, otherwise known as the 19th Ward.
But the real links between the university and the community are made by such things as the dandelions, the many tough dandelions, that Kathleen McLoughlin is willing to pick.


Check-Off for Debt Lets Citizens Fight Back; It's Unconstitutional
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 21 front-page coverage of the President's acceptance speech notes that Mr.
Bush failed to say how he would cut Federal spending if his proposal to allow a debt-reduction income-tax check-off is implemented.
There is a more fundamental flaw: the check-off is unconstitutional.
For the last three decades the Supreme Court and almost all constitutional scholars have recognized the principle of one person one vote.
Under this principle, the courts have invalidated legislative districts with unequal sizes.
Surely, the courts would reject any referendum on spending that entitled people who paid more taxes to cast more votes.


Chrysler to Move Its Headquarters
The Chrysler Corporation, which had previously said it would not move its corporate base from Highland Park, Mich., announced today that it would transfer its headquarters operations to its technology center in Auburn Hills, about 50 miles to the north.
Chrysler said the move was necessary because it had eliminated 12,000 white-collar jobs since 1987 and had reorganized its engineers into teams from functional departments.


A Magazine President
Donald M. Elliman Jr., a Time Inc. executive for 25 years, was named president and publisher of Sports Illustrated yesterday.
Mr.
Elliman, 48 years old, is the first person to be named a president at any of the company's New York-based magazines.
As publisher, he succeeds Mark Mulvoy, who will continue to be managing editor.
Mr.
Elliman has been president of the sales and marketing division of Time Inc.


Charles de Bretteville, 79, Banker And Businessman in California
Charles de Bretteville, a leading businessman who became chairman of the Bank of California, died Friday at Community Hospital in Monterey, Calif.
He was 79 years old and lived in nearby Pebble Beach.
Charles Locke de Bretteville, one of two sons, said the cause of death was a heart attack.


Cowboys Are Back To Their Old Ways
It is amazing what one victory during prime time on national television can do for a team's reputation and psyche.
That is what happened with the Dallas Cowboys on Monday night.


Mets Plan to Shake Up Their Scouting System
The bureaucratese was polite and antiseptic, the official announcement loaded with terms like "efficiency" and "restructuring." What the Mets, in announcing a reworked scouting and talent development operation, said today was this:
*The economics of baseball are in potential trouble.


Mandela Mourns Ciskei Dead and Is Criticized Too
Nelson Mandela today deplored the killing of more than two dozen supporters of the African National Congress in a protest march against the South African black homeland of Ciskei on Monday, but he found the congress itself accused of bearing some responsibility for the deaths.
Flying to the region to mourn the dead and to press his case against the South African-financed Ciskei leadership, Mr.
Mandela vowed that the homeland would eventually be destroyed andits head, Brig.
Oupa J. Gqozo, would be ousted.


Late-Night ABC Talk Show Will Aim at Home Shoppers
ABC will experiment with a late-night talk show next month that will bring a home shopping format to network television for the first time, network executives said yesterday.
The show, called "Nitecap," will be broadcast on 50 or more ABC stations after the network's late-night news program "Nightline," starting the week of Oct. 19,


Reviews/Film; A 1970's Caper Movie With Heroes of the Time
"Sneakers" looks like a movie that just surfaced after being buried alive for 20 years.
It's an atrophied version of a kind of caper movie that was so beloved in the early 1970's, starring Robert Redford and Sidney Poitier, both of whom were very big back then, though they now appear embarrassed to be imitating their youthful selves in such creaky fashion.
Mr.
Redford even says at one point, "We're getting too old for this," as if to disarm criticism.
Instead the line calls attention to all of the other ways in which time has overtaken the movie, directed by Phil Alden Robinson ("Field of Dreams") and written by him with Lawrence Lasker and Walter F. Parkes.
Mr.
Lasker and Mr.
Parkes are the team that wrote the somewhat funnier and timelier "War Games" (1983), which also made use of computer mythology.


Sharpton's Headache: To Get Out the Vote
The next day, the Rev.
Al Sharpton is in Harlem, addressing a forum sponsored by a black sorority.
He stays overnight with a family in a Bronx housing project.
He is at Medgar Evers College in Crown Heights for a debate that has turned into the Al Sharpton show -- Mr.
Sharpton versus three empty chairs to symbolize the white candidates in the race for the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate.
The three declined to attend. 'Something for Nothing'
"They did not show. They have dissed the African-American community," said the moderator, Gary Byrd, who is broadcasting the event live over WLIB, the black-oriented radio station.
Almost as often as the station break, he refers to the "something for nothing conspiracy" of white candidates who, he says, want black votes but "believe they can disrespect the black community and black press and get away with it."


No Headline
"Two weeks ago there were thousands of unemployed construction workers around here. Right now, anybody who is not working is just plain lazy." -- THOMAS MENDEZ, a contractor in Boca Raton, Fla.  [ A1:6. ]


Georgia Sale By Times Co.
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it had completed the sale of the offices, equipment and subscription lists of The Gwinnett Daily News, a suburban Atlanta newspaper it had owned since 1987.
The newpaper was published on Sunday for the last time.
The property of the Gwinnett paper was sold to Cox Enterprises Inc., publisher of The Atlanta Journal and Constitution.
The sale was announced last month but was subject to a waiting period for possible review by the Justice Department.
That period has now expired.


Study of Poor Children Shows a Painful Choice: Heat Over Food
Boston City Hospital today released the findings of a three-year study showing that the number of emergency room visits by underweight children increased by 30 percent after the coldest months of the year.
Calling the results "amazing," Dr.
Deborah Frank, a pediatrician and director of the hospital's Failure to Thrive Clinic, said the seasonal increase in underweight children with medical emergencies appeared to be the result of a "heat-or-eat" dilemma, in which poor families cut back on food so they can pay their winter heating bills.
She said the increase in emergency room visits could not be attributed to chronic illness or disease.


Edison Brothers Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Review/Film; Music Meets Attitude: Lounge Lizards Concert
Three-quarters of the way into Garret Linn's engaging concert film, "John Lurie and the Lounge Lizards Live in Berlin," the leader of the nine-member band puts down his alto saxophone to relate a surreal vignette.
A man wakes up in a white room that he doesn't recognize, peers in a mirror and decides his lips are so thin that he ought to try collagen treatments.
When his wife walks in, he is disappointed to find that she looks so dowdy, but he realizes he loves her, and they both start laughing so hard at a secret joke that they collapse onto the carpet.
The man impulsively apologizes to his wife for his meager sexual endowment.
She says it's all right, but asks him if it is the reason he has massacred so many people.
At this point, Mr.
Lurie does a lurching little dance while making moans and groans that suggest primitive attempts at speech.
The story ends when the man's wife asks, "Why are you so stupid, dear?" and he replies, "Because I'm the President of the United States."


Insider Jail Terms Set Aside
In what may be the final postcript to the Wall Street securities scandals of the 1980's, a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday set aside the prison sentences and $155,000 fines of two defendants closely linked to Michael R. Milken's junk bond empire.
To force the two defendants, Bruce Newberg, a former junk bond trader at Drexel Burnham Lambert, and Charles M. Zarzecki, a member of the defunct investment firm of Princeton/Newport Partners, to go to prison, said Judge Robert L. Carter, would "be something in the nature of a sport."


Chefs International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 26


Hal Riney Wins G.E. Credit Card
The GE Capital Corporation, a unit of the General Electric Company, said yesterday that Hal Riney &amp; Partners in New York had been selected to handle an initial advertising campaign for the credit card that GE Capital introduced last week.
A spokesman for GE Capital in Stamford, Conn., declined to discuss billings or list the finalists considered for the account.
Trade publications said that the billings were estimated at $6 million and that the finalists included Ross Roy Advertising in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., whose affiliate, Ross Roy Direct, is handling the card's larger direct- marketing account, and Lintas New York.


Suspect Changes Plea to Guilty In Kidnapping of Oil Executive
The man accused of abducting a top Exxon official pleaded guilty today to seven counts of conspiracy and extortion, describing in detail a ransom scheme that went brutally awry and ended, he said, with the victim dying in his arms.
In an about-face in Federal District Court here today, Arthur D. Seale retracted his earlier plea of not guilty, abruptly ending a case that began on April 29, when Sidney J. Reso left his Morris Township home for a 10-minute drive to his office.
He never arrived, setting off a wide-ranging investigation that ended on June 19 with the arrest of Mr.
Seale and his wife, Irene Jacqueline.
Victim's Wife at Hearing


Wild for Harry, But Not in '48
George Bush is campaigning against Congress as Harry S. Truman did.
He is promising a come-from-behind victory like the one Harry S. Truman staged in 1948.
He invokes the spirit and oratory of Harry S. Truman in almost every speech.
But his challenger, Gov.
Bill Clinton, says the President is leaving something out of his Trumanesque performance: in the famous 1948 election, Mr.
Bush voted for Mr.
Truman's opponent, Gov.
Thomas Dewey of New York.


Regis Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Pop Life
Linda Ronstadt's Beginnings
Linda Ronstadt's transition from big pop star to small pop exoticist has been greeted with both critical abuse and commercial decline.
Where Ms.
Ronstadt used to have a flourishing pop career, she's now been making records that delve deep into nearly forgotten pop and folk genres, from her album of standards with Nelson Riddle, " 'Round Midnight" (Elektra), to her more recent "Mas Canciones" (Elektra), an album of Mexican folk and mariachi music.


Sharpton's Sober Plea
THE RADIO SCRIPT Announcer: How much is it worth?
As much as it cost.
It cost the lives of young men and women.
It cost the days, months and years spent in jails.
It cost beatings by Klansmen and others.
It cost a lot to get because it's worth a lot.
It?
Your vote.
No one has paid a higher price than the African-American community.
And now, with that vote, paid for with African-American sweat and blood, you can make an important statement.
You can vote for Al Sharpton for U.S.
Senate.
Only Al Sharpton can make a change, because only Al Sharpton, of all the candidates, has never been part of New York's insider system.
Only Al Sharpton has new ideas.
Some say, Don't make a statement.
What would those who fought for the right to vote say?
They'd say, Make that statement on the ballot, with Sharpton, Al Sharpton for U.S.
Senate.
Mr.
Sharpton: This is Al Sharpton.
This has been paid for by the Committee to Elect Al Sharpton, Dan Faustin, treasurer.
Announcer: Sharpton, Al Sharpton, for U.S.
Senate.
PRODUCER Full House Productions of New York.
SCORECARD In this advertisement, wich Mr.
Sharpton's aides say he wrote himself, the flamboyant and sometimes flip civil rights protester presents his candidacy as a sober exercise in black empowerment.
It is a stance he strikes often on the stump, arguing that no black candidate has over won statewide office in New York and insisting that his camppaign has as much to do with encourageing black voters and establishing a precedent for the future as it does with his own chance of winning.
It is running on radio stations aimed at black listeners.
With polls showing most black voters still undecided, and with Mr.
Sharpton running virtually even with the third-place candidate, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, at around 10 percent support, he could be a significant factor in a tight four-way race.


G.M. Expected to Announce Details of New Credit Card
Think of it as a frequent drivers card.
The General Motors Corporation is expected to make a widely anticipated announcement today that it will issue a new Mastercard and possibly a Visa credit card designed to build loyalty among car buyers.


Snapple Beverage Picks Kirshenbaum
The Snapple Beverage Corporation in Valley Stream, L.I., yesterday named Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York to handle its advertising account, with billings of $15 million.
The initial 10 contenders in a five-week-long review had been narrowed to 3: the incumbent, the Marketing Communications Corporation in Essex, Conn., which joined forces with Hal Riney &amp; Partners in New York to make its presentation; Bozell New York, and Kirshenbaum.


Corrections
An obituary on Monday about Lewis W. Gillenson referred imprecisely to family members.
Rochelle Clayman, who survives, was his second wife; his children, Wendy, Amy and Joshua, are from his first marriage.


2 Turkish Fighter Jets Forced Down in Iran
Iranian jet bombers forced two Turkish military planes to land in Iran last week "in an attempt to end invading flights from Turkey," according to reports published today.
According to one report, in Abrar, "During an attempt by Turkish planes to infiltrate border areas of Iran, two invading planes were forced to land in an air base in the west of the country by Iranian jets." The planes and their pilots apparently are being held in western Iran.


Carpenter Is Adding To Jet Receiver Riches
Ask the Jets' Rob Carpenter what happened to him in Cincinnati and New England last season that caused him to wash out in both places and you're likely to get a puzzled look and a shrug of the shoulders.
"I really can't explain it to you -- I have no idea," said Carpenter, a second-year wide receiver who was cut by the Bengals after they drafted him out of Syracuse in the fourth round and then was picked up by the Patriots.


Players Feeling Uncertain
Major league players are peppering their union leaders with questions about lockouts and collusion in light of greater expectations that the Basic Agreement will be reopened a year early and in wake of the owners' ouster of Fay Vincent, a commissioner perceived as conciliatory to labor.
That concern was evident as players kept the switchboard at the union headquarters in New York busy yesterday, one day after Vincent acceded to the wishes of 18 of the 28 owners and resigned.
The concerns were also evident when Donald Fehr, the union leader, met with the Seattle Mariners and the Minnesota Twins and the players' questions focused on labor as opposed to the original meeting topic, the upcoming expansion draft.


Amtech Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Theater; Pastiche of Columbus, Politics and Puppets, Tinged With Pathos
Peter Schumann's Bread and Puppet Theater has never shrunk from taking on issues whose scope more than matches the dimensions of the giant puppet masks and figures that the company commonly uses in its productions.
And in "Columbus: The New World Order," the two-and-a-half-hour play that inaugurated the Public Theater's international festival of puppetry on Monday afternoon, the topic is nothing less than Christopher Columbus's voyage to the New World in 1492 and its consequences.
With Mr.
Schumann being devoutly pacifist and left-wing, the fable that unfolds is a brutal tale of conquest, destruction and oppression that ends with an ambiguous warning.


Credit Markets; U.S. Bond Yields Fall to Lowest in Years
The bond market rallied sharply again yesterday, continuing the surge set off Friday by the weak employment report and sending some yields to lows not seen in years.
In late trading, the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond dropped to 7.21 percent, its lowest since September of 1986.
The bond's price rose 24/32 , to 10012/32 .
In the last two trading days, the bond's yield has fallen 14 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point.


Sports of The Times; Dear David: Don't Even Think of It
THE smartest man in sports is David Stern.
He can explain cable television and salary caps and the future of international basketball better than anybody I know.
David Stern also knows geography.
In the National Basketball Association, the West Coast teams are actually in one division, and the new expansion teams in Florida eventually gravitated to the Eastern divisions.


ESCOBAR SUGGESTS HE MAY SURRENDER
Pablo Escobar, the fugitive Colombian cocaine lord who escaped in July from a luxurious prison, has said he will consider surrendering, but warned that any attempt by the United States to abduct him would bring grave consequences.
In remarks published today in the newspaper El Nuevo Siglo, the Medellin cartel boss said he might turn himself in if the Government insured his safety and provided a jail in his home state of Antioquia.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Background; Democrats Charge 'Dirty Tricks' Over Draft Issue
As President Bush's re-election campaign intensified its public assault on Gov.
Bill Clinton's draft record today, Democrats accused their opponents of resorting to "dirty tricks" to press the issue behind the scenes.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, a wounded World War II veteran, took the Senate floor on behalf of the Bush campaign to denounce the Democratic Presidential nominee for telling "tall tales" about how he avoided serving in Vietnam.
He went on to say: "Let me be clear -- the fact that Bill Clinton avoided military service and did not go to Vietnam are not the issues here. The real issues now are trust, confidence and credibility, and on these three critical standards Bill Clinton is flunking the test."


Sands Regent reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SKY-DIVING CRASH LINKED TO ENGINE
After a day sifting through the rubble of a plane crash that killed 12 members of a sky diving club near here on Monday, Federal investigators said today that they found evidence of engine trouble.
The DeKalb County sheriff, Roger Smith, said a witness told the authorities that it appeared that at least one of the plane's two engines failed shortly after takeoff as the aircraft wobbled through the air about 50 feet above the field where it crashed and burst into flames, killing everyone on board.


Saks Names A New Vice Chairman
The management shake-up at Saks Fifth Avenue that has produced a number of high-profile departures in recent months continued on a more positive note yesterday when Gary Witkin, executive vice president and director of the department-store division of the Dayton Hudson Corporation, was named vice chairman of the specialty retailer.
The move from Minneapolis to New York is set for Oct. 1 and will reunite the 43-year-old Mr.
Witkin with Philip Miller, his former boss in retailing positions at four other chains.


Sabatini Is Surprised As Fernandez Gains Showdown With Seles
No wonder Mary Joe Fernandez kissed Gabriela Sabatini on both cheeks after she upset her, 6-2, 1-6, 6-4, in two hours yesterday in the quarterfinals of the United States Open.
Besides a relationship that dates to when they were 8 or 9 years old, it was Sabatini who inspired Fernandez to literally go forward with her career.


Judge Ousted From Tobacco Case Over Industry's Complaint of Bias
The Federal judge who has been at the center of major liability cases on the risks of smoking for the last decade has been removed from one of those cases by a Federal appeals court, which said that his own words suggested bias against the tobacco industry.
The decision, issued on Friday by the Third Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia, capped a five-year effort by the tobacco industry to remove the judge, H. Lee Sarokin of Federal District Court in Newark, from tobacco liability cases.
No one else in the Federal judiciary has handled so many tobacco cases for so long.  'Most Agonizing' Decision


Check-Off for Debt Lets Citizens Fight Back
To the Editor:


Check-Off for Debt Lets Citizens Fight Back; Arkansas Successes
To the Editor:
On Aug. 17, Rich Bond, Republican National Committee chairman, referred to Bill Clinton as "a failed governor from a small state." Aug. 18 on CNN's "Crossfire," John Sununu (former Governor of New Hampshire) repeated Mr.
Bond's claim; this is amusing when one considers that New Hampshire has approximately half the population and one-fifth the area of Arkansas.
Arkansas is hardly "a failure."


Kim Chung Yul, 75, South Korean Premier
Kim Chung Yul, a former Prime Minister of South Korea who helped prepare the country for its first general elections, died on Monday.
He was 75 years old and lived in Seoul.
Mr.
Kim died after a lengthy illness, an announcement by the South Korean Embassy said.
The immediate cause of death was not given.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile; Quayle's Right Hand: a Contrarian Tries to Remold Boss's Image
When everyone else at Harvard was marching against the war in Vietnam, William Kristol was defending it as a righteous cause.
When they were rallying for the equal rights amendment, he was testifying against it at a Senate hearing.
While others were lampooning Richard M. Nixon, he was wearing a Spiro Agnew sweatshirt around campus "just to shock people."
Proudly contrarian by nature, Mr.
Kristol was openly contemptuous of the "cocksure radicals who thought they were the smartest generation ever and that none of the traditions were worth preserving." He kept his hair short.
He says he did not smoke marijuana.
He had little time for Jimi Hendrix or the Doors.
"He was far too rigorous to compare Bob Dylan to W. B. Yeats," said R. Emmett Tyrrell, a boyhood friend who went on to become editor of The American Spectator.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
A CASE STUDY  IN FAILURE
Five-year-old Randi Anderson scrawled on the walls of her foster home with lipstick.
She stole money from her foster mother's purse.
She broke all her toys.
But while three New York City child-welfare workers concluded that she needed counseling, she never got it.
And when she provoked her foster mother's 20-year-old son once too often, she was beaten to death.
Randi did not fall through a small, isolated tear in the safety net.
Although hers was an extreme case, it points up the failings of the city's child welfare system in caring for the thousands of emotionally troubled children who have poured into foster care in recent years.
A1.
BYSTANDERS KILLED IN BRONX SHOOTING
An argument at a block party in the Bronx escalated into gunfire that killed two bystanders, including a woman who was seven months pregnant, the police said.
The baby was delivered in a Caesarean section but died three hours later.
B3.  51 TICKETS AND STILL DRIVING
Despite a long record of reckless driving and the lack of a valid license, a flawed system failed to keep Christopher Devita off the road.
A tow-truck driver who has been stopped by the police and ticketed 51 times since 1985, when his drivers license was suspended, Mr.
Devita was behind the wheel on Sunday when he plowed into a car and killed a woman in Brooklyn.
State and city officials say that government agencies had no way to prevent a similar incident from occurring.
B3.
A man wrongfully convicted can sue for damages, a Federal appeals court ruled.
B3.
Olympia &amp; York will shed a Manhattan office building. Business Day, D3.
REGION
A GUILTY PLEA  IN EXXON CASE
The man accused of abducting a top Exxon official pleaded guilty to seven counts of conspiracy and extortion, describing in detail a ransom scheme that went brutally awry and ended, he said, with the victim dying in his arms.
A1.
JUDGE OUSTED FROM SMOKING CASE
The Federal judge who has been at the center of major cases on the risks of smoking for the last decade has been removed from one of those cases by a Federal appeals court, which said that his own words suggested bias against the tobacco industry.
The decision capped a five-year effort by the tobacco industry to remove the judge, H. Lee Sarokin of Federal District Court in Newark, from tobacco liability cases, including a New Jersey case that went to the Supreme Court.
A1.
CLINTON TALKS JOBS IN CONNECTICUT
Governor Clinton campaigned in Connecticut, focusing on the need to make American manufacturing more competitive.
Whether or not people agreed with his proposals, he was talking about what many wanted to hear: jobs and the economy.
A14.
THINNING THE GOOSE POPULATION
Like football games and falling leaves, goose hunting is a symbol of autumn in western New York.
But this year the sounds of gunfire were heard before Labor Day, a result of a special 10-day hunting season aimed at thinning the goose population in three counties.
B5.
About New York by Felicia R. Lee B3


Corrections
The Eating Well column in The Living Section last Wednesday referred incompletely to Federal policy regulating the use of the word caviar on food labels.
Only sturgeon roe can be called simply caviar.
The roe of other fish can be labeled caviar only in conjunction with the name of the fish.
For example, caviar made from salmon roe can be marketed as "salmon caviar."


Books of The Times; Unconventional Houses, by Design and Inclination
Frank Lloyd Wright By Meryle Secrest 634 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
Meryle Secrest begins her biography of Frank Lloyd Wright on a Gothic note.
In 1985, in accord with the dying request of Wright's widow, the architect's remains were exhumed from his Wisconsin grave, cremated and shipped to Arizona for reburial.
The disinterment caused a local scandal.
Like corn and wheat, Wright's vision had grown up on prairie soil.
How dare they remove him from it!
One irate relative tracked down the undertaker who performed the deed.
" 'I suppose he's just bones, after 26 years?' and he said, 'Oh, no. He's marvelously intact.' "


Books of The Times; Unconventional Houses, by Design and Inclination
Frank Lloyd Wright By Meryle Secrest 634 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Books of The Times; Unconventional Houses, by Design and Inclination
Frank Lloyd Wright By Meryle Secrest 634 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Alive and Well in Washington Heights
To the Editor:
As a German refugee living in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan for most of the last 57 years, may I take issue with one item in your article on this neighborhood dubbed "Frankfurt-on-the-Hudson" (news article, Aug. 27).
We do relate to the present Washington Heights, its mix of ethnic groups and its present needs.
I shop in Russian, Korean, Dominican and Jewish stores.
We go out to eat in an excellent Indian restaurant or an Irish one.
I am active in Democratic Party politics, whose local candidates may be Jewish or Irish or black or Hispanic, and hope to continue to do so.


Lead in Schools and Its Perils
Lead, the toxic substance that tests detected in dust on the floor of Public School 3 in Manhattan, can be particularly harmful to children because it can impair nervous systems that are still in development.
Lead poisoning can cause learning disabilities, weaken hearing, trigger behavioral problems and slow physical growth, health officials say.
Lead poisoning often occurs when children eat tainted paint chips, which scientists say have a sweet taste.
But the poison can also be ingested more casually, when children inadvertently get lead dust on their hands and then put their hands in their mouths.


Burlington Coat Factory Warehouse Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Lendl, Chang and Edberg Each Win Marathons
It was the longest of days, with marathons the mode in three of four men's Round of 16 contests, and last night at the United States Open a resolute Ivan Lendl and a bombastic Boris Becker dueled into the witching hour in what is believed to be the longest match here in 22 years.
Out on the Stadium Court, Becker and Lendl duked it out like prizefighters with disparate game plans directed toward an identical end, a date in the quarterfinals with the survivor of the daytime marathon, the defending champion, Stefan Edberg.


Jacob Bean Is Dead; Curator of Drawings At the Met Was 68
Jacob Bean, a connoisseur of Italian and French drawings who was the curator of drawings at the Metropolitan Museum of Art for 31 years, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, said his sister, Mary East of Denver.


Volt Information reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Film; State Says Delbert Killed Bill; Delbert Says Bill Just Plain Died
On June 6, 1990, William Ward, 64 years old, was found dead in the bed he had shared for most of his life with his brother, Adelbert, 59, known as Delbert, in the unheated shack on the upstate New York dairy farm where they lived with their brothers Roscoe, 70, and Lyman, 62.
Bill suffered from several ailments, and the death was originally thought to have been the result of natural causes.
An autopsy then suggested that there had been foul play.
After his interrogation by the state police, Delbert signed a confession to the effect that he had smothered Bill in his sleep in a mercy killing that had been sanctioned by the three surviving brothers.
Until then the semi-literate brothers, always called "the Ward boys" in spite of their ages, were regarded as harmless eccentrics.
With their long beards, unkempt hair and disregard for personal hygiene, the brothers didn't have many friends in nearby Munnsville (pop. 499).
"The smell might get the best of you," one woman reports.
The Ward boys kept to themselves.


Who Reports What on Iraq: Pentagon Eases Reins a Bit
Like trauma victims trying to put a recurring nightmare to rest, the American military and American news organizations have been struggling to overcome the Persian Gulf war's legacy of mutual mistrust as reporters cover the latest military operation here.
Reporters who have covered both the war and the latest effort, which is intended to deny the Iraqi Government the use of airspace over southern Iraq, are unanimous in saying that the situation is better now.


At Ford, a Surprise in the Wings?
As the Ford Motor Company gets ready to name a new chief executive, a once-remote prospect, Alexander J. Trotman, has suddenly emerged as the favorite to succeed Harold A. (Red) Poling when the 67-year-old chairman retires next year.
Executives familiar with Ford's prospective plans to realign top management say they think that Mr.
Trotman, who is 59 and is currently executive vice president of North American operations, will receive a promotion putting him closer to that job at a board meeting on Thursday.
But they said it was not clear what his new title would be.


Quarterback Is the Least Of Handley's Concerns
The sign-wavers and the talk-show phone-callers and other observers of Giants life probably think Ray Handley is coy.
It just might be that he is being brutally honest.
Although he will probably nominate Jeff Hostetler today to start against the surging Cowboys on Sunday, Handley contends that it doesn't matter who the quarterback is.


Home Is Where You Take Your Shirts, Still
JAMES R. HAYNES, a writer who admits to a fear of starch, walked into the Tom Yip laundry on the Lower East Side of Manhattan the other day.
As usual, he exchanged a heap of dirty button-down cotton shirts for a tidy brown paper bundle of clean ones.
And as usual, his end of the conversation with Joe Yip, the owner, ran along these lines: "Hi! . . . How ya doin? . . . Remember no starch . . . See ya."
This scene has been going on for 12 years now.
It made perfect sense when Mr.
Haynes was living in a bachelor apartment across from the laundry.
He's married now, and about nine years ago he moved to Westchester County, where the words "no starch" mean nothing, he insists, and where the laundries have a way of laminating a man's shirts.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the new Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan referred incorrectly to the condition and status of the old school building.
The former Stuyvesant remains open, housing the High School for Environmental Studies, the Mabel D. Bacon High School, citywide special education classes and adult evening classes.


Holtzman Critical of Bid Awards
Two years after a new City Charter tightened controls on corrupt contractors, New York City continues to award large contracts to companies with questionable integrity and poor performance records, Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman said in a report released yesterday.
In many instances, she asserted, the city either ignored facts that she found troubling or failed to request information that would have raised questions about potential contractors.


Corrections
Headlines on Thursday about a Federal antitrust judgment against the Massachusetts Institute of Technology referred imprecisely to the judge's ruling.
The case was civil, not criminal; thus there was no finding of guilt.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
The morning after Neil Diamond's opening-night concert at Madison Square Garden, I arrived at my office feeling oh-so-much-wiser (not older) than the 20-something kids who never knew hot August nights of the 60's, 70's and 80's.
Waxing nostalgic and holding sway over pre-30-year-olds, I gathered an small audience and rhapsodized over the concert and the early 70's custom of ending concerts in silence accompanied by lighted matches or candles.


Rangers Sign 3 and Bargain With Leetch
The Rangers signed three more players yesterday, and continued negotiations for their last big-name holdout, BRIAN LEETCH.
General Manager NEIL SMITH completed a two-year deal, terms not disclosed, for goaltender MIKE RICHTER.
No details were given on pacts with defenseman JAY WELLS and forward TIE DOMI.
Richter's signing means that the Rangers once again will have two top goaltenders, and a competition in the crease, when their camp opens in Glens Falls, N.Y., on Sunday.
Richter is perceived as the goaltender of the future by the organization, and figures to own the edge on the starting job over JOHN VANBIESBROUCK.
Domi's continued association with the team was assured when the National Hockey League refused to ban fighting at its preseason meetings.


Bridge
The Vugraph commentators, and 600 spectators, were confused.
It was the final of the NEC world team championship, in Salsomaggiore, Italy, last Friday and there was clearly something wrong with the bidding.
The giant electronic screen indicated that South had opened one no-trump with seven high-card points and a balanced hand.
Impossible was the general verdict.
South was Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, always the acme of steadiness.
Could he have introduced a psychic bid in the middle of a world championship?
Surely not -- but he had.
He hoped that his partner held a weak hand and that the opponents would be unable to bid accurately.
But the result was a three no-trump contract with 18 points in the combined hands.


Accounts
*
Viva International Group, Fairfield, N.J., to Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, to handle the eye-wear company's account, previously at Graf Bertel Dominique, New York.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


Timothy J. Adams, Journalist, 64
Timothy J. Adams, a retired journalist, died Sunday at his home in the Chevy Chase section of Washington.
He was 64 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Gunfire Erupts in Bronx, And Two Bystanders Die
An argument at a block party in the Bronx escalated into gunfire late Monday night, killing two bystanders, including a woman who was seven months pregnant, and injuring a man, the police said.
The baby was delivered in a Caesarean section but died three hours later.


Oshman's Sporting Goods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Cellular Phone Industry Reports Growth
Despite a persistent recession that has hit its most loyal customers especially hard, the cellular telephone industry reported record growth in the six months ended June 30, with nearly 8.9 million subscribers.
The number of subscribers grew 17.6 percent from the December 1991 half and 39 percent from the half a year earlier.
Meanwhile, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest cellular service provider, reported that its subscriber base had grown to nearly two million.
That is up 17 percent from the December half and up 38 percent from the June half a year ago.
The growth has come from new subscribers as well as acquisitions by the Kirkland, Wash., company.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
The Art Commission of the City of New York to Cadwell Davis Partners, New York, to promote public awareness of the "Save Outdoor Sculpture" program.


Running Schools Amid Homework Assignments
WHEN classes begin today for some 993,000 students in New York City schools, Keysha McNeil will face one of the biggest challenges of her 16-year-old life.
As the first student representative on the Board of Education to serve a full academic year, she must give voice to the cacophony of dreams, needs and aspirations of her fellow students.
While that is no easy task in a system full of troubled children and conflicting academic prescriptions, Ms.
McNeil is herself a walking advertisement for what is right about the younger generation.
Poised and well-spoken, she is a senior at Washington Irving High School in Manhattan and the former student body president there.
She plans to be a lawyer.
She is relentlessly upbeat about almost any problem, including the need to make an impact as the nonvoting representative to the seven-member board.


More Than Dances and Picnics Greet Freshmen; Orientation at Columbia Includes Forums on Tolerance, Free Speech and Date Rape
The gymnasium was a jumble of faces, hundreds of them, black, white, Asian, Hispanic, male, female, all of them young, all of them listening to a sincere-looking Columbia University student who was talking about the night he came to terms with being gay.
He was looking at himself in a mirror, he said, trying to find out who he really was, when he realized that his fate was to live his life "in the arms of other men." He cried at his discovery, he said, with tears of pain and relief -- pain because of the names he knew he would be called and relief because he could begin a "tremendous journey" armed with confidence and hope.
New Introductions
In the new world of diversity and multiculturalism, this is the new freshmen orientation.
Discussions on tolerance, the limits of free speech and the problems of date rape have been added to the dances, picnics and forums on the curriculum that have traditionally been used to help introduce students to the campus and each other.


Georgia Bonded Fibers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Reviews/Film; Ruse Serves Artificiality, Elaborately
Eleanor Antin, the creator of "The Man Without a World," is a film maker and performance artist who goes to extraordinary lengths to explore artistic issues involving history, identity and authenticity.
In the 1970's, she invented an exotic alter ego named Eleanora Antinova, an aging black American ballerina who once danced in Diaghilev's Ballets Russes.
Eventually, Ms.
Antin published a book that described what it was like to live in the world as a fictional character for whose portrayal she went around New York wearing tan makeup and a gray wig.
Yevgeny Antinov, the fictional avant-garde director of "The Man Without a World," is a spinoff from the Antinova character.
This exiled Russian silent-film director was supposedly the lover of the ballerina who starred in his 38-minute silent film, "The Last Night of Rasputin." That movie, billed as a lost masterpiece rediscovered in the era of glasnost, was shown in museums around the country in the late 1980's with its make-believe star often on hand to introduce the screenings.
"The Man Without a World," which opened today at the Village East, is supposed to be a sequel to "The Last Night of Rasputin" in that it is the first feature-length Antinov film to have come to light.


Corrections; Fish Soup Recipe
The recipe for fish soup with vegetables in the 60-Minute Gourmet column in The Living Section last Wednesday misstated the quantity of potatoes and fish.
Here is a corrected version.
1.
Heat the oil in a kettle or a large saucepan over medium heat, and add the onions, garlic, fennel, leeks and carrots.
Cook, stirring often, over medium-high heat until the mixture is wilted.
Do not brown.
2.
Add the pepper flakes, saffron, thyme, bay leaf, fish broth, wine, crushed tomatoes, and salt and pepper to taste.
Bring to a boil, then reduce the heat, and simmer for 5 minutes.
3. Add the potatoes. Bring to a simmer, cover closely, and simmer for 10 minutes.
4.
Add the fish and the scallops.
Check for seasoning.
Simmer for 3 minutes; do not overcook.
Add the cream, bring to a boil, remove from the heat, add the basil, and serve immediately with Parmesan croutons.
Yield: 4 servings.
Nutrition analysis per serving:
415 calories, 18 grams fat, 72 milligrams cholesterol, 666 milligrams sodium, 26 grams protein, 30 grams carbohydrate.


President and Congress Square Off On North American Trade Accord
The White House and Congress squared off today on the North American Free Trade Agreement as President Bush released the text of the pact and sent his top trade official to the Senate to begin lobbying for it.
After 14 months of contentious negotiations, Canada, Mexico and the United States on Aug. 12 announced their agreement on a continental free trade zone that would eventually eliminate customs duties and most other restrictions on the sale of goods and services across their borders.
And on the campaign stump Mr.
Bush cites the accord as one of his top achievements.


INSIDE
Bush Makes Appeal to Jews
The President said that Gov.
Bill Clinton had "wavered" on confronting Iraq and that any suspicion of anti-Semitic feeling in the Administration was personally hurtful.
Page A14.
A Salvo Against Car Thieves
Governor Florio joined Newark in its battle against car theft, outlining a plan that includes guaranteed jail time for chronic offenders.
Page B1.
Mets Co-Owner May Sell


Compaq Deal To Expand Retail Sales
In another move to expand its sales to individuals and small businesses, the Compaq Computer Corporation said today that three retailers -- CompUSA, Office Depot and Circuit City Stores -- had agreed to sell its personal computers and other products.
Sales of personal computers to big corporations, Compaq's prime market, have grown sparingly for more than a year.
But the lower-priced segment of the market has come alive, as more powerful machines priced below $2,000 have become commonplace.
Compaq's slow responses to the changes led to a management shake-up a year ago, but analysts say a series of new, lower-priced machines introduced on June 15 have revitalized the company.


Ozawa Goes Home for Festival To Help Musicians Stay in Japan
When Seiji Ozawa first returned to Japan as a guest conductor in the early 1960's, his brash, Americanized style so angered the musicians of the NHK Symphony that they secretly decided to boycott the concert and sent cancellation notices to the ticket holders.
When the young conductor arrived at the concert hall for what should have been a glorious homecoming, he faced a vacant stage and nearly empty auditorium.
"It was a catastrophe," Mr.
Ozawa recalled.
"Because of that, I gave up hope of working in Japan. I gave up my country."


Gooden Impressive Despite Defeat
It is not a glorious fight, the one Dwight Gooden has taken up as the 1992 season gasps to its conclusion.
But the minimal goal -- to avoid the first losing season of his life -- has required maximum effort.
And now, his record suddenly more a casualty of his club's shortcomings rather than his own, it appears beyond reach.
Gooden, with a curveball his manager called "vintage" and a performance his catcher called the most encouraging of the season, suffered a 2-1 defeat to the Phillies tonight.
The solid but wasted effort as Gooden went eight innings and allowed one unearned run left his record at 8-12 with four, perhaps five starts to go.


Sun May Sell Coal Business As It Focuses on Oil Refining
Following similar consolidations by other big energy companies, the Sun Company said yesterday that it might sell off its coal-mining and coke-making operations.
Such a sale is one of a number of "strategic alternatives" Sun said it was exploring with Lehman Brothers, its investment adviser.


Agencies Are Faulted In Tow Crash
Despite Christopher Devita's lack of a valid driver's license and his long record of reckless driving, a flawed system failed to keep him off the road.
Mr.
Devita, a tow-truck driver who has been ticketed by the police 50 times since 1985, each time ignoring the summons, was behind the wheel again when he plowed into a car and killed a woman in Brooklyn on Sunday.
State and city officials said yesterday that government agencies had no way to prevent an accident from occurring in similar circumstances.


For Fewer Chemicals
To The Living Section:
Due to my avoidance of the same chemicals that the Center for Science in the Public Interest considers unsafe  [ Eating Well, Aug. 12 ] , I spend more time cooking from scratch than I really care to.
I pine for a frozen dinner without hydrolyzed vegetable protein (a hidden source of MSG) or a meal out at a restaurant that serves a no-caffeine cola drink.


Earle Palmer Brown Puts New Emphasis on New York
LIKE straphangers elbowing their way into a subway car at rush hour, the executives at Earle Palmer Brown are looking to carve out a larger space in the overcrowded New York market.
To help accomplish that, the midsize agency based in Bethesda, Md., is reorganizing its New York office, replacing two top executives with outsiders -- one with expertise in advertising, the other in public relations.


Reports on Repair of Rigs Hurt Prices of Natural Gas
Natural gas prices fell sharply on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, after unconfirmed reports over the weekend said that some hurricane damage to oil-and-gas production platforms and pipelines would be repaired faster than expected.
The contract for October natural-gas delivery fell 10.3 cents from the highest settlement price of the year on Friday, to $2.044 cents for 1,000 cubic feet.


2d Baboon Liver Transplant Planned
Surgeons at the University of Pittsburgh said today that they planned to proceed with a second liver transplant from a baboon to a human, despite the death of the world's first such recipient from a severe stroke on Sunday.
An autopsy performed on Monday showed that the patient, a 35-year-old man whose name was withheld at his request, did not reject the baboon liver that had regulated his metabolism for 71 days.


Boom Time for One Industry Amid South Florida's Rubble
Benjamin Strunk had no steady job and was getting by "just doing odds and ends, helping out friends" in his hometown of Tazewell, Tenn., when Hurricane Andrew hit southern Florida two weeks ago.
One look at pictures of the devastation, and Mr.
Strunk knew that if he could get here, he had work for as long as he wanted.
So the 27-year-old Mr.
Strunk picked up his tools, and with a friend, Michael Coon, and Mr.
Coon's pet Airedale, S.J., piled into a Ford pickup and drove nearly 1,000 miles to the disaster zone.
Two days ago, at 7:00 A.M., the two men began work as laborers, earning $8 an hour from the construction company that hired them to strip shingles, tarpaper and plywood from houses that need new roofs. 'A Shot in the Arm'


Fatal Beating Points Up a System in Crisis
Randi Anderson, 5 years old and 3 feet 7 inches tall, scrawled on the walls of her foster home with lipstick.
She stole money from her foster mother's purse.
She broke all her toys.
She hoarded food.
She defecated on the floor.
Three New York City child-welfare workers concluded that Randi needed counseling, but, as one said, "Somehow it never happened."


Food Notes
Baby Foods With Meat
Baby foods made from organically grown ingredients by Earth's Best in Middlebury, Vt., are now available in meat and vegetable combinations.
Vegetable turkey, vegetable beef and sweet potato with chicken have been added to the company's line of fruits and vegetables for babies.
Organic yogurt-based baby foods, including blueberry, apple and tropical fruit flavors, have also been introduced.


Church Disowns Fischer
To the Editor:
Some may have incorrectly inferred from "Fischer and Spassky Ready to Play Chess Not Far From a War" (front page, Aug. 31) that Bobby Fischer is still associated with the Worldwide Church of God.
Mr.
Fischer's comments in no way reflect the beliefs or teachings of the church, and the church objects to any possible association with anti-Semitism.
The Worldwide Church of God condemns racism in any and all forms.


CMS Enhancements reports earnings for Year to June 30


Florio Vows to Help Newark Fight Car Theft
Gov.
Jim Florio today pledged that the state would send reinforcements into the battle against car theft here, outlining a plan that includes guaranteed jail sentences for chronic offenders.
Mr.
Florio, who announced the plan at a news conference after a 90-minute meeting with Newark residents at St.
James A.M.E.
Church, said he would consult with legislative leaders later in the day about legislation needed to put the plan in motion.
Several bills intended to curb car thefts have already been introduced in Trenton but have not moved out of committee, and Newark leaders have complained that legislators were indifferent to their pleas for help.


Snapper, With Southwestern Zest
IN some parts of the country, the field tomatoes are no more.
They have been replaced by the boxed variety.
You know the kind: the box tastes better than the tomato.
When that time of year arrives, it's time to revert to canned tomatoes.
Whether the tomatoes come from a can or your local farm, they make a delicious topping for this red snapper dish, which is served with potatoes.


Digitran Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Season for Shooting 'Problem' Geese
Like football games and falling leaves, goose hunting is a symbol of autumn in western New York.
But this year gunfire was heard even before Labor Day, a result of a special 10-day hunting season aimed at thinning the goose population in three counties.
"It's not the migratory geese that are the problem," said Dale R. Dewing, field crop agent with the Cattaraugus County Cooperative Extension.
"It's the ones that live here year-round."


Johnston Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


If It's Over, When Did It Start?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  WAR STORIES OF A SERB
A Serbian commander, charging that his people have been slaughtered by Muslims since his troops pulled back from Gorazde, said in an interview that his militia is back on the offensive.
A1  Two U.N. peackeepers died when gunfire hit an aid convoy.
A10


60-Minute Gourmet
THE calendar may proclaim summer nearly over, but dedicated barbecue chefs are a hardy lot, and Labor Day marks little more than two-thirds of the way through the outdoor cooking season.
Cornish hens are particularly well suited to barbecuing or broiling.
A whole bird, which weighs about three-quarters of a pound, makes a single portion, so there is minimal carving.
Cooked properly, it retains its moisture.


Stewart Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Tells Jews That Rival Would Have Harmed Israel
Opening a fall campaign to woo Jewish voters, President Bush today told a Jewish gathering that Israel's survival would now be threatened had the United States been led by Gov.
Bill Clinton, who "waffled" and "wavered" on whether to confront Iraq.
Mr.
Bush also said that assertions that he or others in his Administration harbored anti-Semitic attitudes, because they had at times disagreed with Israeli policies, were wrong and hurtful to him personally.
For much of the past four years, the President was at odds with pro-Israeli Jewish groups over his insistence that the Israeli Government curtail settlement building in the West Bank as a condition for housing loan guarantees.


Doubleday May Sell His Share Of the Mets
One day after declaring the actions taken to force Commissioner Fay Vincent to resign "inexcusable, illegal and immoral," Nelson Doubleday, co-owner of the Mets, reiterated his desire to disassociate himself from the game by selling his interest in the team.
The defiant Doubleday also issued a stinging attack on the 18 owners who unseated Vincent.
It signaled the first signs of a possible internecine struggle as the owners prepare to meet today for the first time since Vincent's forced resignation Monday.
It is the kind of struggle, ironically, a commissioner may ordinarily have ordered to cease for the best interest of baseball.
But no such person exists today, because of the movement Doubleday protests so vehemently.


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Eating Well
FOR the second year in a row, the plum torte recipe is appearing in the Eating Well column.
The legion of fans of this simple, homey dessert probably do not care where it turns up, so long as they have it when the purple plums are at their peak.
It was 10 years ago that the recipe first appeared in The New York Times.
Last year, the original plum torte, with its butter and eggs and sugar, appeared alongside a New Age version, which had been pulled and pummeled into a nutritionally correct dessert.
Half of the butter had been replaced with mashed bananas; an egg substitute had taken over for the eggs.


Stuarts Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Friends Back Suspect In Beating of Trucker
From the stoop of the house where Damian Williams was reared, just a short run from the intersection where he is accused of severely beating a truck driver at the start of the Los Angeles riots, a rhythmic chant rang out: "Free the L.A. Four."
Under the trees where rap music was booming from a stereo and along the tables where food was spread in the hot sun for a Labor Day picnic, the young men of Mr.
Williams's neighborhood raised their fists and joined the chant.


Check-Off for Debt Lets Citizens Fight Back; Georgia on My Mind
To the Editor:
"We tried this once before," George Bush said in his acceptance speech (transcript, Aug. 21), "combining the Democratic Governor of a small Southern state with a very liberal Vice President and a Democratic Congress. America doesn't need 'Carter 2.' "


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Connecticut Visit; Clinton Tours Plant to Talk About the Issue: Jobs
Gov.
Bill Clinton campaigned in Connecticut today, focusing on the need to make American manufacturing more competitive.
Whether or not people agreed with his proposals, he was talking about what many wanted to hear: jobs and the economy.
Addressing workers at an employee-owned factory in Portland, and speaking outside a restaurant here where he met with Democratic leaders, Mr.
Clinton added details to his own economic plan, while accusing the Bush Administration of lacking one.


Olympia, Bondholders In 55 Water St. Accord
Olympia &amp; York, the troubled Canadian developer, reached an agreement in principle yesterday calling for bondholders of 55 Water Street to take over ownership of the Manhattan office building.
The deal would give Olympia &amp; York some protection against lawsuits from the building's bondholders in exchange for surrendering all rights to the huge office complex.


Topics of The Times; Slopping Swill in the Senate Race
Not all the charges that Geraldine Ferraro's rivals for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York have aimed at her are, as she claims, "garbage." But the latest salvos against her from Attorney General Robert Abrams and City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman are surely rubbish.
They claim, unfairly and absurdly, that Ms.
Ferraro's 1975 prosecution of a woman who performed an illegal abortion on her own daughter indicates a wobbly commitment to abortion rights.
The 14-year-old girl had been raped by her mother's live-in boyfriend, who had also assaulted her younger sister.
Citing extreme poverty and a desire for secrecy, the mother performed the abortion herself, illegally.
Eight months later a relative tipped off the police.
The mother was arrested, pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor and was sentenced to three months' probation.
The boyfriend posted $50 bail, skipped town and has yet to be prosecuted.


Jury Gets N.F.L. Case Today
Closing arguments were concluded here today in the National Football League trial over free agency.
The eight-woman jury received instructions afterward from United States District Court Judge David Doty and will begin deliberations Wednesday morning.
Both lead attorneys -- the league's Frank Rothman and the players' Jim Quinn -- were passionate in their summations.
Each asked the jury to "use your common sense" in finding a verdict.


NEW IRAQI ENVOY APPOINTED AT U.N.
President Saddam Hussein is sending an envoy with considerable experience in Washington to represent Iraq at the United Nations, apparently with the daunting task of persuading the United States to ease pressure on Baghdad.
The envoy, Nizar Hamdoun, a former under secretary in the Foreign Ministry, is expected to arrive early this week, replacing Abdul Amir al-Anbari, who had asked for a less demanding assignment and is to represent Iraq at the Unesco in Paris.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Avatar Holdings Inc., Coral Gables, Fla., a real estate and utility holding company, filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission on a proposed offer to exchange up to $34.5 million of new 9 percent senior debentures due in 2000 for all of 8 percent senior debentures due in 2000 outstanding.


Benihana National reports earnings for Qtr to July 19


Topics of The Times; Fishing for Votes on Saturday
Six states and the Virgin Islands held primary elections yesterday.
Seven more states will vote next week -- again on Tuesday.
Delaware is different.
It votes this Saturday.
There is nothing in the Constitution that says Americans must vote on Tuesdays, and a lot of people have the notion that the turnout would be better if elections were held on weekends; their theory is that more voters would do their civic duty if they didn't have to squeeze it in before or after work.


Personal Health
EACH year about three million Americans receive a kind of liquid organ transplant when they undergo a blood transfusion.
The transfusions, which average two to four units, or pints, of blood per patient, are typically given to replace blood lost as a result of surgery, a hemorrhage or an accidental injury.
But for a small percentage of blood recipients, the transfusion may cause more harm than help.
These are the patients who acquire an illness, like serum hepatitis, that is transmitted through blood or who suffer a reaction to the foreign tissue that was transfused into their veins.


Women and Chess
To The Living Section:
In Bruce Weber's profile of Judit Polgar  [ "Chess Moves Are Planned. Birthdays Happen." Aug. 5 ] , she is described as "the first woman with the potential to be world chess champion." What Mr.
Weber should have said is that Judit Polgar is the first woman with the
possibility
of becoming a world chess champion.
Undoubtedly, there have been many women in the past who have had the potential.
What was missing was the appropriate support and training.
PHILIP SILLER Toronto


Former East German Agent Denies Charges
A senior official of the former East German security police, arrested in Athens on Sunday, denied charges of complicity in murder and terrorism, a Greek official said today.
Theodore Anagnostopoulos, Greece's Minister of Public Order, said Helmut Voigt confirmed he was an ex-agent of the East German security police, known as the Stasi, but denied other charges.


Agassi Set to Battle Courier
Grudge match or not, the Andre Agassi-Jim Courier quarterfinal tonight is being billed as the United States Open's legitimate if premature final.
Courier holds a 5-4 edge in their rivalry and has won their last four confrontations, two of them at the French Open, which became Courier's launching pad toward a No. 1 ranking and Agassi's Waterloo in the 1991 final.
"It wasn't Jim beating me," said Agassi, "it was the third Grand Slam final that I didn't win, and that's not easy to take, emotionally. I lost it emotionally; I had nothing left."


SIEGE IS RESUMED IN BOSNIAN TOWN
Serbian forces that lifted their siege of the Muslim-controlled Bosnian town of Gorazde late last month have returned to the offensive, contending that the withdrawal led to Muslim killings of Serbian civilians.
At an international peace conference in London last month, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs agreed to lift the siege of Sarajevo and other Bosnian cities like Gorazde.
Dusko Kornjaca, the commander of Serbian militia forces attacking Gorazde, said in an interview in this village 12 miles from the Gorazde front that his troops pulled back from Gorazde on Aug. 27, the day the London conference ended.


Tartabull's Banner Night: 9 R.B.I.
If only it were still July.
If only tonight's game meant as much to the Yankees as it did to the second-place Orioles.
If only Danny Tartabull's sensational offensive display had more impact than merely keeping the Yankees within 14 games of first place.
With their season minimized to disrupting the dreams of other pennant- chasing teams, the Yankees must search for glimmers of hope, and they found a huge one tonight.


Katherine S. Ginsburg, Doctor, 34
Katherine Swan Ginsburg, a doctor at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and an instructor at the Harvard Medical School, died Friday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She was 34 years old and lived in Newton Centre, Mass.
The cause of death was cancer, her husband, Dr. Geoffrey Ginsburg, said.


Geraghty &amp; Miller Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


When Bell Rings, All Kidding Stops
A left turn and there was Hector Camacho, running past the incandescent marquees for which Las Vegas Boulevard is famous: bright lights decreeing sexy shows, cheap buffets and Liza headlining at the Desert Inn.
Camacho was in a black training suit and cap.
On a recent morning, a little more than a week away from his match Saturday against the World Boxing Council superlightweight champion, Julio Cesar Chavez, Camacho ran at an easy pace.


Microwave Cooking
WHEN tomatoes are ripe and local -- mostly from my garden -- I press my microwave oven into service in putting up sauce for the cardboard-tomato winter ahead.
I love using the microwave, not only because it is cool and quick, but also because I don't risk scorching the sauce as I did when I cooked it endlessly on top of the stove.
If I want large quantities of sauce, I simply make several batches, which is still quicker and safer than stove-top cooking.
It does not make sense to make very large quantities at one time; the reduction takes too long.
Sometimes I don't even reduce the sauce the second time.
Instead, I use the looser sauce as a stew base.
I use some of the sauce immediately and freezethe rest in pint and half-pint containers and defrost as needed.


Data-Design Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ferraro And Abrams Exchange Complaints
As the New York Senate primary race entered its final week yesterday, State Attorney General Robert Abrams tried to raise additional questions about the family finances of Geraldine A. Ferraro, a rival for the Democratic nomination.
She responded that they were desperate charges without substance.
At the same time Ms.
Ferraro began broadcasting a television commercial in which she seeks to dismiss Mr.
Abrams's contentions that he is more liberal than she on issues like the environment, health care and abortion rights.
"I know the people of New York," she says in the 30-second advertisement, "and I know you're smarter than to fall for that."


Heinz (H.J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 29


CHRONICLE
PETE ROSE has weathered some stormy moments during his flamboyant baseball career, notably his banishment from the game for gambling.
On Sunday, he had quite a time on the real high seas when he skippered a powerboat to victory in the Miller Offshore Grand Prix off Virginia Beach, Va.


Father Charged in Baby's Death
An 18-month-old girl who died in upper Manhattan on Monday night was beaten to death by her father, the police said yesterday.
The father, Kenneth Gibson, 28 years old, was arrested last night and charged with second-degree murder after he turned himself in at the Brooklyn Legal Aid Society, said Sgt.
Ed Burns, a police spokesman.


Electronic Toll-Taking Is Being Put to the Test
This week, when motorists line up at toll plazas on the Garden State Parkway in Hillsdale, N.J. and the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway in Spring Valley, N.Y., they may notice a privileged few vehicles passing through with barely a pause.
But instead of cursing the interlopers, the waiting drivers may want to wave and wish them a pleasant journey.
The cars and trucks breezing through the plazas will be testing experimental systems that could herald an era of electronic toll collection in the New York metropolitan region.


Steinbrenner, Howe and Rose: What Now?
The departure of Commissioner Fay Vincent could lead to changes in the status of National League realignment and one or more baseball people.
If the executive council, which runs the major leagues in the absence of a commissioner, so desires, it could rescind Vincent's order for the National League to realign and permit George Steinbrenner to return to the Yankees before March 1.
An interim commissioner, presumably with the council's blessing, could also take such actions with those matters as well as with Pete Rose and Steve Howe.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., acquired Allstate Business Systems, Atlanta.
Terms were not disclosed.
APPLIED MICROBIOLOGY INC., New York, acquired Aplin &amp; Barrett Ltd., a subsidiary of Burns, Philp &amp; Co.


Bank Yields Fall Again For Week
Yields of bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were down sharply in the latest week ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based publication.
Analysts at the publication said the Federal Reserve Board might still have to move interest rates significantly lower if the economy continued to slip and slide.
In that case, investors may see a one-year bank C.D. under 3 percent, the analysts say.
But they also note that the central bank finds itself in a bind: the Fed cannot protect a falling dollar if it lowers interest rates.


Cairo Journal; Arab Favorite for Nice Times (and Naughty Ones)
The temperature is nearly 100 degrees, the bridges over the Nile are a hopeless tangle of bleating horns and snorting motors, and the yellowish air is thick with dust and diesel fumes and something that smells faintly of donkeys.
But none of this seems to faze Mohammed al-Matrud, a happy tourist from Saudi Arabia.
Others may prefer April in Paris or autumn in New York, but for Mr.
Matrud, nothing can top summer in Cairo.


When the Tool Fits
To The Living Section:
I just read with great amusement Florence Fabricant's article "Out of the Toolbox, Into the Kitchen"  [ Aug. 19 ]  about store items being used by chefs.
It was inspired, as were the innovative cooks.
I felt compelled to share with you the other side of the coin, because I thought you would get the same kick out of it that I did when I read
your
story.


Calcium and Health
To The Living Section:
In the Eating Well column of Aug. 5, Densie Webb presents the results of a recent study showing that preadolescent children who consumed about twice the recommended daily allowance of calcium developed denser bones than those who consumed just the recommended amount.
She suggested that such a regimen be followed "if osteoporosis is to be held at bay later in life."


T.W.A. Cuts Service, Trying To Emerge From Chapter 11
Trans World Airlines announced cutbacks in service yesterday as part of an effort to return to profitability by slimming down and reducing costs.
The reductions in flights are part of the carrier's plan, which is to be presented to a Federal bankrutpcy court later this month, for emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, which T.W.A. entered in January.


Fans Feel 'Cheated' By 7 Hours Of Matches
The 20,831 fans who showed up for the day session yesterday at the United States Open got an eyeful of tennis for their $27 investment -- nearly seven hours' worth of action.
A 4-hour-20-minute marathon between the defending champion, Stefan Edberg, and Richard Krajicek, was followed by a two-hour upset of Gabriela Sabatini by Mary Joe Fernandez that didn't end until almost 6 P.M.
But there was screaming on the concourse when the day session's ticket-holders were informed that, because of the lateness of the hour, the third match of the day, the Boris Becker-Ivan Lendl contest, had been switched to the evening session.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.02
5.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.90
5.27
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.95
5.30
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.74
5.85
7.52
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.21
7.28
7.99
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.40
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.23
6.25
6.96
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Timothy Egan Lenahan, Architect, 34
Timothy Egan Lenahan, an architect who had practiced with Robert A. M. Stern, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 34 years old and lived in Greenwich Village.
He died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


FOES OF ISRAEL WIN IN SOUTH LEBANON
Lebanese factions dedicated to armed struggle against Israel have won Parliament elections by a landslide in southern Lebanon.
Latest official figures showed that a ticket endorsed by Amal, the main, Syrian-supported, Shiite Muslim movement, and the Party of God, Amal's pro-Iranian rival, won 22 of 23 seats in voting on Sunday.
One seat was won by an independent candidate in the port of Sidon.
Because of the heavy turnout, reaching 75 percent in some areas, it took two days to count the ballots.


2 Ballet Troupes Discuss Merger
The board of American Ballet Theater is to meet today to discuss solutions to the company's financial troubles and its immediate cash-flow problems.
One plan that has been under intensive discussion in recent weeks is a merger with the Joffrey Ballet, also financially hard-pressed and with a cash-flow problem.
The Joffrey board also meets today to discuss such a merger, a possibility first reported last week in The Washington Post.
In June, Ballet Theater hired McKinsey &amp; Company, New York-based management consultants, to explore the feasibility of such a plan, which was proposed by members of both boards, including a major donor to Ballet Theater.


Sharpton's Search for Votes
The Rev.
Al Sharpton seems to be campaigning in a different world than his white rivals in the Democratic Senate primary.
Article, page B5.


Lots of Rebellion and a Little Hot Sauce For the Spirited Bob Dylan of Brazil
"I TALK too much," the songwriter Caetano Veloso warned as he sat down to lunch at the Brazilian Pavilion in midtown on Friday.
"Everybody from Bahia is like this. We are always touching each other, too. We are a bit too much."
Mr.
Veloso drew not only deferential waiters, but the restaurant's owner, who consulted with him in Portuguese about the food.
In Brazil, the 50-year-old Mr.
Veloso is a superstar, although he's disarmingly modest.
Brazilian television recently showed a five-hour documentary series about him.
"It was too much," he said.


Transactions
Baseball  American League MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Recalled Bruce Ruffin, pitcher, and Jim Tatum and Jose Valentin, infielders, from Denver of the American Association.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Recalled Sterling Hitchcock, pitcher, from Albany of the Eastern League.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Recalled Pat Howell and D.J.
Dozier, outfielders, and Kevin Baez and Jeff McKnight, infielders, from Tidewater of the International League.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Jose DeLeon, pitcher, to a two-year contract.
Transferred Wes Chamberlain, outfielder, from the 15-day to the 60-day disabled list.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Extended the contract of Ray Miller, pitching coach, through the 1994 season.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Recalled Bien Figueroa, Stan Royer and Craig Wilson, infielders, and Chuck Carr, outfielder, from Louisville of the American Association.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Placed Glen Kozlowski, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Signed Bob Christian, running back, and Barry Wagner, wide receiver, to the practice squad.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Placed Tony Covington, safety, on injured reserve.
Re-signed Chris Barber, defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Richter, goaltender; Jay Wells, defenseman; and Tie Domi, right wing.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Named Yuri Karmanov part-time European scout.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Signed Dimitri Khristich, left wing.


United Nations to Take Further Steps to Aid Somalia's Hungry


CHRONICLE
One week before she is to be formally installed as the third president of the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, Dr.
FRANCES DEGEN HOROWITZ will pay homage to her predecessor Dr.
MINA REES, the first president of the center and an eminent mathematician and computer scientist.


Five for Congress
It will be even harder than usual for New York voters to cast an informed vote for Congress in next Tuesday's primary election.
As usual, many districts remain so dominated by Democrats that winning will be tantamount to victory in November.
And as usual, there's little time for appraisal, what with the primary coming so soon after the summer doldrums.
As the adjacent maps show, voters will also feel the effects of redistricting.
The loss of three seats from the present Congress means that some members are running in unfamiliar districts -- and that some districts have been vastly altered.


Women Turn to Self-Help Groups For Abortions, Despite the Risks
Using aquarium tubing, a mayonnaise jar, a drugstore syringe and a dentist's saliva ejector, three of Lucila C.'s friends gave her an abortion last spring.
The procedure, known as "menstrual extraction," was developed before 1973, when the Supreme Court legalized abortion.


Market Place; Low-Fat Problem At Ben &amp; Jerry's
BEN &amp; JERRY'S is, to say the least, an unconventional corporation.
It brags of paying its suppliers more than market prices and of paying its executives less.
Its annual report includes a "social performance report" dissecting how well it did in serving its community.
But even as the company strives to sell 1.1 million new shares, to raise $30 million for a new plant, it is being bedeviled by Federal regulators who dispute its use of the term "low fat" for its new, and highly successful, line of frozen yogurt.


Chicago District Issues Bonds
A $170 million tax-exempt bond issue by the Metropolitan Water District of Greater Chicago, formerly called the Metropolitan Sanitary District, was tentatively priced yesterday to yield a maximum 6.10 percent for an issue due in 2009.
First Chicago Capital Markets Inc., the lead underwriter for the offering, said all the bonds were priced at par, with yields ranging from 3 percent in 1993 to 4.70 percent in 1997, 5.55 percent in 2002 and 6.05 percent in 2008.


Public &amp; Private; Abhors a Vacuum
Americans have gotten a little tired of Sweden, and it's not just because of the model wars, in which American women are forced out of cover girl positions by Swedes and driven to seek work at auto shows.
It's all the social policy superiority.
You might be researching sex education and you discover that there is a program for Swedish eighth-graders that teaches sex education AND microbiology.
Teen pregnancies plummet while the number of research scientists doubles.
Day care, maternity leave, the elderly -- the American motto has become "I don't want to hear one more word about how well they do it in Sweden."


After the Storm: Homestead Journal; Gone With the Wind: the Stuff of Everyday Life
Is this Nicaragua after the earthquake, Sarajevo during the war or Dade County after the hurricane?
Is it Dodge City or Florida City?
Is it A.D. or B.C.?
In the two weeks since Hurricane Andrew left entire towns in ruins, Federal troops and volunteers have cleared away some debris and set up tents for some of the newly homeless.
But that has not changed the dismal facts of life for many South Dade County residents.


PRESIDENT SEEKING $7.6 BILLION TO AID HURRICANE VICTIMS
President Bush asked Congress today for $7.6 billion to help the victims of Hurricane Andrew, acknowledging that the measure will raise the Federal deficit but declaring that the suffering in Florida and Louisiana outweighed the financial burden.
But Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida said in a letter to lawmakers that his state alone needed nearly $1.5 billion more than Mr.
Bush was proposing for the two states.
Mr.
Chiles said $1 billion was needed just to restore jobs in his state.


Liberty Cup Is Canceled
Corporate support of yachting events brings with it a tenuous existence, as organizers of New York's Liberty Cup Match Racing Regatta acknowledged recently.
The group, the Harbor Festival Foundation, canceled this year's event at the last minute.
Bill Darnell, executive director of the foundation, said last week that that his staff was unable to find adequate sponsorship.
The four-day regatta was scheduled to begin next Wednesday in New York Harbor.
Darnell said that it cost about $300,000 to $400,000 to stage a Liberty Cup regatta.


Check-Off for Debt Lets Citizens Fight Back; The Word 'God'
To the Editor:
President Bush complains that the Democratic Party platform does not contain the word God.
Well, neither does the Constitution of the United States.
ALEXANDER ROSENBERG New York, Aug. 26, 1992


Would-Be Teachers Who Are Being Turned Away
As teachers return to schools this week, their ranks still chronically short of the brightest college graduates, of math and science specialists, of minority members and of men, there is mounting evidence that more of these people want to teach but are not being hired.
Several recent studies offering more detailed portraits of who teaches in America's schools and who wants to teach have rekindled a debate about how to get and keep a better-qualified, more diverse teaching force.
Many of the very people who are in shortest supply in schools, yet who want to become teachers, do not have traditional teaching qualifications and are reluctant to invest the time and money in extended teacher-education programs.


Re-evaluate Animal-Human Transplants
To the Editor:
Dr.
Jan Moor-Jankowski extolls organ transplantation from baboons and other nonhuman primates into humans ("Animal Transplants Save Human Lives," letter, Aug. 4).
He encourages an animal rights advocate to visit a transplantation ward and meet dying patients who wait for organs -- whose lives, he implies, could be saved by animal organs.
The bioethicist Arthur Caplan pointed out in The York (Pa.) Daily Record on July 22 that relying on laboratory-bred baboons to ease the demand for organs would solve only a small part of the problem, with perhaps 200 animals available over the next five years: a fraction of the thousands of organ donors needed now.
The argument that baboons are considered "pests" in parts of Africa has no bearing on transplantation; there is no practical or medically sound way to obtain organs from wild baboons for transplants.
Baboons also carry the ebola and Marburg viruses, both hazardous to humans and able to cross the species barrier.


Wine Talk
SLOWLY, and much too quietly, New York State has become an important producer of serious chardonnay wine.
Not California-style chardonnay and not exactly Burgundian, either, but good wine, much of it, and it's high time it got to be better known.
Chardonnay is a delicate European grape, and for years it was axiomatic that European vinifera grapes like chardonnay could never survive in upstate New York.
There was a period of trial and error, accompanied by a few hopeful signs and a lot of discouragement.
Then came 1980.


Topro Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Finland's Move Jars Markets
A decision by Finland to devalue its currency rippled through the world's financial markets today, setting off yet another surge in the value of the German mark and pushing most European stock prices lower.
The rise in the mark sent the dollar down again in trading in London.
The dollar closed here at 1.3915 marks, down from 1.4030 on Monday, and in New York trading the dollar closed at 1.3945 marks, down from 1.4015 on Friday, which was the last day of trading before the Labor Day holiday.


Mandela Mourns Slayings Amid Charges That the A.N.C. Shares Blame


Judicial Nomination Sunders Old Allies
As the Senate prepares to vote Wednesday on the nomination of Edward E. Carnes to be a Federal appeals court judge, some civil rights groups are trying to dispel the perception of a split in their ranks on the nomination, which they say they unequivocally oppose.
But there is no question that the nomination of Mr.
Carnes, an Alabama assistant attorney general, to succeed Judge Frank M. Johnson Jr. of Alabama, who is widely revered as a hero of the civil rights era, has caused a rift among forces generally considered to be allies.


Anti-Vincent Ownership Is Facing Follow-Through
Major league club owners will meet in St.
Louis today and tomorrow faced with a series of serious questions about baseball's future following the resignation of Commissoner Fay Vincent.
Perhaps the biggest question deals with the ability of the owners who led the move to unseat Vincent to hold together and add to their coalition.
When one owner who supported Vincent was asked yesterday how long he thought the coalition would last, he said: "Until the next vote. The coalition has too many inconsistencies."


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about fighting around the Bosnian city of Gorazde included scrambled passages.
Readers wishing a corrected version of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Executive Changes
ADVACARE INC., Horsham, Pa., which provides accounts-receivable management services to physicians and hospitals, named William Joe Davis 3d president and chief executive.
COCENSYS INC., Irvine, Calif., a biopharmaceutical company, appointed David A. H. Lee, M.D., executive vice president of research and development.


Newborn Boy's Body Is Found in Gym Bag
A newborn boy was found dead yesterday afternoon in a black gym bag that had been left among some weeds near the eastern edge of Brooklyn, the police said.
The infant's body, with the umbilical cord still attached, was wrapped in clear plastic inside the bag, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Lachance Keeps Tabs on Two New Prospects
As a member of the United States Olympic team last winter, defenseman Scott Lachance doubled, unofficially, as a scout.
Back with the Islanders for his first full season, Lachance has mental files on two potential teammates, Vladimir Malakhov and Darius Kasparaitis.
Both defensemen, who could be National Hockey League rookies this season, played for the Unified Team, representing the former Soviet Union, which won the gold medal in France.


Big Shifts Are Announced By Saatchi and Euro RSCG
THE global advertising industry continues to reshape itself.
Yesterday two of the world's giant advertising companies, one British, one French, made significant changes that amalgamate some of their largest and best-known agencies in this country and overseas.
The reshufflings are the latest amid the ranks of global ad powers as the industry's seemingly endless hard times continue to spur fundamental reorganization.


Effort by Iran to Arm Bosnians Is Reported
In the first documented evidence of military support by an Islamic country for the predominantly Muslim Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a planeload of Iranian guns, ammunition and military personnel has been intercepted in Croatia, Western officials said.
The plane was ostensibly delivering relief supplies.
Article, page A10.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
A FEW crayons from a kindergarten classroom find their way into your daughter's lunch box.
A friend's toy mysteriously migrates to your son's collection.
Your teen-ager takes a "five-finger discount" on some makeup or clothing from a store.
Shoplifting and petty thievery are perhaps the most common crimes perpetrated by children.
The issue is not the value of what is taken, for that is often minimal, but the thoughts behind the behavior.
Children's perceptions of stealing are determined by their stage of development as well as by their parents' reactions to the stealing.


Officials Form Elaborate Plan To Keep Peace
Ted Finkelstein and Fritz Sanchez, officials with New York City's Commission on Human Rights, tooled through Washington Heights yesterday afternoon looking for trouble but finding none.
They were worried that reports of a grand jury not indicting the police officer who killed a Dominican immigrant during a struggle last July would touch off anger and violence.
They hoped their weeks of meetings with community leaders and residents -- from seminars on the grand jury process to guidance on holding peaceful demonstrations -- would help keep the calm.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A DECISION IN FATAL SHOOTING
A Manhattan grand jury has cleared a New York City police officer in the fatal shooting of a drug suspect whose death in July touched off violent demonstrations in Washington Heights, according to a top official in the Manhattan District Attorney's office.
But the District Attorney has declined to announce the grand jury's decision while city officials and community groups put into motion elaborate efforts to stave off new violence.
A1.
A FOSTER-CARE SUCCESS STORY
When the 5-year-old foster child first walked into the psychotherapist's office, he did not know how to play.
As the months passed, he learned to express himself, but his games were violent and bizarre.
But gradually, the therapist said, his fury diminished and he began to create rather than to destroy.
Soon he will be adopted by a Queens family, a happy ending in a foster-care system that too often fails to treat troubled children who have been abused by their parents and separated from all that is familiar to them.
A1.


Corrections
The Personal Health column and a picture caption yesterday, about alternatives to regular blood transfusions, misidentified a blood bank.
It was the New York Blood Center, not the New York Blood Bank.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; G.O.P. Looks at Clinton Draft Record and Spies Willie Horton
Have the Republicans found their furlough issue for 1992?
Four years ago, the Bush campaign used a Massachusetts prison release program to chip away at Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, asking what kind of man would give weekend passes to convicted murderers like Willie Horton.
The past few weeks suggest that the Republicans are testing to see if they can use Gov.
Bill Clinton's draft record, and his shifting explanations of it over the years, in a similar fashion in the next 54 days.


Transactions
Baseball  MLB -- Named Bud Selig, Milwaukee Brewers owner, chairman of the executive council.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Recalled Jeff Hartsock, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.


No Headline
"I went along with one Democratic tax increase and I'm not going to do it again. Ever. Ever." PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A1:5. ]


Waterford Journal; The Future of Irish Crystal Is Anything but Clear
In the year 853, Danish Vikings sailed up the river here and, after some battling with with the local Celts, established a port.
Some 1,100 years later, after World War II, an Irish entrepreneur imported a band of German, Czech and Italian craftsmen to revive the local glassmaking business, which became Waterford Crystal and quickly spread its glistering elegance to millions of homes, mostly in America, and bringing prosperity.
The crystal boom, which began in the mid-1950's and started to shatter five years ago, also gave a sense of identity to the 38,000 people of this clean medieval city, eight miles up the River Suir from the Irish Sea.


A Wasted Opportunity
To The Home Section:
Congratulations on Anne Raver's recent article on Ameriflora  [ "Ameriflora: An Odd Hybrid Struggles," Aug. 6 ] .
The report was very fair and balanced.


History of Commissioners Mimics Itself
The appointment of Bud Selig of the Milwaukee Brewers as a temporary holder of the commissioner's functions, is a new procedure for major league baseball.
But it echoes earlier situations.
In 1903, when the National and American Leagues first entered into a joint agreement, the top of the baseball hierarchy became a three-man commission consisting of the two league presidents and a chairman.
The chairman was Garry Herrmann, president of the Cincinnati Reds.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
House and Senate negotiators agreed on a measure that would require local cable systems to negotiate licenses from local television stations to retransmit their signals.
The compromise set the stage for a bill reregulating the cable industry.  [ Page D1. ]


Warner-Lambert Offers 6.66% Yield
Warner-Lambert offered $200 million of 10-year notes yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The notes, due in 2002, were given a 6 5/8 percent coupon and priced at 99.75 to yield 6.66 percent, or about 35 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Four Singular Views: Shops That Sell the Different Drums; Juxtaposing Old and New
THE small building that sits squarely on the green in the center of Bedford, N.Y., looks as if it was built in 1840, in the style John Montague Massengale calls "Provincial Greek Revival."
Actually, the building, which is now home to America's Best and Bedford Green Antiques, used to be the local A.&amp;P., where Sandra Kasper did her grocery shopping.


Eleanor Raynolds, Business Consultant And an Author, 55
Eleanor H. Raynolds, an executive search consultant who was honored by the Queen of England for her work for the British-American Chamber of Commerce, died on Tuesday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
She was 55 years old and lived in Stamford.
The cause of her death was a massive staphylococcus infection, said Penny Paul Mooney, an associate at Ward Howell, the executive search firm where she was a partner.
She said the cause of the infection has not been determined.


Washington Chief Joins A Trend of Frustration
Three years after taking command of the police force in the most heavily policed and most murder-prone city in the United States, Isaac Fulwood Jr. joins the fast-growing number of big-city police chiefs who have left their jobs in the past year.
Faced with drug-related violence, political turnover and shrinking budgets, more and more law-enforcement executives do not want to take it any more.


Storm Blows a New Hero Into Town
With a high-pitched voice and eyes that blink too often, a degree in mathematics and a keen interest in isobars, Bryan Norcross hardly seems a candidate for public adulation.
But Mr.
Norcross, a Miami television weatherman, has become something of a hero.
At least a dozen residents of southern Dade County have unofficially nominated him for elected office, spray-painting "Norcross for Governor" or "Norcross for President" on their homes.
Three Hollywood production companies have bid to film the story of his life.


Absolut Steps Up Efforts in Europe
Absolut vodka and its agency, TBWA Advertising in New York, have announced plans to introduce their first coordinated advertising and marketing efforts in Europe, to begin by the end of the month.
In a telephone interview, Richard N. Costello, TBWA's president and chief operating officer, said sporadic marketing efforts for the Swedish vodka had been undertaken by local importers in Europe, but only on a market-to-market basis.


Review/Music; From Mal Waldron, Jazz Without Pity
Mal Waldron plunged into the depths for his first set on Tuesday night at Sweet Basil.
In an intense and single-minded group of pieces, each extending more than 20 minutes, Mr.
Waldron prowled the low register of the piano, spending long stretches below middle C and keeping his two tenor saxophonists, Chico Freeman and Ricky Ford, in their most sepulchral register for ensembles.
The music glowered, rumbled, ruminated, alluding to the darkest blues, turning torchy ardor into a self-mockery.
One piece was a blues turned into a chromatic maze, another was a Chopinesque ballad, the finale the modal vamp of "The Git Go." The tempos were slower than a dreamer's heartbeat, the motion as inexorable as the tides.
It was jazz without doubt or pity, desolation turned sensual.
The 66-year-old Mr.
Waldron, who worked with Charles Mingus and Billie Holiday in the 1950's and moved to Europe in 1966, generally appears twice a year in New York City, leading carefully chosen quintets.
He has pared his style to essentials.
Accompanying a soloist, he plays steady, almost lumbering chords, brusque and unhurried but always in the right place.
With the current quintet, that approach creates space for Pete LaRoca's splashing cymbals and Reggie Workman's sliding, throbbing, resonant bass lines.
Mr.
Waldron's infrequent solos work through a few notes at a time, as if examining them from every angle before moving on.
It is a somber, concentrated style that sets the tone for the music even when the particulars are blended into the rhythm section.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LTV CORP., Dallas, will move its headquarters to Cleveland.
McGRAW-HILL INC., New York, bought the Utility Data Institute, a 12-year-old company that compiles and distributes data on construction, production, operation and maintenance costs and other information about electricity.
The price was not disclosed.


Judge Says Minister Can't Block Censorship Film
A coalition of film makers and civil rights advocates has won the right to distribute a British documentary about censorship in the arts in the United States over the objections of an anti-pornography crusader who was interviewed in the film.
The crusader, the Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon, had sought a ban on distribution of the 1991 award-winning film, "Damned in the U.S.A.," in a suit filed in Federal District Court in Northern Mississippi.
He asserted that he had a "signed agreement" allowing him to control its viewing and that he objected to its being shown in this country.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Newspaper Ashes
Q.
I burn "logs" of The New York Times
and other newspapers in my fireplace and add the ashes to my garden.
Is there anything harmful in the paper or ink that should not be used around vegetables? -- H. John Flachmeyer, Charlottesville, Va.
A.
Although I, too, have used newsprint ash in my garden for years, your query inspired me to ask a few questions.
The ink used in East Coast editions of The Times is supplied by Sun Chemicals Corporation in Carlstadt, N.J.
Anthony L. Brown, vice president of the corporation's printing ink division, said most newspaper ink is composed of carbon and oil, two organic products.
Fire causes the oil to ignite and evaporate, leaving only the carbon, along with traces of wood pulp and some clay from the paper, none of which poses any problem for edibles.


Candidates on Television
The candidates for the Democratic Senate nomination in New York have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: Today: 7 P.M., WABC-TV, Channel 7 (and other stations around the state), debate among the four candidates.


Term Limits Can Only Make Congress Worse
To the Editor:
The term limitation proposals on several state ballots would, if passed, not only infringe on the public's freedom to a full and open choice on Election Day, as you point out in "Why Vote to Restrict Voters?" (editorial, Aug. 25), but they would also reduce the control of voters over the actions of their representatives in Congress.
Politicians now generally maintain at least some responsiveness to the wishes of their constituencies with an eye toward re-election.
Lame-duck representatives would have no such incentive and would indeed have no reason to pay any attention whatever to the wishes of the voters.


Four Singular Views: Shops That Sell the Different Drums; A Most Elegant Barn . . .
THE back of a barn is not exactly where one would expect to find antique Spode platters ($1,800 each), a series of Greek icons painted in 1933 ($1,400 each) as well as a silver chandelier (sold).
But the incongruous setting is part of the charm of Amy Perlin Antiques.
Ms.
Perlin, who has worked in the insurance industry and attended business school, got into the antiques business a few years ago.
By her account, she finds unusual things "because I remember what they remind me of." For example, she was able to identify a painting she found as a copy of a panel by the Italian Renaissance artist Luca della Robbia ($3,200).
"My knowledge comes from my visual memory," she said.


Connecticut Prices Serial-Bond Issue
Connecticut yesterday sold $216.8 million of general-obligation tax-exempt bonds tentatively priced through the First Boston Corporation to yield a maximum of 6 percent for bonds due in 2008 and 2009 .
The remaining serial bonds yield from 2.80 percent in 1993 to 4.65 percent in 1997, 5.40 percent in 2002 and 5.90 percent in 2007.


Plan Set in Northwest-KLM Link
Northwest and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines asked yesterday for United States Government permission to become the first two large international carriers to combine their operations and, in effect, operate as one airline.
The carriers, in a filing with the Transportation Department, asked for antitrust immunity to create what would be the world's third-largest airline, with route systems stretching around the world.


Arthur Ashe Among 95 Arrested in Protest


Tax-Exempt Yields Rise; Taxables Decline
Yields offered by money market funds were mixed in the latest week as the supply of municipal debt remained heavy and the money markets reflected the cautious easing of interest rates by the Federal Reserve on Friday.
The average yield on tax-exempt funds rose, while the yield on taxable funds dropped.


NEW YORK OFFICER SAID TO BE CLEARED IN FATAL SHOOTING
A Manhattan grand jury has cleared a New York City police officer in the fatal shooting of a drug suspect whose death in July touched off several days of violent demonstrations in Washington Heights, a top official in the Manhattan District Attorney's office said yesterday.
But the District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, has declined any comment on whether a decision was reached by the grand jury, while Mayor David N. Dinkins, the police, , other city agencies and community groups put into motion elaborate efforts to stave off any violence.


Home Video
Television movies are often disregarded by video dealers, but occasionally one comes along that can sit alongside the better feature films.
A recent example is "The Green Man," based on a novel by Kingsley Amis and starring Albert Finney as a boozy, womanizing innkeeper whose establishment near Cambridge, England, is overrun by ghosts.
In a market that constantly demands new material, television films like "The Green Man," with big names and good reviews ("Mr. Amis and Mr. Finney have the man down perfectly," wrote John J. O'Connor in The New York Times), are becoming increasingly important in video stores.


Prints of Published Photographs
HE'S not an obvious pin-up.
But a black-and-white image of Albert Einstein is a hot seller at FPG International, a photography archive in Manhattan.
The picture, by an unknown photographer, has plenty of competition.
FPG owns the rights to more than five million images, from shots of Boy Scouts and bowlers circa 1955 to portraits of contemporary and historical figures.
But since 1988, when the company began promoting its collection of vintage photographs, rights to reproduce the image of Einstein have sold close to 100 times.


Yeltsin Cancels a Visit to Japan As Dispute Over Islands Simmers
President Boris N. Yeltsin abruptly put off a visit to Japan today, only four days before he was scheduled to leave, after negotiations throughout the summer failed to resolve a bitter territorial dispute that has haunted Moscow-Tokyo relations since World War II.
A brief official announcement said only that the decision to postpone the trip to Japan and South Korea, scheduled for Sept. 13-18, was made "taking into account the obtaining circumstances," but it did not spell out the precise reasons.


N.F.L. to Name Namath as Pitchman
NFL Properties in New York, the licensing, marketing and publishing unit of the National Football League, is expected to announce today that Joe Namath has signed a 10-year contract to become the league's first corporate spokesman ever.
At a news conference in Manhattan, the company plans to describe its plans with the former quarterback for the New York Jets, who became known as Broadway Joe for his colorful off-field exploits.
He is expected to appear in all forthcoming television commercials and print advertisments for the N.F.L.


Economic Scene; Safer Mousetraps, Or Better Ones?
IS Congress, stung by White House charges that it is a doormat for special interests, ready to take a whack at what many consider the toughest of Washington lobbies -- the nation's trial lawyers?
The combatants agree that today's vote on product liability legislation, which would tilt power toward defendants, is the best chance ever to draw blood from the plaintiff bar.
If 60 senators vote to shut off debate, the momentum could lead to success next year in the House, where the lawyers have had a lock on the Judiciary Committee.
But that is about all they agree on.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column in some editions of Business Day on Saturday about the acquisition of Sunrise Bancorp by PNC Financial described one company incorrectly and misstated the other's location.
PNC Financial is a bank holding company, and Sunrise is based in Fort Mitchell, Ky.


Fujitsu Says Its Computer Will Be the World's Fastest
Fujitsu Ltd. provided details today of its first parallel supercomputer and said it would be the world's fastest computer when shipments began in September 1993.
The Fujitsu VPP500 represents the first major Japanese initiative to catch up with United States supercomputer suppliers in developing machines that chain together hundreds or thousands of processors for higher speed.
But Fujitsu has eschewed the microprocessor-based approach of American companies, including Thinking Machines, Intel and Maspar, and has concentrated instead on hooking together a smaller number of very fast custom processors.


As Students Return, Districts Face Similar Ills
Youngsters in the New York City region returned to class yesterday, more absorbed by the first day of a new school year than by the widespread absence of teacher contracts and no-frills budgets that reflect sour economic times.
On Long Island, state-mandated austerity budgets in 13 of the 130 school districts mean more children walking to school and fewer superintendents.
In Westchester County, programs are being cut and teachers are being offered incentives to retire early in an effort to reduce staff.


Kohl, His Support Sagging, Admits Unification Errors
Chancellor Helmut Kohl acknowledged today that he had mishandled some aspects of German unification.
"We did a lot right, but also some things wrong," Mr.
Kohl told Parliament as it convened for its 1992-93 session.
He said it was now clear that unification "brought with it enormous problems, more than many people, myself included, had expected."


NASA Begins Countdown for 50th Shuttle Launch


Four Singular Views: Shops That Sell the Different Drums; . . . And Whimsy Next Door
ACCORDING to Stella Flame, for years her husband, Michael Somers, a New York bond trader, "ran to yard sales like a nut." Now Mr.
Somers has a place to trade it all off: Wild Ivy, a small shop located in a nicely ramshackle maroon barn just off Route 27 in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Mr.
Somers is the owner.
His wife is the manager and buyer.
"Our stuff is all sorts of things that make people smile and are fun to have around," said Ms.
Flame, who has grouped fringed pillows, vintage toys, tramp-art frames, jewelry, silver-plated dressing-table accessories, old stuffed animals and a sprinkling of fashionable clothes in cute visual vignettes.
On the counter is an old gum-ball machine for which Ms.
Flame supplies the pennies.


This Fall, the Barely Adult Set Is the Object of Network Desire
In the 1992-93 season, network television will enter a new age. The age is about 22.
That is more or less the target age for a great majority of 36 new shows that the commercial networks -- which number four now that Fox Broadcasting has announced it will fill a full seven nights -- will add to the crowded prime-time battlefield starting next week.


In Senate Race, Debate Comes at a Crucial Time
Just five days before the New York Democratic primary for the Senate, the strategies of all the candidates revolve around Geraldine A. Ferraro.
For her rivals, the question is how to beat her.
For Ms.
Ferraro, the trick is to hold onto every ounce of support that has made her the leader in the polls so far.
That dynamic has been apparent for weeks, in speeches, press releases and commericals, in which Ms.
Ferraro's opponents have attacked her integrity, questioned her liberal credentials and doubted her strength against the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
She has sought to dismiss their claims as the slurs and sour grapes of also-rans.


Four Singular Views: Shops That Sell the Different Drums; Creating Modern Heirlooms
"THE normal route is not for me," said June Goldfinger, whose Katonah General Store is certainly not run-of-the-mill.The recently opened store in upper Westchester is a mini-emporium of high design, all in understated hues of beige and white.


Trade Pact Is Criticized By Gephardt
Dealing a blow to Congressional prospects for the North American Free Trade Agreement, the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, said today that the labor and environmental provisions were so badly flawed that the pact should be renegotiated.
Mr.
Gephardt, one of the most influential House Democrats on trade issues, ran for President in 1988 on a platform that emphasized restrictions on imports from Japan.
His last-moment support last year was crucial to the narrow approval of the measure giving President Bush the authority to negotiate the agreement among the United States, Mexico and Canada.
Mexico and Canada do not want to renegotiate the pact.


FERRARO FIRES BACK
THE TELEVISION SCRIPT
Ms.
Ferraro: Bob Abrams has been running a negative TV ad that misstates my views, and I want to set the record straight.
I've stood up on the environment --and I was an early fighter for Superfund and a crackdown on corporate polluters.
I'm for the same national health-care plan supported by Bill Clinton and Al Gore -- one where you get to choose your own doctor.
I've fought my heart out -- and I've paid a price -- to defend a woman's right to choose.
For Bob Abrams to suggest otherwise is unbelievable.
I know the people of New York, and I know you're smarter than to fall for that."
PRODUCER -- Doak, Shrum, Harris, Sherman, Donilon of Washington.
ON THE SCREEN -- Ms.
Ferraro, sober in a red dress, looking squarely into the camera as it closes in on her.
ACCURACY -- Mr.
Abrams has claimed that while he was forcing corporate polluters in New York to clean up toxic dumps, Ms.
Ferraro was in Congress "voting to weaken environmental laws." She did vote to relax some environmental restrictions, but she says that on all but one such vote, she was joined by either Al Gore of Tennessee or Morris Udall of Arizona, then two of the most prominent environmentalists in Congress.
In 1984, she co-authored legislation to extend and expand the Superfund cleanup program.
While Mr.
Abrams favors a universal health-care plan backed by a new Federal payroll tax, Ms.
Ferraro would leave the mix of public and private insurance plans in place but expand coverage by requiring employees either to provide health benefits for their workers or pay into a national fund that would do so.
Unlike Mr.
Abrams, Ms.
Ferraro did not go to anti-abortion protests in Buffalo earlier this year, saying she feared her presence would spark more confrontation.
She has long supported abortion rights, and was criticized during her 1984 Vice Presidential campaign by John Cardinal O'Connor.
SCORECARD -- Mr.
Abrams has tried to paint Ms.
Ferraro as a closet conservative, something that could hurt her among traditionally liberal Democratic primary voters.
In keeping with the prevailing widsom that almost no attack should go unrebutted, Ms.
Ferraro takes pains in this ad to fire back a terse, "Am not!" In fact, she is more conservative than Mr.
Abrams on some issues, supporting the death penalty, for example, while he does not.
But here she uses her strong fame to claim that voters simply know her too well to be misled by any rivals' attacks -- a point she drives home in the last phrase with her friendly expression of confidence in "the people of New York."


ON STAGE AND OFF WITH: Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme; After 35 Years, Their Act Is Here to Stay
BY 11:30 P.M., Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme are stepping quickly into their dressing room at the Desert Inn, exhausted and exhilarated.
The 85-minute show in the tiered, chandeliered Crystal Room has earned a standing ovation from the packed crowd, and a woman has rushed forward to hand Eydie a rose.
"Terrific audience," says Eydie.


G.M.'s Bold Move Into Credit Cards
The credit card introduced yesterday by the General Motors Corporation brandishes a long list of features that make it, some industry analysts say, the most important new national card since A.T.&amp; T. introduced its Universal card in March 1990.
Good news for consumers, bad news for competitors.
The features are a sign that consumers stand to benefit from the growing competition among banks and nonbanks for trustworthy credit risks.
G.M.'s card, whose primary mission is to help the auto maker sell cars by building brand loyalty through offering rebates, is likely to take a toll on some smaller players and continue the consolidation under way among credit card companies.
In the last five years, the market share of the top 10 card issuers has increased to 51.5 percent from 37 percent.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about management changes at Saks Fifth Avenue described Investcorp S.A. incorrectly.
It owns a minority stake in Saks and represents Persian Gulf investors who collectively have a controlling interest.
It is not a subsidiary of the Arabian Investment Banking Corporation.


Florida Freezes Insurer's Rates in Warning
Florida's insurance commissioner took the unusual action yesterday of freezing the rates and premiums charged by one of the nation's largest insurance companies, the American International Group.
The commissioner also warned other property casualty insurers operating in the state that regulators would reject any unjustified rate increases sought in the wake of the devastation caused by Hurricane Andrew.


Goodbye to Dad and Hello to a New School Year


It Seems Like Solitaire As Sampras Breezes
He called it the case of the missing opponent, and amateur sleuth Pete Sampras later said it was a pleasant problem that every athlete ought to face once or twice in the turbulent course of chasing the Grand Slam grail.
Sampras spent the latter stages of his quarterfinal match at the United States Open yesterday afternoon searching in vain for his opponent, Aleksandr Volkov.
And when Sampras failed to find him, he had no choice but to polish off a monochromatic 6-4, 6-1, 6-0 victory and advance to the semifinals without breaking a sweat.


Events: Plant Auction, Children's Harvest Fairs
Fair, Tours, Open House
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The annual harvest fair by the children's garden participants, ages 7 to 18, will be held from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. on Saturday.
Informal workshops, demonstrations, crafts, tours and entertainment are planned.


State Acquires Landmark Theater To Salvage While It Still Can
The New Amsterdam Theater, the badly tarnished crown jewel in a string of historic playhouses along 42d Street, has been taken over from the Nederlander Organization by New York State, in the hope of salvaging the building while there is still so much left to salvage.
Structural stabilization of the abandoned, 89-year-old Art Nouveau landmark at 214 West 42d Street is to begin immediately and will cost about $450,000, said Rebecca Robertson, the president of the state's 42d Street Development Project.


COMPANY NEWS: New Owens-Corning Logotype; This Change Is Purely Symbolic
Some 25 years after settling on an "interim" logo, the Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation has gotten around to choosing a replacement.
Gone is the rectangle that emphasized the word Fiberglas and treated the rest of the company's name as an afterthought.
In fact, Fiberglas has been left out of the new design.
"We have been talking about this for years," William Boeschenstein, the company's former chairman and chief executive, said yesterday.
"We had intended to gradually increase the size of the Owens-Corning name and de-emphasize the Fiberglas."


Amex Is Investigating Link Between Officer and Investor
Once seen as an idea that would signal the revival of the American Stock Exchange, the five-month-old Emerging Company Marketplace has instead led to new questions about the actions taken at the senior levels of the exchange.
The Amex is investigating financial and business relationships between a member of its board of governors and the controlling shareholder in one of the issues listed on the new company marketplace, executives with ties to the exchange said yesterday.


8 Jurors Start Weighing Evidence in N.F.L. Case
The eight-woman jury deciding the National Football League's battle over free agency with its players began deliberations at 9 A.M. today and worked for nearly eight hours without reaching a decision before adjourning for the night.
The jurors will resume at 9 A.M. on Thursday.
The jury, which received instructions from United States District Judge David Doty before convening, asked for two items during its deliberations today.
First, rather than one list, the jurors wanted a list of Doty's instructions for each member.
Second, they asked for clarification on instruction No. 3 on the extent of Plan B restrictions.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Jewish Voters; Clinton Swipes at Bush For Lack of Jewish Aides
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, seeking the support of Jewish voters, today painted the Bush Administration and the Republican Party as institutions that were virtually devoid of Jews and dominated by fringe religious and right-wing elements hostile to Jewish concerns.
Alluding to the fact that there are virtually no Jews in the upper reaches of the Bush Administration, the Democratic Presidential candidate told the B'nai B'rith International Convention, "I think I ought to give you an administration that looks and feels like America -- a Cabinet, a White House staff, appointments to the judiciary and to other major positions that reach across racial, and religious, and ethnic, and regional lines, an administration committed to the highest standards of excellence."


Corrections
An article on Sept. 2 about changes in medical school curriculums referred incorrectly to an associate dean of the medical school at Emory University in Atlanta.
He is Dr.
Jonas A. Shulman.


Court Nominee Is Confirmed After Angry Senate Debate
After two days of angry debate in which election-year politics were never far from the surface, the Senate today confirmed Edward E. Carnes, an Alabama prosecutor, to an important Federal appeals judgeship.
Mr.
Carnes was easily confirmed after his supporters garnered 66 votes, six more than needed, to cut off a threatened filibuster to thwart the nomination.


Text of Letter to Representatives
Following is the
letter sent today to some members of the House of Representatives by Malcolm R. Wilkey, the special Justice Department prosecutor investigating the House bank scandal.
It was released
by the Justice Department.
Dear Representative:


Only Uncertainty Is Certain in French Vote
After two weeks in which the "no" surged, the "yes" rebounded and the "no" inched back, polls tracing French voting intentions in a referendum on Europe this month have so far produced only one certainty: the outcome will be up in the air until the votes are counted.
The latest polls have indicated that among those giving an opinion, supporters and opponents of a treaty on European union are almost evenly split.
But they also show that anywhere between 15 and 33 percent of probable voters have not yet made up their minds, and that as many as 30 percent may not even vote.


'Brainy Bunch' Begins Anew
To those who think Stuyvesant High School students are a brainy but elitist bunch who have been overindulged by New York City's cash-strapped city government, those students have a message:
You're right.


Corrections
A report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about Orion Pictures' quarterly loss misattributed two films.
"Driving Miss Daisy" and "Rain Man" were not produced by Orion.


28 Graves Giving Up Secrets of the 1700's
Because of a twist of archeological fate and a minor mistake on an old map, H. David Geer's sand-and-gravel crew stumbled onto a bit of 1700's rural America two years ago.
A tiny and long forgotten farm family cemetery -- 28 bodies representing generations of a family called the Waltons -- suddenly re-emerged into the 20th century.
The bodies, some turned to dust by two and a half centuries, others preserved to the braided hair on a 15-year-old girl, were given thoroughly modern treatment.
Samples were taken for DNA analysis and X-ray studies in Washington.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; BUSH AGAIN VOWS NO TAX INCREASE
Traveling to Pennsylvania and New Jersey suburbs, President Bush renewed his no-new-taxes pledge today, promising he would not raise taxes again, "ever."
The President campaigned on improving education, but quickly ended up defending his management of an economy that even he conceded, not once but three times, was "lousy."


'A Toast to Miss Tully'
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is to celebrate the 90th birthday of its founding chairwoman and patron, Alice Tully, on Monday at 8 P.M. at the hall that bears her name at Lincoln Center.
Scheduled to join members of the society for the evening's program, entitled "A Toast to Miss Tully," are the pianists Richard Goode, Andre Previn and Charles Wadsworth; the organist Anthony Newman; the cellist Yo-Yo Ma; the violinist Isaac Stern; the flutist Paula Robison; the tenor Robert White, and the soprano Dawn Upshaw.
On the program are works by Bach, Debussy, Godard, Wolf, Mozart and others.
Mr.
Wadsworth, who was the society's artistic director from its founding in 1969 until 1989, is to be the master of ceremonies.
Tickets are $100.
Information: (212) 875-5787.


Weary Drivers Praise a Thruway Travel Plaza
TO discerning travelers like Frederick Winslow, everything that is wrong with a long road trip can be summed up in these words: highway rest stops.
"Gulp-and-gallop places," Mr.
Winslow called them, conjuring up images of cramped cafeterias hawking greasy burgers and flat sodas, places with bathrooms whose lack of cleanliness could ruin whatever appetite a traveler had.
But Mr.
Winslow seemed nearly ready to abandon the liverwurst sandwich he had packed for a recent trip as he marveled at what is being billed as the nation's largest travel plaza, 17 miles north of the Tappan Zee Bridge, near Suffern, on the northbound side of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway.


When Storm Got Tough, the Women Got Tougher
Surrounded by sugar cane fields that seem to isolate them like green oceans, the people of this poor overwhelmingly black hamlet have been surviving without electricity, insurance adjustors, the National Guard or Federal aid since Hurricane Andrew struck Louisiana.
Yet the women who live here have already started rebuilding.
They speak of it as almost a spiritual task because for the past three and a half years local women, united as the Four Corners Self-Help Housing Committee, have poured their sweat into improving their dilapidated clapboard cabins, learning builders' and bankers' skills to provide their families with solid walls and decent roofs.


C.I.A. Chief to Visit Moscow; Cooperation May Be a Topic
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, will visit Moscow this fall to discuss, among other issues, potential cooperation with Russia's Foreign Intelligence Service, senior Administration officials said today.
The visit by Mr.
Gates is considered symbolically important because it would be the first visit to Moscow by the highest-ranking United States intelligence official.


Letters Lift House Bank Cloud From Some Lawmakers
Federal agents swept across Capitol Hill today hand-delivering the first of hundreds of letters clearing lawmakers who wrote overdrafts at the House bank, but leaving others not knowing when or whether the cloud over their careers would be lifted.
The action by Judge Malcolm R. Wilkey, the Justice Department's special counsel investigating the check-writing practices of House members, reopened a raw political wound less than two months before Election Day over an issue that has contributed to a stream of retirements and political defeats of incumbents.


Scotch and Soda, and a Couple of Cubes
GLASS can be made into many shapes: round, oval, square or rectangular.
And from 1928 to 1932, Reuben Haley, a glass designer at the Consolidated Lamp &amp; Glass Company in Coraopolis, Pa., designed cubistic glassware.
The bowls, vases and glasses, which the company called "Ruba Rombic," had irregular planes.
From tomorrow through Oct. 24, "Ruba Rombic at Moderne," a show of 400 pieces of the glassware, will be at Moderne, a gallery at 111 North Third Street in Philadelphia.


CAR DEALER ADMITS FRAUD OF BILLIONS
John McNamara, the Long Island car dealer and philanthropist, admitted yesterday that he had bilked General Motors in a $6 billion loan scheme and that he had used some of the money to bribe officials at all levels in the town of Brookhaven to win approvals for his vast real-estate developments.
Mr.
McNamara, 53 years old, pleaded guilty to fraud in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
For 11 years, he said, he had borrowed billions from General Motors for cars that did not exist, plowing the money into a $400 million business empire built in part on bribery and fraud.


Term Limits Can Only Make Congress Worse; Keeping in Touch
To the Editor:
"Why Vote to Restrict Voters" (editorial, Aug. 25) notes that term limits heave out the good with the bad.
Yes, but how many good and how many bad?
Our founding fathers envisioned citizen legislators.
Members of Congress went back to their farms and factories in the early days of the Republic and thus kept in touch with the people.
If George Washington were President today, he'd know how to use a supermarket scanner, and Franklin or Jefferson would have invented it.


Orioles Find Yanks Are Hardly A Pushover
It could have been a series where the Yankees snoozed through three straight games and watched the Orioles chase the Toronto Blue Jays.
They could have muttered excuses and claimed there was nothing redeeming to play for.
But they did not.
Instead, the Yanks turned their short bus trip south into one of the most rewarding journeys of an agonizing season as they blasted three homers tonight to beat the Orioles, 5-2, at Camden Yards, sweep them of three games and severely bruise their pennant hopes.


Georgia Hospital's Tax-Exempt Issue
A $139.6 million tax-exempt financing by the Fulco Hospital Authority of Georgia was priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 6.55 percent for a certificate due in 2022 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch.


Jackson Shifts Focus to a Good Cause
For Mark Jackson, last night's Wheelchair Classic at Madison Square Garden was another precious evening on the town, with the taxi meter running.
"I went out there on the court and thought about New York City," Jackson said.
"I thought about not leaving. I thought about playing with Rolando Blackman, about driving to the basket and kicking it out to that kind of a great shooter.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; BUDGET JOUSTING HAS POLITICAL RING
Those Congressional big spenders President Bush has been attacking, sometimes by name, were a bit puzzled to be asked down to the White House on Tuesday for a drink and some amiable chitchat.
The three top Democrats in Congress, along with two Republicans, were even more puzzled at the President's message: that all his angry talk was just politics and everyone had to work together on important legislation.


Whatever His Title, Selig's in the Hot Seat
Several days ago, Jerry Reinsdorf, the most powerful and influential owner in major league baseball, declared Bud Selig to be the most powerful and influential owner in major league baseball.
So, to very few raised eyebrows, Selig was named by the major league owners' interim governing body yesterday to be the titular head of the game, filling a vacuum left Monday by the forced resignation of Commissioner Fay Vincent.


Many Questions Remain on Trump's Shortened West Side Story
To the Editor:
"Riverside South: Still Questions" (editorial, Aug. 31) discusses the scaled-down plans of Donald Trump for 74.6 acres of Manhattan's Hudson River waterfront, now dubbed Riverside South.
This issue concerns not only West Siders, but also environmentalists and all who support development appropriate to a community.
Mr.
Trump's guarantees to Ruth Messinger, Manhattan Borough President, that his project will not add volume to the North River Sewage Treatment plant is based on the fact that his project can never be hooked up to the North River plant.
A small, proposed project on Central Park West and 106th Street has been denied a sewer hook-up.


Mentally Ill Jailed on No Charges, Survey Says
A survey of American jails has found that more than half regularly hold people with serious mental disorders on trivial charges or no charges at all.
"We were shocked to find that 29 percent of the jails we asked admitted to holding people in jail with no charges at all, solely because they are mentally ill," said Dr.
Sidney Wolfe, director of the Public Citizen Health Research Group, a Washington health advocacy group that conducted the survey of 1,391 local jails, the first of its kind.


Angry U.N. General Says Bosnia Attacked Convoy
The commander of the United Nations peace force in Sarajevo charged today that Muslim militiamen had deliberately attacked a United Nations supply convoy on the city's western fringe Tuesday night, killing two French officers and wounding five.
Witnesses said the convoy was unprotected and drove onto the scene where an exchange of fire took place between Serbian forces and Muslim militiamen loyal to Bosnia and Herzegovina's Government.


Washington State Refinances Debt
A $203.4 million refunding by the State of Washington was tentatively priced yesterday for sale to the public.
Underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said the offering of general obligation tax-exempt debt was being done to raise cash to refund previously issued bonds sold when interest rates were higher.


A Boy Back From the Brink: When Love and Care Prevail
When the 5-year-old foster child first walked into Debra Bondy's psychotherapy office, she noticed that his front teeth were missing (knocked out by his mother, it turned out).
The beautiful, dark-eyed boy did not know how to play.
He sat very still, clutching a toy ambulance and making a wailing, siren noise: "Lee-loo, lee-loo, lee-loo."
As the months passed, he learned to express himself, but his games were violent and bizarre.
He made little human figures jump to their deaths from the windows of a toy house.
But gradually, his fury diminished.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 4
Aug. 28
Sept. 6
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.7
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.8
2.9
3.1
Gasoline stocks
202.1
205.1
212.9
Distillate stocks
123.5
125.5
130.1
Crude imports, daily
5.8
5.4
6.0
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.7
2.0
Crude stocks
327.1
325.9
342.3
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
85.5
86.3
91.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Timothy Egan Lenahan misstated the date of his death.
It was Monday.


On First Day For Schools, Many Lessons
New York City's schools opened their doors yesterday in a spirit of giddiness and dread, with six brand-new schools and 2,000 eager new teachers confronting a stagnant budget, labor turmoil and an enrollment that has swollen ominously to almost one million.
As in most systems in the New York City area, the city system's first day was as bright with promise as the freshly waxed floors of its 1,000 schools and the highly polished shoes of children like 5-year-old Nicky Garland.
Sticking close to her father's legs, she made her debut at Public School 23 in the Bronx, a school that was itself making its debut.


3 Die in Clash of Iranian Soldiers and Police
At least 3 people were killed and 10 wounded on Tuesday when Iranian soldiers and the Teheran police fought over a building in the northern part of the capital, witnesses said today.
The building, near a palace of the late Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi in the city's Tajrish district, had been confiscated from the army by the police.
Disputes over buildings seized by various groups after the Islamic revolution of 1979 are not uncommon in Iran.


Graf Is Left Baffled; Young Maleeva Falls
Nerves were the headliners in both of the women's quarterfinal matches yesterday at the United States Open, and in the case of a publicly miserable Steffi Graf, the nerves won and cost her a chance to become No. 1.
"I definitely made some wrong choices today; I realized I just couldn't do anything," said the second-seeded Graf after being upended in straight sets, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3 by an ebullient Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey Visit; Bush Finds Fertile Ground for Attacking Governors
President Bush today opened a second front in his campaign against what he called tax-and-spend liberals when he attacked Gov.
Bill Clinton by way of Gov.
Jim Florio.
"I don't have to tell New Jersey about that old saxophone song sounding the familiar tax-and-spend theme," Mr.
Bush told more than 2,000 people who had waited three hours in the parking lot of V.F.W.
Post 2179 to hear his speech.


A New Stove With the Sign of the Wolf
FOR 60 years, the Wolf Range Company of Compton, Calif., has produced commercial ranges, signing each oven with a bright red wolf's face on the door.
Five years ago, it began making a line of residential models, and this month, it introduced its sixth range designed for the home: a 48-inch-wide version.
The other models are from 25 7/8 to 62 inches wide.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Presses Welfare Overhaul, Stressing Job Training and Work
Gov.
Bill Clinton today called for an "end to welfare as we know it" and proposed a major program of job training and education for recipients of public aid.
Mr.
Clinton said he would quadruple to $4 billion the amount the Government spends on job training for welfare recipients and add $2 billion in tax credits for the working poor.
By 1996, he said, the Government would be spending an additional $6 billion a year.


Thompson Tries Talking Way Into Job
The kid is full of superstitions and energy.
His rap is a crazy, personal patois of slang and literate metaphor.
He is asked a single question and he offers oral history by way of response.
Ryan Thompson may or may not make it bigtime with the Mets.
But the Mets could sure use him.
Bigtime.


School Tainted With Lead Dust Is Expected to Reopen Monday
An elementary school in Greenwich Village that was closed yesterday after lead was found in dust on the floors will remain closed the rest of the week while a cleanup crew scours every surface in the building -- every wall, ledge, radiator and book, officials said.
The school, Public School 3, at 590 Hudson Street, will be retested over the weekend by an industrial hygienist from the United Federation of Teachers.
If the tests show that lead levels are below Federal limits, the school is expected to open on Monday, officials said.


Fox to Preview New PBS Children's Series
In a unusual cross-promotion that recalls the premiere of "Sesame Street" 24 years ago, a new public television series called "Ghostwriter" will be broadcast as a sneak preview on the Fox network one day before it begins on PBS stations.
The Children's Television Workshop, which developed "Ghostwriter" to promote reading and writing to children, announced the arrangement with Fox yesterday, saying the preview was intended to reach millions of children who watch cartoon programs on Saturday mornings.


Judge Denies Bid to Close In-School TV Program
A California judge said today that he would not shut down the San Jose operation of Channel One, although he imposed new restrictions to make clear that neither teachers nor students can be forced to watch the the controversial in-school news and entertainment program.
The California Department of Education had sued to stop the East Side Union High School District in San Jose from televising the 12-minute Whittle Communications program, which includes two minutes of commercials.


Essay; A Smoking Gun?
Did the Bush Administration, eager to build up Saddam Hussein, interfere in the Atlanta U.S.
Attorney's investigation of Iraq's corruption of our Department of Agriculture?
Has the Attorney General committed an impeachable offense in refusing to permit a special prosecutor to investigate obstruction of justice, as Congress requested?
A memo dated Oct. 26, 1989, suggests the answer to both questions is yes.


Term Limits Can Only Make Congress Worse; Curbing the President
To the Editor:
In "Congress Is the Problem" (Op-Ed, Aug. 18) Representative Christopher Cox and Michael Horowitz advocate a Presidential get-tough approach to Congress, with a veto of the Congressional budget.
They make the following startling assertion:
"Voters don't want to return to authoritarian Congresses amd collapsed one-term Presidencies. They expect the President to use his powers to bring Congress into line."


Striking Midnight, All Day and All Night
IT is always midnight at John Badum's apartment.
Except for the master bedroom, where it is almost too bright to sleep.
"I wanted a disco palace nightclub," said Mr.
Badum, the vice president of international sales at Go Silk, a manufacturer of silk clothes.
Mr.
Badum, who deals only in solid-colored silks at work, craved the exact opposite at home, a two-bedroom cooperative apartment in the East Village.
He wanted nocturnal frenzy.
And with the help of artist friends like Kenny Scharf and Tim Goslin, he got it.


Ugandan Aide Among 5 Indicted From a Sting on Illegal Arms Deal
After an elaborate 10-month sting operation, a senior aide to the Ugandan President and four other people were indicted today on charges that they had illegally tried to export antitank missiles and launchers to Uganda.
Two of the men were also accused of illegally trying to sell helicopter parts to Libya.
Federal officials said the Customs Service set up a phony arms company, the Poseidon Trade Group, in Orlando, Fla., that was used by the defendants and Uganda's Ambassador to the United States, to buy 400 TOW missiles and 34 launchers for $18.8 million.


Embargoed Haiti's Suffering Increases
To the Editor:
"Haiti's Lies" (Op-Ed, Aug. 13) by Amy Wilentz is dead wrong in its plea to keep the Organization of American States embargo to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power.
The embargo has failed to do so after nearly 10 months, yet innocent people are suffering and dying.
For the last 20 years, I have made an average of three trips to Haiti every year.
During my three visits in the last five months, I have never seen such misery and hopelessness.
Because of the embargo, people of all ages, including my own father, in need of special antibiotics die without getting them.
Women with episiotomies, unable to be sutured following childbirth, heal slowly and painfully.


CHRONICLE
President Bush has nominated STEVEN J. McAULIFFE to be a Federal judge; he is the husband of Christa McAuliffe, the schoolteacher who died in the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger. .
The White House announced yesterday that Mr.
McAuliffe, a partner in the Concord, N.H., law firm of Gallagher, Callahan &amp; Gartrell, would serve on the United States District Court in New Hampshire if he is confirmed by the Senate.


CHRONICLE
SALMAN RUSHDIE, the British author who has lived in hiding since 1989, said yesterday at the University of Colorado in Boulder that he intends to be increasingly visible, in the hopes that public pressure on the Iranian Government will lead it to lift the death threat under which he lives.
The Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini called for his assassination after Mr.
Rushdie's book "The Satanic Verses" was deemed to be blasphemous according to Islam.
Referring to trips he made to Spain, Denmark and Norway in June, Mr.
Rushdie said during an interview at the university that "the political climate in these countries on this issue improved 1,000 percent."


Bridge
The clubs that provide duplicate bridge in New York City fall into four categories.
Some are major operations, providing for all comers throughout the week.
Others are also open clubs, but operate once or twice a week.
A few are private clubs with permanent premises and a variety of services.
And one, perhaps only one, is a private club offering a weekly game.
It is the Murray Hill Club, playing Tuesday evenings at the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Club at Lexington Avenue and 36th Street.
There are no excitable young lions to be found here; the emphasis is on manners and social skills rather than master points and technical skills.


Sayedah Khadijah Faisal Is Dead; Co-Founder of Mosque Was 93
Sayedah Khadijah Faisal, a founder of Brooklyn's first mosque who was known to hundreds of Muslims as Mother Khadijah, died Saturday at her home at the mosque in Brooklyn Heights.
She was 93 years old.
Officials of the mosque, the Islamic Mission of America, said she died after a long illness, which they did not specify.


For Assembly: Manhattan, Queens
Because of redistricting, New York voters will face an unusually large number of Democratic primary contests for the State Assembly on Tuesday.
Here are our recommendations for Manhattan and Queens races in which the primary winner is all but guaranteed election in November.
MANHATTAN.
72d District.
John Brian Murtaugh is a diligent and dedicated lawmaker who has earned a seventh term.
He understands the ethnic complexities of his district and can stand up to pressure.
Despite opposition from the Catholic Church and anti-abortion activists, he opposed a bill that would have impeded young women's access to abortion by requiring parental notification.
He is opposed by William Alicea, a former housing official, who has electoral appeal, and Julio Hernandez, recently with the Mayor's office of Latino Affairs.
But neither offers a compelling reason to unseat Mr.
Murtaugh.


Donald M. Sterzin Adman, 42
Donald M. Sterzin, creative director of Carlson &amp; Partners Advertising, died on Aug. 30 at New York Hospital.
He was 42 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Sterzin died of pulmonary failure, a spokeswoman for the family, Dolores Barrett, said.


Topics of The Times; Food Label Footwork
The Congressional mandate for more honest food labels applies only to foods regulated by the Food and Drug Administration.
But in a breakthrough a year ago, the Department of Agriculture agreed to harmonize its labeling rules for meat and poultry products with those of the F.D.A.
Now Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan appears to be backtracking.
His department favors a format for meat and poultry labels that falls far short of the comprehensive disclosure that was contemplated by the F.D.A.


Courier Refuses to Crack, Banishing Agassi to Defeat
It was well past midnight when the resident strongman, who later fell prey to a case of post-match cramps, finally fended off this Grand Slam's unofficial Zen master, who remained glib in defeat.
In a match where clash was the dominant password, Jim Courier, the world's No. 1 player, eliminated ninth-seeded Andre Agassi from the quarterfinals of the United States Open with a grimly hewn 6-3, 6-7 (6-7), 6-1, 6-4 victory that kept the 22-year-old Floridian poised to seize his first Open title and third Grand Slam of 1992.


Review/Jazz; Javon Jackson, in Good Company
Javon Jackson, a 27-year-old tenor saxophonist who grew up in Denver and was a member of Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers, has superb company for his first Village Vanguard date as a leader.
His quartet on Tuesday night included Kenny Barron on piano and the agile rhythm section of Ron Carter on bass and Lewis Nash on drums, with the trombonist Curtis Fuller scheduled to make it a quintet tomorrow through Sunday at the Vanguard (178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Greenwich Village).
But in Tuesday's second set, Mr.
Jackson was not in the same league as his associates.
It was a straightforward set -- hard-bop tunes, a bossa nova by Mr.
Barron, a standard, a Thelonious Monk composition, a blues -- with theme-solos-theme structures.
Mr.
Jackson played with confidence and precision, reeling off choruses that generally stayed within the confines of be-bop, now and then hinting at more modern dissonances.


Storm's Staggering Load on Banks
The rebuilding of the southern Florida economy after Hurricane Andrew may require billions of dollars more in financing than the amount covered by insurance and even the new aid proposed by President Bush.
The President's request on Monday for $7.6 billion to assist the storm victims in both Florida and Louisiana will help.
Some Federal funds will help hard-hit businesses and homeowners, but much of that money is earmarked for repairing streets, schools, government buildings and an Air Force base here.


Pacific Bell Sells 40-Year Bonds
Pacific Bell, a unit of Pacific Telesis Group, offered $300 million of 40-year bonds yesterday through Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, which was awarded the issue in competitive bidding yesterday.
The bonds are being reoffered to the public with a coupon of 7 3/4 percent at a price of 98.125 to yield 7.905 percent, or about 67 basis points more than the 30-year Treasury bond.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
REMODELING a house, apartment or condominium before putting it up for sale is not always worth the investment if the home already compares with better-than-average homes in the area.
But making simple repairs and carrying out thorough cleaning and maintenance chores -- none of which calls for significant spending -- can add value to a home, and make the difference between a quick sale at the desired asking price and a lengthy one at a lowered price.
Here is a checklist for sprucing up a home before putting it on the market.


Spassky Defeats a Vacillating Fischer in Game 5
A fired-up Boris Spassky convincingly defeated an indecisive Bobby Fischer yesterday in Game 5 of their exhibition match in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
Spassky's victory, his second in a row, gives him a 2-to-1 lead; the first player to achieve 10 victories wins the match.
Fischer, playing with the initiative of the white pieces, varied the attack in his favorite opening, which had gone sour in Game 3, but he failed to back it up with the moves that might have made it count for something.
His general strategy might have been good, but he inconsistently wasted time with extraneous maneuvers that gave Spassky the opportunity for the powerful counterpunches that won the game.


Banking Dept. Proposes Changes in Rating Rules
In a fresh effort to pressure lenders to provide more loans and services in poor areas, the New York State Banking Department yesterday proposed new rules that it said would strengthen a controversial law that ranks lenders on the basis of their social responsibility.
Although the strengthened law, the Community Reinvestment Act, would affect regulations statewide, the changes -- intended to encourage public review and add incentives for banks -- would have the greatest impact on banking services in poor neighborhoods in New York City.


Zaccaro Scarce on Campaign Trail
Wheeeere's Johnny?
This may be the Year of the Woman, but for the two women seeking the Democratic nomination for United States Senate from New York, it's not the Year of the Spouse.
Elizabeth Holtzman does not have one.
And Geraldine Ferraro's husband, John A. Zaccaro, shuns publicity, although during his wife's campaigns it has usually managed to find him.
"This is a guy who's very separate," said Frank Wilkinson, Ms.
Ferraro's spokesman.
"He has his business, and Gerry has hers."


Clinton Seeks Jews' Backing
Addressing the B'nai B'rith convention, Gov.
Bill Clinton said the Administration was virtually devoid of Jews in high posts.
Page A20.


Selig Goes In for Vincent at First
Peace broke out among baseball owners today, at least in the major leagues' executive council.
With two supporters of the former commissioner, Fay Vincent, seconding the nomination, Bud Selig of the Milwaukee Brewers, one of the leaders of the move to unseat Vincent, was unanimously elected chairman of the council.


Sports of The Times; The Capping of Baseball's Popularity
IT is not even necessary to get inside the head of the average American kid to know that baseball is facing a humbling, if not apocalyptic, decline in the 21st century.
Just look at what these kids are wearing on top of their heads.
Years ago, a kid was introduced to sports with an unmistakable slice of Americana: the baseball cap with the hometown's initials embroidered on the front.
This was a first possession that immediately linked the child with the game; forever, in more cases than not.


Hughes Shifts Missile Work To Arizona From California
The Hughes Aircraft Company said today that it would move its missile production and several thousand jobs, including work on the Tomahawk, Stinger, and Standard missiles, from a number of sites in Southern California to a single plant in Tucson, Ariz.
The move, which had been widely expected, follows Hughes's $450 million acquisition of the General Dynamics Corporation's missile division last month and is intended to consolidate the company's five missile manufacturing plants.
Hughes officials said the move will be completed within two years.


Handley Pulls Reverse and Stays With Simms
And you thought the Giants quarterback controversy was over?
You knew Phil Simms started last Sunday because Jeff Hostetler was hurt, but you also knew Hostetler would regain the starting job this Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys.
Wrong.
In a stunning development today, Coach Ray Handley said Simms would start against the Cowboys because Handley wanted to maintain continuity.
Simms built that continuity with the offense for the last three weeks while Hostetler missed the last preseason game and the first regular-season game because of a bruised back and pelvis.


Irving Allen Lee, Actor And Director, 43, Dies
Irving Allen Lee, a Broadway and television actor and director, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old.
He died of AIDS-related lymphoma, said his companion, John Uehlein.


Chavez Has Pounded His Way to the Top
His older brothers were fighters of ordinary talent.
When they would lose, little Julio Cesar Chavez of Culiacan, Mexico, would tell them that some day he would do better and become a world champion.
Then came his first bouts, informal matches out on the streets of Culiacan, and with them a sober reassessment of just how tricky a proposition boxing could be.


Biggest Sale By America's Top Hatter
Would-be Harrison Fords have worn his Indiana Jones fedoras.
And legions of young people have slipped on all manner of his baseball caps to identify with the cachet of their favorite sports teams.
But Irving Joel, who in three decades has built the country's largest designer, manufacturer and marketer of headwear, made by far his biggest sale this week.
Hicks, Muse &amp; Company, a leveraged buyout firm based in New York and Dallas, says it will announce today that it has acquired an 80 percent stake in Hat Brands Inc., Mr.
Joel's company, for more than $100 million in cash and debt securities.


AMGEN SAYS ARIBITRATOR RULED IN ITS FAVOR, OVER ORTHO
Amgen Inc. said the arbitrator in the company's longstanding dispute with the Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation had issued an opinion finding Ortho in default of its contractual obligation to develop and register Amgen's hepatitis-B vaccine and interleukin-2 products.
The dispute stems from a 1985 technology license agreement between Amgen, a biotech company based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., and Ortho, a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson, which is based in New Brunswick, N.J.


C.I.A. Is Planning to Unlock Many Long-Secret Nazi Files
In a change of policy that could provide new information about American recruitment of Nazi war criminals after World War II, the Central Intelligence Agency says it has begun to systematically search its records with the aim of opening long-secret files to historians' scrutiny.
The agency, which has been accused of shielding such contacts in the past, said it intended to make public the information, so long as it did not harm national security, regardless of its potential for embarrassment to the Government.


Hallowell Davis, 96, an Explorer Who Charted the Inner Ear, Dies
Dr.
Hallowell Davis, a pioneer in the physiology of hearing and a former director of research at the Central Institute for the Deaf in St.
Louis, died on Aug. 22 at the Bethesda Dalworth Home in St.
Louis.
He was 96 years old and until recently had lived in University City, Mo.
At Harvard Medical School in the 1930's Dr.
Davis played a pivotal role in the development of the electroencephalograph, or EEG, which measures minute electrical changes in the brain.
The first EEG of human brain waves seen in this country was recorded from Dr.
Davis's scalp by his students.


Nobody's Collecting a Social Security Bonanza
To the Editor:
In "Social Security Gives More Than It Took In" (letter, Aug. 16), Dan Schwarcz repeats the familiar claim that what Social Security recipients contributed to the program is only a tiny fraction of what they will receive.
Such statements always assume that a dollar contributed many years ago is adequately repaid by a dollar that may not be received until many years in the future.
If Mr.
Schwarcz believes this, I have a business proposition for him.
If he pays me $5,000 now, I will pay him $500 a year for 10 years beginning 20 years from now, in 2012.
Sound like a good deal?


CHRONICLE
EVELYN LAUDER has received compliments on the photographs that have embellished her Christmas cards for the last 10 years or so.
"Sometimes people even notice that they are my photographs," said Mrs.
Lauder, who is senior corporate vice president of the Estee Lauder cosmetics company, as she prepared to show her photographs on a grander scale.
The pictures she takes on travels abroad and during visits to her country homes in New York State and in Colorado will go on exhibition tomorrow through Sept. 19 at the Holly Solomon Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, near 57th Street in Manhattan.
Proceeds will benefit her favorite cause: a breast cancer center operated by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center that is to open next month at 205 East 64th Street.


Estonia Is Reasonable On Citizenship Rules
To the Editor:
"Estonia Rattles Its Russian Residents With Its Insistence on 'Estonization' " (news article, Aug. 10) confuses the politics of survival with the politics of resentment.
About 30 percent to 40 percent of non-Estonian newcomers supported Estonia's independence in the March 3, 1991, referendum.
A similar percentage (perhaps slightly higher) can be inferred for Latvia.
In a poll of the residents of Moscow and Leningrad shortly after the August 1991 coup attempt, some 70 percent supported Baltic independence.
The reason for the smaller percentages among Russians in the Baltic states is that newcomers from occupying countries tend to have a disproportionate vested interest in the colonial-imperial status quo.
Many of the leaders in the Russian community in Estonia were hard-line Communists, who openly supported the August 1991 coup attempt and were against the mild reforms of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Extremists among them continue to call for Russian intervention; Paul Goble gives some recent examples in "Serbian Success Echoes in Russia" (Op-Ed, Aug. 13).


Willing Suspension
NAOMI KOBRIN, a 27-year-old interior designer, always liked the soothing, rhythmic feeling of dozing off in a swaying hammock.
Two years ago, she moved into a 2,400-square-foot loft in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, where machinery to produce corrugated paper had once been made.
There, Ms.
Kobrin found an industrial relic: a bridge crane, two I-beams with a wheeled device to transport machinery across the loft.
In the crane, Ms.
Kobrin found the urban equivalent of two trees from which to suspend a hammock.


Comedy Troupe Makes It Up As It Goes
Campaign '92 is shaping up nicely for Chicago City Limits, the improvisational comedy group that has been based in New York City for the last decade.
True, Ross Perot dropped out of the race, dealing a severe comic blow, but the two main candidates look as if they will generate enough material to sustain the company's "Unconventional Wisdom" show, devoted to the absurdities of the political olympics.


R. T. Wellington Jr.; Wine Expert Was 39
Raymond Thomas Wellington Jr., an authority on wines who played a major role in food and wine education in New York City and beyond, died Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old.
Mr.
Wellington died from complications related to AIDS, his companion, Ed McCarthy, said.


The President and Topic A
The economy remains overwhelmingly the most important issue in the election campaign, yet President Bush has ducked it.
Today he has the chance -- perhaps his last -- to propose a credible plan for recovery.
So far, Mr.
Bush has minimized the current stagnation, urging the public to look ahead to the recovery that he asserts is just around the corner.
Or he has tried to change the subject and focus on Congressional gridlock and family values.
Or he has proposed mere tinkering, as though the $6 trillion American economy can be electrified by, for instance, subsidizing a handful of first-time home buyers.


Books of The Times; Name-Dropping and Star-Gazing Among the Best
Dangerous Friends At Large With Huston and Hemingway in the 50's By Peter Viertel 406 pages.
Doubleday. $24.50.
"We had great fun in Spain that year and we traveled and wrote and Hemingway took me tuna fishing and I caught four cans," Woody Allen wrote in "A Twenties Memory," his satirical version of a star-struck literary memoir.
The tone of that parody is at times inadvertently echoed by "Dangerous Friends," Peter Viertel's chatty, globe-trotting, eminently readable account of his adventures with an encyclopedic list of artists and celebrities.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  YELTSIN POSTPONES JAPAN VISIT
With a bitter territorial dispute still unresolved after months of negotiations, the Russian President canceled a trip to Japan only four days before he was to leave.
A1  APARTHEID'S VIOLENT LEGACY
As the South African Government tries to reunify into its territory the tribal homelands it created, the killing of 28 people in one homeland on Monday showed the explosive disagreement about where homelands fit in the post-apartheid order.
A1  KOHL ACKNOWLEDGES ERRORS
Addressing Parliament, the German Chancellor said he had mishandled some aspects of unification and that the process had brought more problems than he had expected.
He predicted that "for a long time" Bonn would have to spend more than $100 billion annually on the east.
A3  FRENCH VOTE UP IN THE AIR
The only thing certain about the Sept. 20 referendum on the European union treaty is that the outcome is uncertain.
The latest polls show supporters and opponents evenly split, with a large percentage of probably voters undecided.
A3  IRAN SAID TO SEND ARMS TO BOSNIA
Western officials said that in the first documented evidence of support from an Islamic country to the Muslim-dominated Government of Bosnia, a planeload of Iranian arms and military personnel had been intercepted in Croatia.
A10  MUSLIMS ACCUSED IN U.N.
ATTACK
The head of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Sarajevo said that Muslim militiamen were responsible for the attack on a United Nations supply convoy Tuesday that killed two French officers and wounded five.
A11  INDICTMENTS IN UGANDA ARMS CASE
A senior aide to the President of Uganda and four other people were indicted on charges that they had illegally tried to export antitank missiles and launchers to Uganda.
Two of the men were also accused of illegally trying to sell helicopter parts to Libya.
A10  RABIN FLEXIBLE ON GOLAN
The Israel Prime Minister strongly suggested that Israel was willing to return at least part of the annexed Golan Heights for peace with one of its Arab enemies.
A8  CHINA TALKS TOUGH ON U.S.
TRADE
Jolting already strained relations, China's Government-controlled press agency said China was ready to retaliate with punitive tariffs if the United States restricted the import of Chinese-made goods.
A15  Waterford Journal: Surviving the shattered boom in crystal.
A4  National A16-21, B8  CLINTON PRESENTS A WELFARE PLAN
Urging an "end to welfare as we know it," Governor Clinton proposed a $6-billion-a-year program of job training and education for recipients of public assistance.
A1
Clinton pointed to a dearth of Jews in high Administration posts.  A20
Clinton and the draft may yet become a big Republican issue.
A20  NOT AGAIN, BUSH SAYS OF TAX RISE
Campaigning in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, the President attributed the "lousy" state of the economy to what he described as a stubborn Congress and said he would not agree to increase taxes again, "ever." A1
In New Jersey, Bush assailed Clinton by way of Florio.  A21
The Administration opened fire on health-care policy.  A21
Bush's new attack on Congress followed a brief, friendly respite.
A21  NEW CHAPTER IN HOUSE BANK CASE
Federal agents swept across Capitol Hill to hand-deliver the first of hundreds of letters clearing overdraft-writing lawmakers of criminal wrongdoing.
But many House members were left empty-handed.
B8  CARNES WINS CONFIRMATION
After two days of angry debate, the Senate confirmed Edward E. Carnes, an Alabama prosecutor widely known for his skills in arguing death-penalty cases, to an important Federal appeals judgeship.
A16  MANY BURDENS AT FOUR CORNERS
In the weeks since Hurricane Andrew struck, the women who serve as the leaders of Four Corners, La., have begun rebuilding.
For them, the task is virtually spiritual.
A16
A Miami TV weatherman has emerged as an unlikely hero.
A16  VICTORY FOR 'DAMNED IN THE U.S.A.'
A Federal judge ruled that a coalition of film makers and civil rights advocates had the right to distribute in the United States a British documentary about censorship in the arts.
A17  'CENTERS' FOR THE MENTALLY ILL
A survey of American jails found that more than half of them regularly hold people with serious mental disorders on trivial charges or no charges at all.
A18  WHITTLE GAINS A PARTIAL VICTORY
A California judge declined to shut down a San Jose district's operation of Channel One, the in-school news and entertainment program shown with commercials.
But the judge imposed new restrictions to make clear that neither teachers nor students can be forced to watch it.
A19  In Washington, another big-city police chief is departing.
B8  New data on American recruitment of Nazis could be at hand.
B8  Metro Digest B1  WASHINGTON HTS.
DECISION
A grand jury has cleared a New York City police officer in the fatal shooting of a drug suspect whose death in July touched off violence in Washington Heights, a top official in the District Attorney's office said.
But the District Attorney declined to announce the decision while elaborate efforts were made to stave off a repeat of the violence.
A1  WHEN FOSTER CARE WORKS
Annie and Rafael Padilla of Queens will soon adopt a 5-year-old foster child, the son of a poor, crack-addicted mother whose destructive behavior has gradually improved.
Their story is a happy ending in a foster-care system that too often fails to treat troubled children who have been abused by their parents.
A1  DEALER ADMITS G.M.
FRAUD
John McNamara, the Long Island car dealer and philanthropist, admitted that he had bilked General Motors in a $6 billion loan scheme and that he had used some of the money to bribe officials in the Town of Brookhaven.
In a plea agreement, Mr.
McNamara said he would assist in prosecuting the officials.
A1  Business Digest D1  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  The President and Topic A.  Assembly: Manhattan, Queens.
Topics: Justice beclouded.
Letters  William Safire: A smoking gun?
Jerome E. Groopman: A dangerous delusion about AIDS.
Seymour Martin Lipset: Polls don't lie.
People do.
Felicia Lamport: One more point of light.


Lloyd's of London Names a New Chief
Lloyd's of London, the troubled insurance market whose sizable losses have raised questions about its management structure, today named Peter Middleton as its chief executive, succeeding Alan Lord, who is retiring at age 63.
A former monk with a passion for motorcycles, Mr.
Middleton, 52, was until recently chief executive of the Thomas Cook Group, the Midland Bank travel subsidiary that was sold to a German investment group earlier this summer.


As Promised, Florio Vetoes a Bill Permitting Assault Weapons
After stumping the state for more than a month to build public support for his position, Gov.
Jim Florio today made good on his promise to veto a bill that would effectively repeal the state's two-year-old ban on the sale and possession of semiautomatic assault firearms.
Standing in the Hackensack High School auditorium, backed by a banner that read, "Who Owns New Jersey?," the Governor urged citizens to "say no to the National Rifle Association" and called for a statewide referendum on whether to keep or scrap the sweeping weapons ban that he pushed through the State Legislature in 1990.
The referendum would be nonbinding.


When Pain Is an Intruder at the Table
FOR elderly, arthritic or handicapped people, some objects can make eating and drinking easier.
In 1988, a show at the Museum of Modern Art, "Design for Independent Living," featured well-designed objects for people with disabilities: wheelchairs, cutlery and a milk-carton opener.
The MOMA Design Store started selling half a dozen objects designed specifically for disabled people.
This month, the store added 10 new items.


Warning From France On U.S. Wheat Subsidy
France, which has long defended the European Community's system of generous farm subsidies, warned today that President Bush's recent decision to increase subsidies for American wheat exports posed a new threat to stalled international trade talks.
A French Government spokesman said President Francois Mitterrand had told a weekly Cabinet meeting that he had written to President Bush to complain about the plan to increase American wheat subsidies by $1 billion as a way of competing with European Community grain exports.


Rabin Implies He'd Return Some of Golan to Syria
Responding to legislators' criticism of his conduct of Middle East peace negotiations, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin strongly suggested today that Israel is willing to return at least part of the Golan Heights to Syria for peace with that country.
"Our purpose is indeed to make the most of the chance," Mr.
Rabin said in Parliament.
"We are not starting from the assumption that in return for peace, we can give only peace when it comes to Syria."


All the Prints in Newsstands That Fit
GREEN newsstands, the plain flat-roofed kind that dot the New York landscape, may someday become obsolete.
Starting this winter, along the Avenue of the Americas between 4th and 57th Streets, the city's Transportation Department will put up six newsstands in a pilot program.
The perforated steel structures, which will have peaked roofs and will cost $20,000 each, were designed by Patsy Norvell, an artist, and Frances Halsband, an architect, both of whom work in Manhattan.


Democracy vs. Dictator in Apartheid 'Homeland'
The make-believe country of Ciskei has a shiny "international" airport capable of landing a Boeing 747, in case one ever attempts to visit this curious figment of apartheid.
It has 846,000 inhabitants who were not consulted in 1981 when they were stripped of their South African citizenship and gerrymandered into one of 10 tribal homelands to protect white control of the wealthy remainder of the country.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.13
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
5.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.95
5.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.80
5.74
7.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.24
7.21
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.38
8.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.23
6.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


China Threatens U.S. With Trade Reprisals
In yet another jolt to strained Chinese-American relations, the Government-controlled press agency said today that China was prepared to retaliate with punitive tariffs if the United States carried out a threat to restrict the import of Chinese-made goods.
Quoting what it said were authoritative foreign trade officials, the New China News Agency said that China would raise tariffs sharply on $4 billion in products China bought from the United States last year.
These might include chemicals, automobiles, computers, medical equipment and commercial jets.


William Barrett, 78, a Professor And Interpreter of Existentialism
William Barrett, one of the foremost American interpreters of the philosophy of existentialism and a leading chronicler of the post-World War II generation of New York intellectuals, died on Tuesday at the Tarrytown Hall Nursing Home in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 78 years old.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, said his son-in-law, Gary La Rue, with whom he lived in North Tarrytown in recent years.


Bay Area Still Has a Chance
Bill White, the National League president, disclosed today that the city of San Francisco still has a chance to keep the Giants.
"I will accept an offer from people in San Francisco and then the league will have to decide what to do," White told a news conference after a meeting of league owners.
"I would pass it to the ownership committee, and that offer would be compared with the offer from St. Petersburg."
White said he had received no bid from a San Francisco group but expected one.
"It must be a competitive bid," he said.
The president said he personally had no preference.
"All we're doing is making sure the people in San Francisco have an opportunity to keep the club there," he said.


David Hyatt, at 76; A Former President Of Interfaith Group
David Hyatt, a former president of the National Conference of Christians and Jews, died Tuesday at Mount Zion Hospital in San Francisco, his hometown.
He was 76 years old.
He died of complications of throat cancer, said his wife, Lillian.


Clinton: Getting People Off Welfare
The Clinton campaign yesterday began broadcasting its second commercial since the Republican National Convention.
The campaign said it purchased $1 million of broadcast time in 10 states for the 30-second advertisement, but it refused to name the states.
It said about a third of the money would be spent in the South.
ON THE SCREEN Opens with these words against plain background: "The Clinton Plan. Welfare to Work." Switches to image of Gov.
Bill Clinton in a jacket and tie leaning on his office desk.
As Mr.
Clinton discusses welfare, the camera zooms in for a close-up, and these lines appear on the screen: "End welfare as we know it," "Provide education, training and child care," and "Those who are able must go to work."


Polls Continue To Vary
Five recent nationwide polls show a continuation of the variability seen in surveys taken since the Republican National Convention was held in mid-August.
A Harris Poll taken Aug. 26-Sept. 1 found Gov.
Bill Clinton leading by five points.
Fifty percent of 904 likely voters supported Mr.
Clinton to 45 percent for Mr.
Bush.


Jets' Plan of Action: To Reinstate the Run
The Jets' rushing attack was sidetracked last week when the Atlanta Falcons went up by 17-0 in the first quarter.
Forced to throw the football to get back into the game, the Jets finished with only 68 yards rushing on 18 attempts (3.8 yards a carry).


Democrats Say: One of the Above; New York Senate Primary Leaves Voters Angry but Unsure
Anna Jaeger, a registered Democrat who lost her job as a waitress last year, has not decided which of the four United States Senate candidates to vote for in her party's primary next Tuesday.
While the most important issues to her are "jobs, jobs, jobs," she is not sure there are any major differences between the candidates on how to create them.
So she plans to turn on her television set tonight and watch as Robert Abrams, Geraldine A. Ferraro, Elizabeth Holtzman and the Rev.
Al Sharpton debate.


N.H.L. in Court on TV
The National Hockey League and SportsChannel America faced off acrimoniously in court yesterday as the N.H.L. defended its right to sell cable television rights for the next five years to ESPN despite SCA's claim that it was cut out of bidding.
SCA filed suit in State Supreme Court Friday after the league and ESPN reached accord, charging that the league had not provided it with the right to match the ESPN offer, a provision that SCA said existed in its $5.5 million, 1991-92 contract with the N.H.L.
Justice Shirley Fingerhood did not extend her temporary injunction barring the N.H.L. from pursuing any more television deals.
The temporary injunction expired yesterday.


INSIDE
New House-Bank Chapter
Federal agents delivered letters to some overdraft-writing lawmakers, clearing them of wrongdoing.
But others were left empty-handed.
Page B8.
Carnes Wins Confirmation
The Senate confirmed to a Federal appeals judgeship an Alabama prosecutor known for his skills in arguing death-penalty cases.
Page A16.
Florio Vetoes Gun Bill
Governor Florio made good on his promise to veto a bill that would effectively repeal New Jersey's ban on assault weapons.
Page B1.
Cable Bill Compromise
House and Senate negotiators agreed on new licensing rules for cable television systems, a step toward reregulation of the cable industry.
Page D1.


Four Singular Points Of View
AT least in principle, shopping outside New York City implies a more leisurely pace.
But the intensity of purpose and single-mindedness of four new shops on Long Island and in Westchester County are anything but laid-back.
It is the enthusiasm of their owners that makes them particularly appealing, even to the most jaded furniture and accessories buyer.
Salesmanship is often mixed with philosophy, and after 10 minutes, these shopkeepers may feel like old friends.
In the horse country of upper Westchester County, where antiques stores can be a bit stuffy, Sandra Kasper and her partner, John Montague Massengale, take a different approach: their America's Best and Bedford Green Antiques in Bedford pairs pricey English antiques and less costly American reproductions.


Calendar: Manuscripts, Architecture and Glass
Collection Highlights
Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street; (212) 685-0008
.


Head of SUNY at Purchase to Retire in June
Dr.
Sheldon N. Grebstein, who has headed the State University campus here during a decade of budget cuts, announced today that he would retire as president in July.
Dr.
Grebstein, who is 65 years old, said he was leaving neither "in defeat nor in protest," but to make time for new projects.
A specialist in 20th-century American fiction, he said he hoped to teach literature as a faculty member here.


A Lot More Than Dust Can Stay Under the Bed
Bob and Lois Anderson want to help all those people whose closets look like Fibber McGee's, or in the case of New Yorkers, whose entire apartments seem to be the size of a closet.
Mr.
Anderson has invented the Bedroom Organizer, a bed frame that can hold an ironing board, skis, a broom or even a ladder, depending on the size of the bed.
The organizer adjusts to fit any standard American-made bed.
It has three drawers on each side and a six-foot-long storage area in the middle.


Cable Bill Agreement Is Reached
In a big step toward reregulation of the cable television industry, House and Senatenegotiators agreed today on a measure that would require local cable systems to negotiate licenses from local broadcast stations to retransmit their signals.
The change could provide broadcasters with hundreds of millions of dollars in royalties.


Market Place; Growth Is Harder For Safety-Kleen
WHEN the Safety-Kleen Corporation disclosed on Aug. 5 that it was guilty of large-scale permit violations in its storage of liquid hazardous wastes in Puerto Rico, investors hammered its stock.
Shares ended the day down $3, to $27.625, on the Big Board as Wall Street worried about the potential for fines and cleanup costs.
But some analysts immediately figured that investors had overreacted to an isolated problem in a small if highly profitable corner of Safety-Kleen's liquid waste recycling empire.
Vishnu Swarup of Prudential Securities, for example, quickly changed his "hold" rating on the company's stock to a "buy." For many, though, the incident simply provided another reason to advise clients to avoid the company, based in Elgin, Ill., unless they were taking a long-term perspective.


A Good Time Was Had
To The Home Section:
I am not in any way associated with Ameriflora '92 except as a visitor.
I live less than three miles from the site of Ameriflora '92 and have visited the flower show eight times.


Mobbed in Milwaukee: Yount Gets No. 3,000
Engulfed by a sense of drama that exceeded his expectations and embraced by the frenzied affection of his fans, Robin Yount of the Milwaukee Brewers tonight became the 17th player in major league history to reach 3,000 hits.
After failing to get the ball out of the infield in three frustrating times at bat, Yount hit a line-drive single off Cleveland pitcher Jose Mesa, over the head of second baseman Carlos Baerga and into right-center field, beginning a celebration that stopped the game for nine minutes in the seventh inning.


Topics of The Times; Justice Beclouded
When Judge Lee Sarokin of U.S.
District Court in New Jersey issued a key ruling against tobacco manufacturers in February, he began with a thorough denunciation of the industry.
He declared that "despite some rising pretenders, the tobacco industry may be the king of concealment and disinformation."
That may be so, but the judge was far out of line to say it.
He had been assigned to preside over an eventual trial on the very issue he opined about so colorfully: whether cigarette makers had conspired to withhold information about the dangers of smoking.
The U.S.
Court of Appeals rightly pulled the judge, able and hard-working as he is, off the case.


IRAN SAID TO SEND ARMS TO BOSNIANS
In the first documented evidence of military support by an Islamic country to the Muslim-dominated Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatian officials have intercepted a planeload of Iranian arms and personnel, Western officials said today.
The officials said that according to reports from the region, an Iranian Boeing 747 flew to Zagreb, the Croatian capital, on Friday.
Its ostensible mission was to deliver relief supplies for overland delivery to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But when the plane was inspected, Croatian officials discovered 4,000 guns, more than a million rounds of ammunition and 20 to 40 Iranians huddled in the back.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Health Care Policy; Administration Accuses Democrats of Blocking Bush's Health Plan
The Bush Administration complained today that House Democrats had blocked action on President Bush's proposal to guarantee health insurance coverage for virtually all Americans, even as Administration officials accused Gov.
Bill Clinton of equivocating on health-care policy.
Not until February of this year did the President offer a detailed plan to help the 35 million Americans who lack health insurance.
But he and his Administration are evidently hoping to make up for the delay by putting Democrats, especially Mr.
Clinton, the party's Presidential nominee, on the defensive.


Critic's Choice/Art; Trove of Wit And Grace From Africa
There is no more rewarding how of sculpture in New York City at the moment than "Royal Art of Benin From the Perls Collection: Treasures From an African Kingdom" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
One of the finest private gatherings of its kind, the collection was recently donated to the Met, and nearly all of its 163 items can be seen together in this exhibition, which closes on Sunday.
Western art historians have long compared Benin metal sculpture with that of the Italian Renaissance.
Many of these objects, created in Nigeria between the 14th and 19th centuries, are of cast brass and represent the stylized "portraits" of Kings and Queen Mothers, in whose persons divine and earthly powers meet.
With their immense eyes, swollen cheeks and fantastic ornamental detail they have an extraordinary vivacity, and they are examples of a familiar esthetic paradox: political power visually expressed through extreme material refinement.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH
In a speech to the Detroit Economic Club yesterday
"The American people have just completed the greatest mission in the lifetime of our country, the triumph of Democratic capitalism over imperial communism. And today this year, for the first time since December of 1941, the United States is not engaged in a war, hot or cold. And throughout history, at the close of prolonged and costly wars, victors have confronted the problem of securing a new basis for peace and prosperity.


Sony Introduces Recordable Disk System
The Sony Corporation today introduced the product lineup and pricing for the recordable music disk system that it hopes will become the heir to its wildly successful Walkman line of portable cassette players.
Sony said it would begin selling three different models of its mini-disk system in Japan on Nov. 1 and another by early December.


Diner's Journal
Patricio on Staten Island
For years I have been searching for a restaurant on Staten Island that would give residents of the other boroughs an excuse to ride the ferry over for dinner.
Patricio, a short ride by taxi or by Staten Island Rapid Transit (three stops to the Clifton station) from the ferry terminal, is not quite that compelling, but it's probably as good as it gets on the northern end of the island.


New York City Firefighters Given 4.5% Raise in 30-Month Accord
In a settlement that Dinkins administration officials said they hoped would set a pattern for coming labor negotiations, City Hall and the firefighters union agreed on a tentative contract yesterday that calls for a 4.5 percent raise.
The increase is roughly the same as what the police and other city workers won in 1990.
But since it runs for 30 months, or twice as long as most of New York City's other union contracts, some city officials described it as the equivalent of two 15-month deals, the second without a raise.


Lawyer, Hereafter Broken Heart, Sues to Mend It
In a year when lawyers are fodder for just about everyone else, Maria Dillon has another beef with the profession.
Because her former fiance is so much the lawyer, she contends, her broken courtship has ended up in court.
Last month, precisely a year after the couple had met, nine months after her fiance had placed a 1.06 carat diamond ring on her finger, and only two days before they were to have wed, Frank D. Zaffere 3d, a corporate lawyer here, sued Ms.
Dillon for breaking off their engagement weeks earlier.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Facing Draft Questions, Clinton Avoids the Press
Stung by recurring questions about his credibility, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas took refuge today behind the unblinking eye of a camera and the long-distance questions of television anchors in Detroit to try to control the coverage of his campaign.
The Clinton campaign, which is normally eager to have the candidate appear before the press to criticize President Bush whenever it looks like the Republicans might dominate news coverage, instead canceled a news briefing as well as plans to hold a news conference.


Critic's Notebook; For Adult Pop Music, A Quiet Sonic Boom
"WHAT have you heard that's good?"
It is a question that this critic, who has been reviewing records for more than two decades, is invariably asked at gatherings where the guests are fortysomething and the conversation turns to popular music.
Those who ask are usually people who have bought Paul Simon's and Bonnie Raitt's last two albums and who feel a nagging sense that there must be more adult pop music of quality out there if only they could find it.


Youth Denies He Killed Man In Crown Hts.
The youth accused of killing a visiting rabbinical student during disturbances in Crown Heights last year testified in a pretrial hearing yesterday that he neither stabbed nor participated in the assault on the student.
The 17-year-old defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., also said that the police did not find the murder weapon in his pocket, as the police have said.
Mr.
Nelson said that he first saw the bloodied pocket knife when officers showed it to the student, Yankel Rosenbaum, 29, who was lying bleeding on the hood of a car.


Kit Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ex-House Post Office Manager Indicted
A House post office manager was indicted today for conspiring with legislative officials to use the mailing service for "personal and campaign services," including cashing checks for House employees.
The indictment did not say precisely what role any lawmaker played in the conspiracy, nor did it directly charge any of them with a crime, but it hinted that they sought and received financial favors.


'High Powered' President for Tektronix
Delbert W. Yocam, a former chief operating officer at Apple Computer Inc., agreed yesterday to join Tektronix Inc. as its president and chief operating officer.
Tektronix, based in Wilsonville, Ore., is best known for its high-end printers and for graphics work stations for the scientific, engineering and graphics arts industries.


A New Stance for Doubleday
As the first baseball club owners meeting in the post-Fay Vincent era ended, one owner of a New York team came away with his qualms about remaining in baseball eliminated while another was still in limbo.
Nelson Doubleday, co-owner of the Mets and a supporter of the deposed commissioner, had indicated as recently as Tuesday that he might consider selling his 50 percent share of the team in wake of the overthrow.
But after a three-and-a-half-hour meeting with his 27 fellow owners today, Doubleday's anger had greatly subsided.


Trade Pact Job Losses Put as High as 150,000
Labor Secretary Lynn Martin conceded that the North American Free Trade Agreement could put up to 150,000 Americans out of work, while Democrats asserted that the President's plan to help them was inadequate.
Under persistent questioning by members of the Senate Finance Committee, Ms.
Martin became the first Administration official to provide an estimate of American jobs that would be lost with the elimination of trade barriers among Canada, Mexico and the United States.


ROCKWELL INTRODUCES A PHONE CALL-DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
The Rockwell International Corporation, which has aerospace interests and also makes specialized telephone systems for corporate customers, said yesterday that it was introducing an all-in-one unit that incorporates the features of such widely used telecommunications hardware and software as automatic call distributors and voice mail processors.
One noteworthy feature is a program that tells incoming callers who must wait for the next available operator how long their wait will be, based on the number of calls at that time.
Travel agencies, airline reservation desks, government offices and other users of such systems often keep people waiting, giving them no idea of how long they have to hold on.
Alerting a caller that a wait will be, say, 90 seconds, is likely to reduce hang-ups.


Bridgford Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Interstate Bakeries Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 22


For Assembly: Brooklyn, the Bronx
Here are our recommendations for New York Assembly races in Brooklyn and the Bronx where victory in Tuesday's Democratic primary will be tantamount to election.
BROOKLYN.
42d District
.
The seven-term veteran Rhoda Jacobs has worked hard and well, for instance pressing legislation to help the elderly and homeless, and has earned re-election.
Still, two challengers offer promise -- Edward Roberts, a lawyer, and Clarence Robertson, formerly an official in the Brooklyn District Attorney's office.


4 Senate Challengers: Excerpts From the Democrats' Debate
Following are excerpts from last night's Democratic Senate debate, as transcribed by The New York Times:  Taxes and the Middle Class
Q Considering the state of the economy, are there any circumstances under which you would agree to a tax increase on middle-class working Americans?


Amrep Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Art; Magritte And His Defiance Of Life
"IF the spectator finds that my paintings are a kind of defiance of 'common sense,' he realizes something obvious," said Rene Magritte, who is the subject of a stimulating retrospective that opens tomorrow at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"I want nevertheless to add that for me the world is a defiance of common sense."
In a way, Magritte himself defied common sense, or at least conventional expectations.


At Last, a Bush Package
President Bush: Welcome to the debate.
Yesterday, almost four years after taking office, he issued an "Agenda for American Renewal" that comprises a coherent statement of economic objectives and policies.
It calls for making the U.S. a strong exporter, educating disadvantaged children, sharpening competitiveness, cutting government waste, helping the poor and protecting workers.
There's certainly nothing wrong with that list of priorities.
And the program's coherence will help frame a more constructive campaign debate.
Yet while sensible, the President's agenda is also deficient in two ways.


David Hyatt, Head Of Interfaith Group In 1970's, Dies at 76
David Hyatt, a former president of the National Conference of Christians and Jews, died on Tuesday at Mount Zion Hospital in San Francisco, his hometown.
He was 76 years old.
He died of complications of throat cancer, his wife, Lillian, said.
Mr.
Hyatt, who as a youth had witnessed cross burnings by the Ku Klux Klan in his native Ohio, joined the National Conference in 1954 as national director of public relations.
He was promoted to vice president for public information in 1958, executive vice president in 1965 and president in 1973.
He retired 10 years ago.


No Place for the Drug-Addicted Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
"The 'Wild Man' and the Law" (editorial, Aug. 29) concludes that the purported conflict between civil liberties and public safety in the case of Larry Hogue, a mentally ill man addicted to crack, is a red herring.
If the reports of Mr.
Hogue's violent behavior are true, he probably has met the standards for involuntary commitment under New York's mental health laws on several occasions.


This Time, Namath Will Model for N.F.L.
Deciding it was time to hire a well-known former player to serve as a spokesman, NFL Properties, the National Football League's licensing arm, signed JOE NAMATH to a 10-year agreement yesterday.


Midlantic Hires Lintas Marketing
The Midlantic Corporation of Edison, N.J., has named Lintas Marketing Communications in New York to handle its corporate and retail banking accounts, with billings of $2 million to $3 million.
The account was previously divided between Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc. in New York and Elkman Advertising in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.


Bachanalia Festival
The fourth annual Bachanalia Festival is to begin this weekend with two free concerts at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, in Morningside Heights.
Tomorrow night at 7:30, the Festival Orchestra is to present the New York premiere of the actor and jazz musician Michael Moriarty's Symphony for Strings, conducted by the composer, as well as three concertos by Bach, conducted by the festival's director, Nina Beilina, who will also be a violin soloist.
On Sunday at 3:30 P.M. there is to be a chamber-music concert featuring a Concerto for Clarinet and Piano Trio by Boris Tischenko and works by Shostakovich and Bach, with Ms.
Beilina, Mr.
Tischenko, the clarinetist Julius Milkis, the pianist Nina Kogan, the cellist Boris Rayskin and the violinist Basia Danilow.
The festival will end with two concerts next Friday and Sept. 19.
Admission is free.
Information: (212) 316-7563.


Newark Police Shootings Revive Calls for a Civilian Review Board
In the first organized citizen response to recent police shootings of young car-theft suspects, a new coalition of community groups led by Amiri Baraka, the poet, pressed today for a civilian police complaint review board.
Mr.
Baraka said the coalition would begin to circulate petitions today to present to Mayor Sharpe James and the City Council "in the wake of a car theft panic" that has seen escalating clashes between car-theft suspects and the police.


Two Jets Quarterbacks Are Making Quite a Team
Browning Nagle is all of 24 years old, with a grand total of one National Football League start, although that was an impressive near-record performance.
So perhaps he was merely being premature today when he thought of the type of defense he will face Sunday in Pittsburgh -- and for the rest of the season.


Trade Pact Won't Cut Illegal Immigration
To the Editor:
In "We Gain. Mexico Gains. Canada Gains." (Op-Ed, Aug. 14), Michael Boskin expresses the widely held view that improving the Mexican economy through a Free Trade Agreement would reduce pressures for Mexican illegal immigration across our southern border.


A Better Bargaining Hand for N.F.L. Players
The verdict in favor of the players in the McNeil v.
National Football League trial vastly ups the ante for baseball-like free agency in football, but much will depend on how United States District Court Judge David Doty frames his injunction against the league and the league's certain appeal.
"The judge could order a system of free agency, but I think he'll come up with a system that looks like what the players wanted, which was free agency after four years of service," said Gary Roberts, vice dean of the Tulane University Law School.


Auto Dealer Plea Deal Is Called Good for U.S.
The plea bargain in which a Long Island car dealer admitted bilking General Motors of $6 billion and promised to help prosecute public officials he said he bribed was cited by criminal lawyers and other legal experts yesterday as an apparently good deal for Federal prosecutors.
The experts said the Government gave away only a conditional pledge to recommend leniency and may have opened a wedge against corruption in Suffolk County and perhaps in the auto industry as well.
The lawyers and legal experts said the value of the bargain would ultimately depend on the extent and quality of the evidence provided by the car dealer, John McNamara, who said he had bribed planning, zoning and other officials in the Town of Brookhaven, a member of the Port Jefferson Planning Board and a State Transportation Department official.


Corrections
An obituary on Sunday about Jack Ossofsky, retired chief executive of the National Council on the Aging, omitted the names of some survivors.
Besides his wife, Eula, Mr.
Ossofsky is survived by two sons, Robert, of the Bronx, and Stephen Walden of Churchville, Va.; three daughters, Mindy Homer of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., Patricia Harrison of Boothbay Harbor, Me., and Paula Thompson of Yarmouth, Me.; and eight grandchildren.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY WASHINGTON HEIGHTS: BEHIND THE DECISION
The claims of two sisters who said they saw a police officer beat and fatally shoot a Dominican immigrant crumbled under the weight of physical evidence and their own contradictions, leading a grand jury to clear the officer, the Manhattan District Attorney said.
He gave the explanation as he issued a detailed 45-page review of an investigation in the July death, which touched off several days of violence in Washington Heights.
A1.
A summary of the report.
B2.


At Chapel Hill, Athletes Suddenly Become Activists
At the University of North Carolina, athletes and their accomplishments are taken seriously.
The school is about to begin celebrating its bicentennial and, along with its reputation as one of the nation's most illustrious public universities, it has a proud history of exploits by such stars as Michael Jordan and Lawrence Taylor.
But today, athletes were at the forefront on the North Carolina campus for a different reason, as at least a dozen black football players led approximately 1,000 students on a march to the office of Chancellor Paul Hardin to ask for the construction of a black cultural center on the campus.
A letter presented to Hardin said, "Failure to respond to this deadline will leave the people no other choice but to organize towards direct action," which some players speculated could include boycotts of games.


Special Prosecutor Sought On Justice Dept. Software
The 21 Democratic members of the House Judiciary Committee asked the Justice Department today to seek appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate accusations that senior department officials stole a computer company's program in the mid-1980's to benefit their friends and associates.
The request gives Attorney General William P. Barr 30 days to seek an independent court-appointed prosecutor or to explain why he does not want one.


Fischer Just Manages a Draw in Game 6 of Match
After more than seven hours of hard-fought play, Bobby Fischer barely managed to survive with a draw yesterday in Game 6 of his exhibition chess match with Boris Spassky in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
It was a matter of error balancing error in very demanding positions.
Spassky had put Fischer under pressure from the beginning, but there was indeed a way out, if only Fischer had been able to find it.
Instead, he defended weakly and stumbled into an endgame where he was a vital pawn down.
In the game's next stage, he struggled to keep Spassky from winning, but his effort would have been useless, had not Spassky committed errors at crucial moments.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon:
Closing This Weekend
"WALT WHITMAN: IN LIFE OR DEATH FOREVER," New York Public Library.
More than 150 manuscripts, books and photographs from the library's collection.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 221-7676.
"STEP LIVELY: THE ART OF THE FOLK CANE," Museum of American Folk Art, 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, mid-Manhattan.
About 183 hand-carved American canes, dating from the 19th century.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 977-7298.
"COLOMBIA: CONTEMPORARY IMAGES," Queens Museum of Art, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
A display of 68 works by 35 Colombian artists.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $2; $1 for students, the elderly and children ages 5 to 12; free for those under age 5.
Information: (718) 592-5555.
Closing Next Weekend
"GIFTS AND ACQUISITIONS IN CONTEXT," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Upper East Side.
More than 70 items commemorating the museum's 60th anniversary.
Through Sept. 20.
Hours: Wednesday and Friday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


District Attorney's Findings Regarding the Police Killing of Jose Garcia
Following is the text of the introduction by District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau to his report on the investigation into the fatal shooting of Jose Garcia.
Morgenthau's Summary
The investigation into the death of Jose Garcia began with two conflicting accounts of the events that preceded and precipitated the fatal shooting.


Diversified Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Stifel Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


William Leisher, 51, Paintings Conservator
William R. Leisher, a paintings conservator and the executive director of the department of conservation at the Art Institute of Chicago, died on Wednesday at his home in Evanston, Ill.
He was 51 years old.
He died of cancer, said Eileen Harakal, the executive director of public affairs at the institute.


Young &amp; Rubicam Gets Mixed News
As Young &amp; Rubicam New York watched one account go into review, it was reported that another client was likely to award the agency additional business.
The Citizen Watch Company said that it had placed its account, with billings estimated at $10 million, in a review after four years.
In a telephone interview, Michael S. Conner, vice president of marketing for Citizen in Lyndhurst, N.J., confirmed reports of the review this week in Advertising Age and Adweek, adding that the company was "in need of a fresh look at the business creatively."


Balloonists Will Try Again to Circle Globe
Larry Newman, captain of a team of aeronauts who hope to make the first nonstop balloon flight around the world, announced this week that their Earthwinds balloon would be ready to launch from Reno Stead Airport in Nevada on Nov. 15.
A previous attempt by the group to launch Earthwinds from Akron, Ohio, was abandoned last February when surface winds became too strong to handle the huge balloon on the ground.
Winds at the Nevada site are expected to be much milder for a longer period, and Mr.
Newman said weather would be favorable from Nov. 15 until the end of February.


DVI Health Services Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Tokyo Stocks
Japanese stocks closed sharply lower today.
The Nikkei average of 225 issues was off 800.78 points, or 4.24 percent, to 18.107.
Brokers attributed today's drop to index-related selling.
On Thursday, the Nikkei rose 32.92 points.


Gunmen in Italy Kill Cousins Of an Informer Against Mob
Five days after he police arrested a suspected Mafia boss, gunmen in Sicily today shot dead two brothers related to an informer who had earlier helped the authorities identify other mobsters, the police said.
The killings, in a villa near Catania, were thought to be part of an internal Mafia feud or were intended as a warning to other potential Mafia turncoats.


CHRONICLE
In retrospect, DAVID BAKALAR says that there was something presumptuous about telling GEORGE SEGAL how to create a sculpture.
But it was a request that in a way transformed Mr.
Bakalar, a former electronics executive, into a sculptor himself.
On Wednesday, his work goes on display at the Camillos Kouros Gallery, 23 East 73d Street in Manhattan.


On My Mind; Movies, Drugs, Elections
The movie stuck in my throat.
It was not just that I and everybody else in the movie theater were being treated as political morons -- captive to left-wing paranoia about America and putting out $7.50 a head for the privilege.
"Bob Roberts" -- big Labor Day lines in New York -- is about how a slick guitar-playing millionaire right-wing candidate for Senate, next stop White House, fakes an assassination attempt and gets away with it.


I.M.F. Urges U.S. to Lift Taxes and Slash Deficit
The International Monetary Fund's executive board criticized the United States today for doing too little to cut its budget deficit and said that tax increases would be needed.
Coming one day after President Bush vowed never again to agree to raise taxes, the fund's annual report "stressed the importance of fully exploiting the window of opportunity immediately after the elections" to make progress in cutting the deficit.


Ever a Litigious Lot
To the Editor:
In regard to the Republican campaign's attack on trial lawyers and the feeling it has engendered, as reported in "Selling Voters on Bush, Nemesis of Lawyers" (front page, Aug. 31), that Americans are "sue happy," it might interest the voters to know that one of the reasons the British Parliament passed the Stamp Act in 1765 requiring the purchase of a stamp to be attached to every legal document, from marriage licenses to the filing of lawsuits, was that the colonists were a litigious lot.
George Grenville, the Prime Minister, thought this would surely replenish the British exchequer.
Being sue happy seems to be part of the American heritage.
BARBARA SAPINSLEY  New York, Aug. 31, 1992
The writer is author of "Taxes" (New York, 1986), for high schools.


BORLAND'S QUATTRO FOR WINDOWS ON SALE THIS MONTH
Borland International Inc. said yesterday that its long-delayed version of its Quattro Pro for Windows spreadsheet will be available this month.
In an attempt to win market share, Borland will sell the program to users of competing programs for $99.
People using Borland's older Quattro Pro, for DOS-based computers, can buy the new program for $79.
The list price for everyone else will be $495.


September Rubies Ripe for Harvest
THERE was a time, in the mists of the middle-aged memory of at least some former children, when summer's end was an eagerly awaited seasonal moment of hidden treasure.
Those were the days before air-conditioning imprisoned people indoors, before movies and records needed warning labels and before earnest mothers and fathers confined a prescribed period of parenting into something called "quality time."
Early autumn meant the start of football, of course.
And school.
And leaf raking.
And more recently the first Christmas sales.
But there was once one special September Saturday, possibly two if fall's falling rains were tardy.


Autotote Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Abroad at Home; Loop The Loop
When Bill Clinton snapped at reporters this week that instead of going on and on about his Vietnam draft status they should press George Bush about his role in the Iran-contra affair, Clinton supporters should have been uneasy.
It is not a good sign when a candidate starts attacking the press.
But on Iran-contra, Governor Clinton had a point.
We in the press have been dismally negligent in failing to pin Mr.
Bush down on what he knew and did -- negligent for the last six years.


Concern in the Season of Jocklock
Beats me.
People who only last week called Fay Vincent an arrogant, conniving back-stabber now proclaim him the Man of La Mancha.
What a comeback.
It may be solace for Vincent, but it leaves me confused.
I just can't get my arms around this one.
It's that "best interests of baseball" mandate that brushes me back.
Who is this "baseball" they are referring to -- the owners, the players, the umpires, the fans, the news media, the television stations, the sponsors?
Is that a monolithic constituency?
Of whom did Vincent think he was commissioner?
If baseball is still the national pastime, is this all a metaphor of national crisis?
Do I really have to care?


Campbell Soup Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  ISRAEL AND SYRIA TALK OF PEACE
Israeli officials said the longtime enemies are negotiating the terms of a document on principles for a peace settlement.
The plan would involve the return to Syria of at least part of the Golan Heights, which Israel captured in 1967.
A1  U.N.
WANTS MORE TROOPS IN BOSNIA
In a move that would greatly expand the size of the United Nations peacekeeping force in the wartorn country, Secretary General Boutros-Ghali formally proposed the addition of more than 5,000 NATO troops to protect relief convoys.
A1


U.N. Will Add NATO Troops To Bosnia Force
The United Nations moved today to greatly expand the size of its peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina through the addition of at least 5,000 NATO troops to protect convoys of food and medicine being sent to needy people throughout the wartorn country.
The enlarged force would also be available to escort detainees, whom both sides agreed to release at a recent London peace conference, as they are transported to places of refuge in neighboring countries.


Ailing, Sure, but Fit for a Championship
The four women's semifinalists are on a myriad of missions, but the one who says she is the sickest after five rounds of United States Open duty is probably the least fragile of the lot.
The defending Open champion, Monica Seles, with a croaking throat and a screaming racquet, is already assured of retaining her No. 1 ranking because of Steffi Graf's quarterfinal demise.
And she's inching closer to a third Grand Slam title for 1992, the mirror image of the feat she achieved last year.


Ferraro Releases Tax Returns for 2 Missing Years to Offset Attacks by Rivals
Conceding that her refusal to release two years of tax returns had given her rivals an issue that was helping to erode her lead for the Democratic nomination for the Senate, Geraldine A. Ferraro reversed herself yesterday and said she was adding her 1984 and 1985 personal and family business tax filings to the dozen years of financial records she had previously released.
She said attacks on her integrity were "absolutely" hurting, draining votes from her to one of her opponents in the race, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, who is second in most polls.


Jolo Journal; When the Faithful Tempt the Serpent
In a small frame sanctuary on the lip of a ravine outside Jolo, the Church of the Lord Jesus held its 20th annual homecoming over the Labor Day weekend, complete with strychnine drinking and snake handling, followed by dinner.
The small band of faithful, several dozen at the most, had come from as far away as Alabama and Georgia to participate in the three days of signs and miracles, and nobody seemed to go away disappointed.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Plan Promoted In 5-Minute Ad
The Bush-Quayle campaign purchased five minutes of air time on four television networks last night to broadcast a new advertisement in which the President promotes the package of economic proposals that he announced earlier in the day.
Although he offers few details, Mr.
Bush, sitting behind his desk in the Oval Office and speaking directly into the camera, outlines the program in broad strokes.


Family-Leave Bill Sent to President
After a debate marked by emotion, sarcasm and political one-upmanship, the House passed and sent to President Bush today legislation that would require employers to give workers 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family and personal medical emergencies.
Despite a threatened veto, Democrats and some Republicans said that passing the measure was essential if lawmakers believed in "family values." But the 241-to-161 vote was far short of the two-thirds majority required to override, and a White House spokeswoman, Judy Smith, said she was "confident of strength to sustain a veto."


Naylor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Review/Photography; Obsessive Investigation of Personality
With its pristine surfaces and mechanically precise rendering of space, photography would seem to be a particularly unpromising medium for Lucas Samaras to work in.
Mr.
Samaras has long specialized in psychologically charged paintings and objects that feature ornate, obsessively worked surfaces made up of hundreds of pins or nails or bits of brightly colored yarn.
But the exhibition of Mr.
Samaras's photographic works from the last two decades, at the Museum of Modern Art through Dec. 1, demonstrates how well he has managed to turn this apparently recalcitrant medium to his own ends.
The show, created with a recent gift to the museum by Robert and Gayle Greenhill, offers a comprehensive survey of Mr.
Samaras's photographic work, from his first self-portraits, made in 1969, to panoramic collages and multiple-exposure portraits of the mid-1980's.
As such, it provides a welcome opportunity to trace the development and continuity of Mr.
Samaras's interests and techniques in the medium.


New York's Senate Race; FERRARO AND FOES CLASH OVER ETHICS
The contenders for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York clashed sharply over ethics last night, as Geraldine A. Ferraro's main rivals repeatedly questioned her integrity, and she responded by vigorously challenging their own.
The exchanges -- in the candidates' first major televised debate -- came just hours after Ms.
Ferraro said that repeated questions about her personal finances by State Attorney General Robert Abrams and City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman had cost her some support.
She released two years of previously undisclosed tax returns in an effort to head off the questions.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.08
5.44
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.90
5.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.94
5.19
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.80
5.80
7.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.24
7.24
8.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.40
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.23
6.22
6.94
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Proposal On Housing Is Approved By Council
The New York City Council gave final approval to a plan to replace the historic Brighton Beach Baths in Brooklyn with a large housing development yesterday, ending a bitter, six-year-old dispute.
In other action, the Council rejected a recommendation from the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission to designate a vacant, Beaux-Arts bank building in Jamaica, Queens, as a historic site.
It was the second time since the Council gained power over landmarking decisions two years ago that it has overruled the commission.


The Big Guns Take Sides in Trade-Policy Debate
Chances are that if Warren Steibel, the producer of "Firing Line," were entrusted with organizing the Presidential debates, they would turn out to be a lot more enlightening and entertaining than they promise to be this year.
Tonight's two-hour debate on a subject that is not often honored in prime time manages to make the pros and cons of free trade, believe it or not, positively lively.
The program was taped last week at the University of Mississippi, where eight men with some knowledge of the matter gathered to argue over the proposition that "United States Industry Does Not Need Protection." ("Firing Line" does not go in for proportionate representation by sex, race or ethnic heritage, but there is plenty of variety in style as well as of opinion on display.)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; VOWING A REVIVAL, PRESIDENT SETS OUT HIS ECONOMIC PLAN
Seeking to convince the electorate that he has a coherent plan to lead the country to prosperity, President Bush today packaged his economic proposals of the last four years into what he called "a single program, a unified strategy" to revive the nation's economy.
Speaking to business leaders here, Mr.
Bush promised a broad mix of tax and spending cuts, expanded social programs and new free-trade pacts as he sought to weave a string of domestic and foreign policy steps into a strategy for a new global economy.


Raymond Hickok, 74, Executive Who Helped Develop Seat Belts
Raymond P. Hickok, who headed a family business that made men's belts and jewelry and helped develop automobile seat belts, died on Wednesday at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester.
He was 74 years old and lived in nearby Pittsford.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Score Board Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mandela Group Agrees to Meeting With de Klerk
Sobered by the massacre of its followers in the black homeland of Ciskei, the African National Congress agreed in principle tonight to a summit meeting with President F. W. de Klerk aimed at curbing violence and resuming the transition to a nonracial democracy.
The congress said the meeting between Mr. de Klerk and the congress leader, Nelson Mandela, must be preceded by advance talks and "practical actions" by the Government.


CHRONICLE
About a year and a half ago, it struck ALEXANDER S. FRIEDMAN, a mountain climber who is a senior at Princeton University, that his sport was an apt metaphor for the battle against AIDS.
Out of that notion came plans for an expedition that will benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Mr.
Friedman says he hopes it will also increase public awareness of the disease.
In June, four women and five men who are Princeton students plan to climb Mount McKinley, the highest peak in North America.
Their goal is to raise $250,000 for the foundation, known as Amfar.


Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Air Force PC Contract For Zenith
Zenith Data Systems, a division of Groupe Bull of France, has been awarded an Air Force contract estimated to be worth at least $740 million, one of the largest Government contracts for desktop computers.
The contract was originally awarded in November to two smaller companies, the Compuadd Corporation of Austin and Sysorex Information Systems Inc. of Falls Church, Va.
But that contract was canceled in January after eight companies, including Zenith Data, protested that the Government bidding process was flawed.


U.S. Says Serbian Warplanes Use Relief Flights as 'Cover'
Warplanes of the Serbian forces in Bosnia have shadowed Western relief flights to Sarajevo in recent weeks, using them as cover for military action, Bush Administration officials said today.
The United States this week lodged protests over the tactic with Radovan Karadzic, the leader of Serbs in Bosnia, and with Milan Panic, the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, the officials said.
The fact that it was made to Mr.
Panic as well as to Mr.
Karadzic reflects the Administration's belief that the shadowing could not happen without the support of Belgrade.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
Christopher Street between Seventh Avenue and Greenwich Avenue will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Christopher Street East fair.
Fourth Avenue between Fifth Street and Astor Place will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Fourth Avenue Fair.
First Avenue between Sixth and 14th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the First Avenue fair.
West End Avenue between 86th and 96th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the N.A.A.C.P. street fair.
SUNDAY
Broadway between Houston and Eighth Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Broadway festival.
Third Avenue between 14th and 34th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Lower Third Avenue fair.
Third Avenue between 68th and 96th Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Third Avenue fair.


Sage Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Year to June 30


Sounds Around Town
Culture at S.O.B.'s
Culture, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
Culture, led by Joseph Hill, sings about pain and resistance in richly somber harmonies.
It has been one of the most respected reggae bands since the 1970's; its "Two Sevens Clash" is regarded as one of the best reggae albums of that decade.
Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.; admission is $15.
Don Byron's Klezmer
Don Byron, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, SoHo, (212) 219-3055.
Don Byron, the avant-jazz clarinetist who came out of the New England Conservatory's klezmer orchestra, offers both sides of his music this weekend.
Tomorrow night, he will lead a klezmer group in tricky, funny music by Mickey Katz, the Spike Jones of klezmer music.
On Sunday, he'll be playing his jazz repertory, full of spiky harmonies and asymmetrical tunes.
Shows each night are at 9 and 11; tickets are $12 in advance or $14 at the door.


Currencies Teaching Europe That Unity Can Be Painful
Europe's plans for further unification may be up in the air, but people from Helsinki to Rome have been learning an often painful lesson in recent weeks about how entwined their economies have already become.
The agent of their discomfort has been the effort by most European nations to link the value of their currencies by maintaining relatively stable exchange rates.
In doing so amid a worldwide recession, nations have increasingly been torn between their short-term domestic economic needs and their long-range goal of creating a single European market with stable prices and steady growth.


Pall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


TV Weekend; Corruption, Love and Murder, All From Real Life
The based-on-fact movie brigades are out in force this season.
Two representative examples of the form are on tap this weekend: "Teamster Boss: The Jackie Presser Story," making its debut on HBO tomorrow at 8 P.M., and "A Murderous Affair: The Carolyn Warmus Story," on ABC Sunday at 9 P.M.
Presser was the unscrupulous leader of a notoriously corrupt union; Ms.
Warmus is now serving time for killing her lover's wife.
In short, just about par for the this-is-a-true-story course.
Of the two, "Teamster Boss," adapted by Abby Mann from James Neff's book "Mobbed Up," is by far the more ambitious as it uses the Presser story to level allegations of corruption in society at large in the Reagan era, right up to the very highest circles of Washington.
Presser, played by the always remarkable Brian Dennehy, may be a wily thug, but his transgressions have nothing on those of the United States Senator who threatens him with a Congressional hearing unless the International Brotherhood of Teamsters helps bail out a failing savings-and-loan in his state.
Presser's advice to the F.B.I.: "Go after the guys in Washington, the ones who are on David Brinkley every Sunday."


Senate Panel Rejects Plan to Repair Florida Base
Dealing a serious blow to President Bush's $7.6 billion plan to rebuild South Florida in the aftermath of the hurricane, the Senate Appropriations Committee today rejected his proposal to restore Homestead Air Force Base.
The committee action took the Administration by surprise, and it provoked a bitter White House reaction that set the stage for another Republican campaign offensive against Congress.
"We regret the proclivity of the Democrats to play politics with human suffering," said Judy Smith, a White House spokeswoman.
Three Republicans on the committee joined the 12-to-8 majority.


Learning the Bare Bones of History


Baseball Owners Lean Toward Lockout
With the battle over Fay Vincent as commissioner apparently ancient history, major league baseball's club owners focused their attention on economic issues today and showed early signs that they were gearing themselves for a self-inflicted shutdown next spring.
"I'd be surprised if there isn't a lockout," one participant in the owners' meeting said after listening to the report and discussion on labor.
"No votes were taken, but they were certainly feisty enough about it."


The Rhetoric Aside, She's No Churchill
To the Editor:
It is surprising that you should equate Margaret Thatcher with Winston Churchill in an Aug. 11 editorial.
To this Englishman, the two couldn't be more different.
Your perception of Lady Thatcher as a world-class stateswoman contrasts with her achievements in Britain, where the results of her policies are now hurting many citizens.


Did the Mets Forgo A Deal for Canseco?
According to one high-ranking baseball executive, the A's called the Mets after New York traded David Cone to the Blue Jays and asked why New York hadn't gotten in touch with Oakland to discuss a possible deal concerning Jose Canseco.
The Mets have maintained that they did not shop Cone around because they arrived very late at a decision to trade him, and because they were privately convinced that no club would match Toronto's offer of Jeff Kent and Ryan Thompson.
Gerry Hunsicker, assistant vice president for baseball operations, who was asked recently to address the possibility that the Mets could have landed Canseco with a more aggressive display of bartering, stuck with the club's official line.


Hadco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


AIDS Benefit Concert
The Theater of the Heart is to perform a benefit concert for the People With AIDS Coalition entitled "Embrace the Human Race," at 8 tonight and tomorrow night at St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street, in Clinton.
The composer and pianist Richard Shulman is to perform the premieres of two new works scored for chamber orchestra and choir.
Selections from his album "Open Spaces," as choreographed by Jeff Quinlivan, is to be performed by 10 dancers.
Dawn Buckholz, a composer and cellist, is to perform her chamber ensemble work "Embrace," and Maureen Snyder, a composer and French hornist, is to present the premiere of a jazz work for horn, trombone, piano, cello and voice.
Tickets are $15, $30 and $45.
Information: (212) 265-6507.


Judge's Ruling May Mean Clifford Will Never Face Trial
A Federal judge today postponed a trial on bank fraud charges for Clark M. Clifford and his junior law partner, allowing a trial on similar charges in New York to proceed first.
But the ruling also set in motion events that may result in Mr.
Clifford never going to trial anywhere because of concerns about his health.
Judge Joyce Hens Green said she would select an independent cardiologist to examine Mr.
Clifford and his health records to resolve questions as to whether the 85-year-old former adviser to several Presidents could withstand a trial.
The results of the independent review would be forwarded to prosecutors in New York, where Mr.
Clifford and his partner, Robert A. Altman, are now scheduled to be tried on Jan. 4.


Fehr Awaits 2 Words: Delay Ball
Bud Selig, the closest thing to a commissioner baseball has these days, is expressing a bit of puzzlement.
He does not understand why the owners' overthrow of Commissioner Fay Vincent is being construed as a signal that management not only intends to reopen negotiations on the labor agreement with players come January, but also plans to manufacture such a confrontation so as to shut down the game for a very long time.
The public that still bothers to care about baseball may be so war-weary as to be beyond understanding how players, or anyone else, have drawn such pessimistic conclusions.
Donald Fehr, a person with more than a passing interest in this issue, is more than willing to provide the answer.


An Upset: Opponents Are Gracious
As DON KING, the promoter, rambled on from the dais, HECTOR CAMACHO shadowboxed, mugged and postured, and kissed his infant son, MACHO.
Yesterday's occasion was the final news conference for Camacho's challenge of JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ, the World Boxing Council superlightweight champion, on Saturday in Las Vegas.


Market Place; Small Investors Stepping Aside?
SIGNS of a retreat by small investors led to much wringing of hands yesterday on Wall Street, where some brokerage stocks took a nasty hit.
The selling was prompted by an announcement by Charles Schwab &amp; Company, the discount broker, that said late Wednesday that business had fallen to an average of 18,000 trades a day recently, down from boom levels of 32,300 in January.
Schwab shares were down as much as $4.25, to $18.25, in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, though they rebounded to close down $2.625 at $19.875.
The shares of Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc., another discount broker, were also down, falling 62.5 cents, to $19.375, on the Big Board.


Five Charged With Looting Pension Fund
Three top officials of a construction union and two reputed members of the Genovese crime family were charged yesterday with turning the union "into a racketeering enterprise" through kickbacks and a fraudulent real-estate deal that looted nearly $20 million from the union's pension fund.
One of the officials, Frank Lupo, the 45-year-old president of the Mason Tenders District Council of Greater New York, was charged with arranging real-estate loans for a reputed mob member, who in turn sold property to the union at inflated prices, said Otto G. Obermaier, the United States Attorney for the Southern District.


Countrywide Credit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The Art Market
Hammer Museum Pact
The Armand Hammer Museum of Art and Cultural Center is about to come under the management of the University of California at Los Angeles.
The contract under which the two-year-old museum will give up its independence is expected to be signed in a few weeks, Arthur Groman, the museum's lawyer, said this week.


NEW YORK'S SENATE RACE: The Ad Campaign; Holtzman: On the Attack


Excalibur Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Recriminations Fly in Japan On Collapse of Yeltsin Visit
President Boris N. Yeltsin's sudden cancellation of his trip to Japan unleashed an unusual round of recriminations as the Japanese Government was accused of pressing an embattled Russian leader so hard on its territorial claims that it lost its best chance in decades to improve relations with Moscow.
While it remained possible for Russia and Japan to work out a cooperative relationship on some levels, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa left little doubt today that he thought an early resolution of a longstanding territorial dispute with Russia was years away.
The issue concerns a handful of islands north of Japan seized by the Soviet Union at the end of World War II.


Russia Has Far More A-Fuel Than U.S. Thinks, Study Says
A private group said yesterday that Russia apparently has much more highly enriched uranium than previously thought, leading to serious doubts about whether an agreement to sell such bomb-grade material to the United States will insure the scrapping of nuclear arms.
The Natural Resources Defense Council, a private group that tracks nuclear arms, said from its Washington office that the uncertainty showed the importance of verifying weapon dismantlement in arms agreements.


Brazil's Besieged Leader Is Deserted by a Top Aide
With impeachment pressure mounting, President Fernando Collor de Mello today accepted the resignation of his top political coordinator and canceled a trip to the United States.
In another setback for the President, Brazil's Supreme Court ruled today that he must present his impeachment defense before the Chamber of Deputies by Sept. 22.
This new schedule allows Brazil's lower chamber to vote for or against a trial in the Senate before municipal elections on Oct. 3.


Clinton Criticizes Provisions in Trade Pact
Following in the footsteps of the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, Gov.
Bill Clinton said today that the North American Free Trade Agreement appears to be lacking substantive provisions on job retraining for American workers and environmental cleanup in Mexico.
"I would note, by the way, that there is nothing in the agreement about worker retraining -- the President really has no proposal on that -- and very little about environmental cleanup, two things he made real commitments on," Mr.
Clinton said when he was asked about the agreement during an interview with WDIV-TV in Detroit.
"But I don't want to prejudge the agreement until I have the time to study it, because we do need one if it's the right one."


General Host reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 9


Andretti's World Might Include Indy
MICHAEL ANDRETTI will join the international Formula One circuit next year, but he still might be able to race in the Indianapolis 500.
Andretti was in Manhattan yesterday to discuss his recent multiyear deal with Team McLaren, the British team that will give him a shot at the world driving championship, which his father, MARIO, won in 1978.


Review/Film; Rosy, Sentimental Memoir of Drug Smuggling
Mort Golden (Josh Charles), the main character in Mike Binder's coming-of-age film, "Crossing the Bridge," dreams of being a comedy writer and even concocts a sample "Gilligan's Island" screenplay, complete with nightmare dream sequence.
Mr.
Binder aims much higher, but he too wears his ambitions on his sleeve.
Although "Crossing the Bridge" centers on a plot to smuggle drugs across the United States-Canadian border, it is essentially a rosy, sentimental memoir.
And it is filled with touches that seem to be present for autobiographical rather than dramatic reasons and that occur far more easily in retrospect than in real life.
Only in the movies can a young artist-to-be spend a magical evening with a beautiful young woman and leave happily the next morning as she calls out, "Go be a writer!"


Value Merchants Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15


Review/Cabaret; Susannah McCorkle Sings About the Vagaries of Love
Susannah McCorkle has determined, she says early in her new cabaret act, that in a romantic relationship things are great only 17.5 percent of the time.
Appropriately, just 3 of the 17 songs in the singer's new show, "I'll Take Romance: Love Songs for People Who Love Songs," celebrate those perfect moments.
And that happens to be just about 17.6 percent of the show.
The selections Ms.
McCorkle has chosen to describe the happy times couldn't be more diverse.
"My New Celebrity Is You," Johnny Mercer's witty name-dropping boast, captures the feeling of triumph in having landed someone wonderful.
"You Go to My Head," by Haven Gillespie and J. Fred Coots, evokes a consuming erotic passion.
George and Ira Gershwin's "Who Cares?" announces a happy couple's sense of security in a topsy-turvy world.


Review/Art; Photomontages of 20's Still Resonate in the 90's
It may be early to start designating the season's best shows, but one of them is bound to be the quietly dazzling display of the photomontages of the German artist Hannah Hoch (1889-1978) at Goethe House.
The 30 montages, bought from the artist's heirs by the German Government, range from the 1920's, when Hoch was the only woman in the Berlin Dada group, to the mid-60's, when the feminist subtext of her work came most clearly into the open.


In Washington Heights, Dinkins Defends Actions After Shooting
Frustrated over charges that he had taken sides against the police in the shooting of Jose (Kiko) Garcia, Mayor David N. Dinkins angrily defended his actions in the Washington Heights case late yesterday afternoon when he was challenged by a police officer.
After walking several blocks on 181st Street in Washington Heights, talking with residents shortly before 5 P.M., Mr.
Dinkins then addressed a roll call of police officers at the 34th Precinct headquarters.
He told the officers that he recognized how difficult their jobs were and commended them for standing "between good citizens and lawlessness."


Verdict Leaves Players Happy and Wanting More
Yes, Jim Quinn was happy last night, and why wouldn't he be.
As the lead lawyer for eight National Football League players he had just won what he called "a total and huge victory" in Federal court in Minneapolis.
And like Quinn, Dick Berthelsen was also happy, even before the champagne arrived at the law offices of Linquist &amp; Vennum, where the players' legal team made its headquarters in Minneapolis.
As the general counsel for the N.F.L.
Players Association, the players' once and probably future union, Berthelsen also had good reason to be delighted.


2 Researchers Accidentally Exposed to Monkeys' AIDS-Like Virus
Two researchers studying an AIDS-like virus in monkeys were accidentally exposed to the virus in different laboratories, and Federal health officials said yesterday that they were conducting tests to determine whether they had become infected with the virus.
It is known as S.I.V., for simian immunodeficiency virus.
Both laboratory workers have developed antibodies to the virus, but that does not necessarily mean it has multiplied and established itself as an infection in their bodies.
Neither worker has shown any symptoms of an AIDS-like disease.


Imex Medical Systems reports earnings for Year to June 30


Knicks Lose McDaniel to The Celtics
Placed on hold by the Knicks all summer, Xavier McDaniel abruptly cut the line between himself and New York yesterday by signing a three-year contract with the Boston Celtics, rivals of the Knicks in the Atlantic Division.
McDaniel, an unrestricted free agent, had been negotiating with the Celtics this week, and the Knicks' president, David Checketts, called the development "shocking to us." Checketts acknowledged that his team was suddenly confronted with "a gaping hole" at the small-forward position less than a month from the start of training camp.


INSIDE
Talks Likely in South Africa
With both sides jarred toward conciliation after a massacre, the African National Congress agreed to a meeting with President de Klerk.
Page A3.
Union Corruption Charged
Officials of a New York construction union and two reputed mob figures were charged with looting nearly $20 million from a pension fund.
Page B1.
Clifford May Not Face a Trial


Even G.O.P. Supported Children's Legal Rights
To the Editor:
Re "Legal Scholars See Distortion in Attacks on Hillary Clinton" (front page, Aug. 24): I find it surprising that the Bush campaign has attacked a 1973 article by Hillary Clinton for making the supposedly radical suggestion that children have rights that they may vindicate in court contrary to the wishes of their parents.


Yield on 30-Year Bond Remains 7.24%
The prices of bond and notes bounced around yesterday but did not change that much on the day.
Trading was moderate, and many investors were waiting to see what President Bush would say in an important economic speech in Detroit and in a five-minute paid television broadcast last night.
In late trading in the secondary market for Treasury securities, the 7.25 percent 30-year bond was offered at 1003/32 , up 5/32 to yield 7.24 percent, the same as Wednesday's yield.


AEL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


NEW YORK'S SENATE RACE: Ferraro's About-Face; As Opponents' Charges Begin to Hurt, She Abandons Front-Runner's Stance
For weeks, former United States Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro insisted that opponents' charges about her family's finances were "sour grapes," desperate gambits of rivals far behind her in the polls.
But yesterday, she acknowledged something quite different: the charges were working.
Jettisoning the jaunty stance of front-runner that she had so carefully nurtured since the early phases of this Senate campaign, Ms.
Ferraro said that Elizabeth Holtzman's attacks were "destroying the target" -- herself -- and helping a third contender.
"What is happening is that the votes are going to Bob Abrams," she said.
"He's going up and I'm going down."


R. L. Auchincloss, 72, Investment Counselor
Reginald L. Auchincloss Jr., a former investment counselor and a trustee of the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Auchincloss, who had been ill for years, died of Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Frances.


'Doktor Faust' Premiere
The New York stage premiere of Busoni's opera "Doktor Faust" is to be presented by the New York City Opera at 8 tonight at the New York State Theater.
"Doktor Faust" was unfinished when Busoni died in 1924, and was completed by his student and colleague Philip Jarnach.
Using Busoni's libretto based on a puppet-play version of "Faust," the work was first performed in Dresden in 1925, and in a concert version at Carnegie Hall in 1964.
Tonight's performance is to feature William Stone in the title role; Eva Zseller as Herzogin, and Michael Rees Davis as Mephistopheles, with John Calvin West, Peter Blanchet and Robert Brubaker in supporting roles.
Tickets are $10 to $68.
Information: (212) 870-5633.


Review/Film; Under the Freeway, A Family of Runaways
The southern California teen-agers seen in Marc Rocco's "Where the Day Takes You" have no thoughts of fun in the sun.
These runaways, ragged and homeless, could be living in Times Square were it not for certain particulars of the film's Hollywood setting.
The dive where they gather for fast food doesn't have plates, but it does have movie posters on its walls.
One character recalls having been so high on drugs that he tried to scrape the stars off Hollywood Boulevard.
And a glamorous likeness of James Cagney looks down from a mural, as if to emphasize that tough guys of the past had no notion of how tough things can be today.
In what has already been a terrifically good year for American independent film makers, Mr.
Rocco's name can be added to the list of formidable new talent.
Giving his debut feature a forceful documentary look and a sense of wrenching authenticity, Mr.
Rocco (who wrote the film with Michael Hitchcock and Kurt Voss) is also able to tell an involving story of young runaways trying, against impossible odds, to form their own version of a family.
This is "Rebel Without a Cause" without the grown-ups and without boundaries, transposed to a world of hard drugs, petty crime, hand-to-mouth existence and hopes that somehow will not die.


Stemming the Upsurge in Measles
Three years ago measles, which had been reduced to very low levels in the United States, started making a comeback.
It has since infected tens of thousands of young victims, many of them in New York.
The epidemic has been caused by an unconscionable failure to vaccinate the most vulnerable children.
But starting today, health authorities should be able to turn the tide.
The State Department of Social Services, working with the state and New York City Health Departments and the Human Resources Administration, is launching a campaign to reach the chief victims -- poor children under 5 who are neither immunized nor connected to a primary care facility.
Posters and brochures listing information and an 800 number to call for referrals to clinics and physicians will be broadly distributed.
Next summer free vaccines will be distributed to the 4,000 physicians who vaccinate children enrolled in Medicaid.
And 11 community organizations have received grants to help widen their outreach to families eligible for these services.


Exxon and Mobil in Russia Venture
The nation's two biggest oil companies, the Exxon Corporation and the Mobil Corporation, said today that they would join forces to bid on oil-and-gas exploration and production projects in one of Russia's biggest oilfields, the West Siberian basin.
The Exxon-Mobil partnership is a rare one in recent years between two corporate giants that mostly have gone separate ways or teamed with other oil companies during the last 20 years.
It revives an alliance whose biggest undertaking, along with Chevron and Texaco, was developing oilfields in Saudi Arabia under the Aramco banner.
The giant Middle East operation was purchased by the Saudis between 1972 and 1980.


Sidney Forman, 77, U.S. Army Historian
Prof.
Sidney Forman, an authority on the history of the United States Army, died on Monday at the home of his son in Spring Valley, N.Y.
He was 77 and lived in Fort Montgomery, N.Y.
Professor Forman died of cancer, said his son, Charles R. Forman.


Sounds Around Town
Sweet Soul
Solomon Burke and Carla Thomas, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Solomon Burke is one of the handymen of 1960's soul.
On a sweet ballad he can breathe romantic innocence; when the beat gets tougher, his voice can scratch and blaze.
"Home in Your Heart: The Best of Solomon Burke," a recent two-CD collection from Rhino/Atlantic, moves so fluently between gospel and rhythm-and-blues, country and pop, that it bespeaks the work of a true master.
Carla Thomas, the daughter of the Stax records legend Rufus Thomas and a sweet soul voice in her own right, wears her innocence like a charm in hits like "Gee Whiz," but she can bite into the blues with an arresting ferocity.
Shows are tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Tickets are $15 for general admission and $20 for reserved seating.
Luna's World
Luna, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Dean Wareham, Luna's singer and guitarist, has a voice with all the passionless depth of a magazine photograph: it's provocative yet impersonal, sensual yet giving nothing away.
His guitar leads, too, seem to unfold without any pretense to meaning; even when swathed in distortion, they seem calm and beautifully remote.
Like Mr.
Wareham's previous band, Galaxie 500, Luna has evolved from the folky restraint of the Velvet Underground.
But on the debut album, "Lunapark" (Elektra), it's the mood rather than simply the pace that seems slow and elastic.
Mr.
Wareham stills rock-and-roll's hyperactive pulse; he cools its fever and quiets its heart.
Tomorrow night the band appears with Circle X and Mecca Normal.
The show starts at 10 P.M.; tickets are $6.


Zuckerman Gains in Bid To Purchase Daily News
Seven of the Daily News's nine unions said last night that they had reached an agreement in principle with Mortimer B. Zuckerman, propelling the real estate developer into front-runner status for acquiring the newspaper.
"We still have a long way to go with Zuckerman but it is now his to lose," said Michael M. Connery, a lawyer advising the unions from Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.


September Surprise in Bronx
September can be a cruel month for losing baseball teams.
The losses mount, the games stretch longer and the road trips never seem to end.
Sometimes, the team captain even announces there is nothing left to play for.
The Yankees are one team that is susceptible to bagging the last four weeks of the season, coasting to their fourth straight losing record and then rushing for tee times once the abysmal slide is complete.


COMPANY BRIEFS AMCOR LTD.,Melbourne, Australia, said its paper-making division, Australian Paper Manufacturers, would build its first American mill in Prewitt, N.M., to make corrugated fiber box materials from wastepaper. INTELSAT, Washington, an international cooperative of 124 member nations that owns the global communications satellite system, said its board had approved the purchase of Intelsat 8 satellites from GE Astro Space.


People
*
Edward N. Ney, former chief executive at Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, was named to the new position of chairman of the worldwide board of advisors at Burson-Marsteller, New York, which is owned by Y.&amp; R. Mr.
Ney was most recently U.S.
Ambassador to Canada.


Inmac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


CHINA WILL BUILD A-PLANT FOR IRAN
In an indication of closer nuclear cooperation, China will provide Iran with its first nuclear power plant, the two Governments announced today.
In disclosing the agreement during a four-day visit to Beijing, President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran said that there were no plans for new military agreements between the two countries, and Chinese officials emphasized that Iran had agreed to allow the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect the nuclear power plant.


Fritz Leiber Jr. Dead; A Fantasy Novelist, 81
Fritz Leiber Jr., an award-winning science-fiction and fantasy writer, died last Saturday at California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 81 years old and lived in San Francisco.
He died of a stroke, said his wife, Margo.


The Green Card at the End of the Irish Rainbow; Latest Wave of Immigrants Finds That, Even With Legal Status, Jobs Are Still Tight
Last fall, Carol Philbin gave up.
Without working papers and out of a job for more than a month, she returned home to Galway for good after three years of struggle in the shadow world of New York City's undocumented Irish.
A letter in her parent's mailbox sent her back again.
The letter informed Ms.
Philbin that she had won a visa lottery that would allow her to work and live legally in the United States.
But since her return, Ms.
Philbin -- whose sister Moira and brother Sean have also immigrated to the United States -- has found that while the shadow had lifted, the struggle was not over.


At the Bar
Last July, Craig Bradley of the Indiana University Law School received a tempting invitation, at least for a law professor accustomed to the mealy-mouthed mores of academic scholarship.
It came from Reconstruction Magazine, and it was to write a no-holds-barred attack on Justice Clarence Thomas.
The project was not unusual for Reconstruction, a two-year-old journal on black politics, society and culture edited by Randall Kennedy, a professor at Harvard Law School and a former clerk for Justice Thomas's predecessor, Justice Thurgood Marshall.
Mr.
Bradley's article was to be one of several on the subject of Justice Thomas, pro and con, to run in a single issue of the magazine.


Italian Premier Seeks Fiscal Powers in Crisis
As the lira slumped again on foreign exchange markets, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato today sought a reluctant Parliament's support for crisis measures enabling the Government to run its economy by decree during emergencies.
The Italian leader announced on Wednesday night that he wanted special powers for the next three years to halt Government borrowing and spending, to modify taxes and to divert Government investment without Parliament's approval.


MOUNTAIN TROOPS HELPING IN FLORIDA
Until Hurricane Andrew came along, the soldiers of the United States Army's 10th Mountain Division had planned to spend September in training exercises at their home base, Fort Drum, N.Y.
Instead, members of the unit have for the last week been sorting canned goods and other donated items in the ruins of a tomato processing plant here.
"We're infantry soldiers, and we're used to doing that job," Pvt.
Anthony Lee, a 21-year-old from Sandusky, Ohio, said as he and his buddies wheeled a pallet of canned vegetables to a truck waiting for a load to carry to a nearby tent city.
"It feels good to be here helping people, but this is something totally new and different for us."


Geraghty &amp; Miller Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Restaurants
Century Cafe
Dining in the Broadway theater district has improved markedly in the last few years with the debut of some exuberant newcomers and the revitalization of other long-running productions.
The 11-year-old Century Cafe, which for much of its existence was considered merely a convenient lunch spot for office workers in the area, has been transformed this year into something much more.
The new chef, Stephen Meyers, most recently upgraded the American menu at Chelsea Central on 10th Avenue at 23d Street in Manhattan.
Before that, he honed his skills at the Sign of the Dove, Le Bernardin and La Caravelle.


Dance World Bestows The Bessies
Modern dancers and performance artists are often considered among the rugged individualists of the cultural world.
Yet there are times when they gather in a spirit of community.
Such an occasion took place on Thursday night, when Dance Theater Workshop presented the ninth annual Dance and Performance Awards at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park.
The awards, familiarly known as the Bessies, are named in honor of Bessie Schonberg, a noted teacher of dance composition, and acknowledge creative work in dance and performance art.
Recipients are chosen by a committee of dance writers and producers.


7 Charged in Death of Student Who Objected to Racial Slur
Seven young men have been charged by Broward County prosecutors in the beating death last month of a 19-year-old pre-medical student after he objected to a racial slur.
The prosecutors also said today that they had decided there was not enough evidence to charge two other men arrested in the killing.


Genetic Therapy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Books of The Times; Artist, Pawn and Avenging Angel
Trick of the Eye By Jane Stanton Hitchcock 275 pages. E. P. Dutton. $19.
"Trick of the Eye," a new thriller by the playwright Jane Stanton Hitchcock, is peopled with characters in need of a shrink.
None of the characters in this novel are capable of feeling.
None of them have the ability to sustain an emotional relationship.
Each of them has found unique ways of sublimating his or her passions.


Messinger Hurt in Crash
The Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, was slightly injured yesterday when her chauffeur-driven car swerved onto a sidewalk along Third Avenue to avoid hitting a truck and crashed into a pole, the police said.
Ms.
Messinger complained of neck and back pain after the accident, the police said.
She was admitted for observation to St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center, where she was listed in stable condition yesterday afternoon.
Her driver, Clarice Brown, was treated and released at St.
Vincent's.
The driver of the truck, John Grillo, was not injured.


Genesee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Even G.O.P. Supported Children's Legal Rights; Nothing Radical in It
To the Editor:
Conservative politicians, like Patrick J. Buchanan at the Republican National Convention, seek to portray Hillary Clinton as a "radical feminist," in part for her firm opinions about the rights of children.


Federal Grand Jury Indicts Ex-Chairman of Silverado
A Federal grand jury in Denver today indicted Michael R. Wise, former chairman and chief executive of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association, on charges of intent to defraud the bank and misapplication of its funds, Justice Department officials announced.
Neil Bush, the President's son and a former Silverado director, was "not in any way" involved in these offenses, Thomas Cannistra, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said in a telephone interview.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle
TODAY: 10:30 A.M., C-SPAN,
call-in program.


Accounts
*
Avia Group International Inc., Portland, Ore., to Atlas Citron Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco, to handle the athletic footwear and apparel manufacturer's account, previously at Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander, Seattle.
Atlas Citron was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $5 million, in a review that also included as finalists Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis, and Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco. *
New England Oldsmobile Dealers Association to Trainor Associates Inc., New Hartford, N.Y., to handle its account, previously at Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners, Boston.
Trainor was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $2.5 million, in a review that included three other finalists: Clement &amp; McCabe, Avon, Conn.; McDougall Associates, Peabody, Mass., and Rossin, Greenberg, Seronick, Boston.


Even G.O.P. Supported Children's Legal Rights; A Douglas Opinion
To the Editor:
As you suggest in "Legal Scholars See Distortion in Attacks on Hillary Clinton" (front page, Aug. 24), the Republican notion that Hillary Clinton's views on children's rights fall outside the mainstream of legal thinking does not withstand scrutiny.
In 1971, Associate Justice William O. Douglas -- an indisputably first-rate legal mind -- staked a position similar to that of Mrs.
Clinton in a case involving religious freedom.


Plan Giving Public Hospitals More Autonomy Is Approved
The board of New York City's public hospital system voted without opposition yesterday to overhaul its relationship with City Hall, approving a plan intended to give the hospitals more control over their own budgets and more incentive to save money and to improve care.
The vote by the board of directors of the Health and Hospitals Corporation -- which oversees the city's 11 public hospitals, 5 long-term care centers and network of neighborhood clinics -- means the city's relationship with its hospital system will finally resemble those in many other cities across the nation, where hospitals are more autonomous.


Bergdorf Turns to Humor to Soften Image of Men's Store
EXECUTIVES at one of the most problematic recent retail ventures are hoping that humor can help sell high-priced haberdashery.
An advertising campaign that begins today will try to increase business at Bergdorf Goodman Men, the breathtakingly fashionable store -- with correspondingly breathtakingly priced clothing and accessories -- at 745 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.


Chang Stops Ferreira In Five Sets
Michael Chang, careful to a fault, let himself be pushed to the limit last night by 12th-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, an incorrigible risk-taker, in their lengthy United States Open quarterfinal last night on the Grandstand Court.
This was a classic contest between tortoise and hare, and somehow, in the space of its 4-hour 17-minute duration, the hare walloped out 104 unforced errors to give the tortoise little alternative but to hold his breath and hang on for a 7-5, 2-6, 6-3, 6-7 (4-7), 6-1 victory.


N.F.L.'s Judicial Record Remains 0 for Antitrust
The National Football League has never won an antitrust case on the basis of law, although it has escaped paying damages some of the time.
In 1957, the Supreme Court ruled that football was bound by Federal antitrust law, even though baseball had been declared exempt in 1953 by the reaffirmation of a 1922 decision.
The case involved Bill Radovich, who played for the Detroit Lions in 1938-41 and in 1945.
In 1946 and 1947, he played in the rival All-America Conference.
But when he wanted to play in 1948 for a San Francisco team in the minor Pacific Coast League, which had ties to the National Football League, he was blacklisted.
This was an antitrust violation and he was awarded damages.


Getty Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Alice Fordyce, Benefactor, 86; Aided Medicine
Alice Woodard Fordyce, a philanthropist whose support of medical research in the last five decades included her involvement in the awarding of one of science's most prestigious prizes, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Fordyce died of heart failure, her son, James Woodard Fordyce, said.


Reviews/Theater; A Triangle of Puppets, Exploring Life and Death
From time to time on the stage of the Susan Stein Shiva Theater at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, tiny bells tinkle.
Send not to know for whom; they tinkle for thee.


Ballet Theater and Joffrey Decide Against Merging
American Ballet Theater and the Joffrey Ballet have agreed not to pursue a merger plan that the financially hard-pressed companies had been exploring since June.
The decision was reached in separate board meetings on Wednesday and announced yesterday.
Both companies, which have severe cash-flow problems, also announced that they were beginning emergency fund-raising campaigns and that they expected to perform through the 1992-93 season.
Ballet Theater also said that next week it would announce an artistic director to succeed Jane Hermann, a co-director with Oliver Smith, who resigned on Sept. 1.


Paramount Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Tales of Corruption Widen L.I. Dealer Inquiry
The investigation of municipal corruption in Brookhaven has already expanded far beyond the allegations of bribery raised by John McNamara, the Long Island car dealer and real estate developer who pleaded guilty to fraud and bribery on Wednesday, Federal prosecutors said today.
Other developers have provided information about "pervasive" corruption in the town government, the authorities said, and Federal officials expect to win their cooperation in prosecuting town officials.


Contradictions in Testimony Cited As New York Panel Clears Officer
The claims of two sisters who said they saw a police officer beat and fatally shoot a Dominican immigrant crumbled under the weight of physical evidence and their own contradictions, leading a grand jury to clear the officer, the Manhattan District Attorney said yesterday.
Issuing a detailed 45-page review of an investigation in the July death, which touched off several days of violence in Washington Heights, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau announced the grand jury's decision a week after the panel cleared the officer.


Review/Film; The Romance of the Sea And the Lure of the Cup
Carroll Ballard's "Wind" is an irresistible end-of-summer dividend that extends the season indefinitely.
It's a bracing fable about those grand 12-meter yachts and their crews that compete for the America's Cup, the oldest and most prestigious of international sailing trophies.
Though called the Hundred Guinea Cup when it was originally offered in England in 1851, it was renamed that year for the boat that won the first race.
Since then, except for one brief period in the 1980's when Australian sailors took the prize, the cup has remained in American hands.
Many things have happened to the cup in the last 140 years.
What was once the sport of aristocrats and millionaires (Harold Sterling Vanderbilt won the cup three times in the 1930's) is now the sport of syndicates.
The race is big business.
Only associations of the well-heeled can afford the huge cost of building the boats.
Their design has become as high-tech as that of supersonic aircraft.
Even their specifications have changed.


Little Isles, A Big Fight
After voluntarily pulling out of Afghanistan and Eastern Europe and watching their huge empire crumble, the Russians suddenly drew the line at four obscure islands off Japan -- alienating, in the process, a major potential donor.
That, at least, was the impression on Wednesday, when President Boris N. Yeltsin abruptly postponed his trip to Japan after a wave of public discontent made it virtually impossible for him to grant Tokyo even a tentative pledge of eventual sovereignty over a group of islands in the Kurile chain that the Soviet Union captured in the closing days of World War II.


G.O.P. Lawmakers Meet to Regroup and Rethink Issues
Faced with a politically explosive $1.7 billion budget shortfall next year and possible defections on major issues, New Jersey's Republican legislative majority held a retreat today to regroup.
After a day that opened with motivational speeches that some members compared to a locker-room pep talk and ended with a discussion of the state's increasingly gloomy budget picture, the 85 Republicans decided to hand the problems back to Gov.
Jim Florio, a Democrat.


Gates/FA Distributing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alistair Butler Is Dead; Ex-Ailey Dancer, 42
Alistair Butler, a former member of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and a performer with other modern-dance troupes, died on Monday at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center.
He was 42 years old and lived in New York City.


Nicaragua Leader Seeks to Counter U.S. Criticism
Despite charges from her leftist opposition that she was caving in to the United States, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has taken steps to clear up some of Nicaragua's bitter disputes over private property.
She announced Wednesday night the creation of a new body to review all disputed claims to property confiscated by the Nicaraguan Government during the 11 years that it was under the control of the leftist Sandinista Front, and signed a law effectively ordering it to respond favorably to all 5,000 pending claims, either by ordering the property returned or by paying indemnities.


Haitian Women With H.I.V. To Be Admitted to the U.S.
Opening the door further to Haitians stranded at the United States Navy base at Guantanamo, Cuba, because they or their relatives tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS, the Administration will allow all pregnant women at the camp infected with H.I.V. to come to American hospitals, Assistant Attorney General Stuart M. Gerson said today.
About 16 women will be admitted.


Toro Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Carrington Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


ISRAELIS DISCLOSE TALKS WITH SYRIA ON STEPS TO PEACE
Israel and Syria are negotiating the terms of a joint document setting forth the principles for working out a peaceful settlement between the two countries, Israeli officials say.
The negotiations are the latest in a series of signals by the two countries that they are moving to ease more than four decades of enmity through a negotiated settlement involving an Israeli return of at least part of the Golan Heights captured by Israel in the 1967 war in return for Syria's acceptance of a peace treaty with Israel.


Reviews/Theater; Getting to the Heart of Joyce With His Own Words
Whether jigging a jiggily jig down the Liffey or juggling a jangly jingle jiffily, there's joyance and jollity in "Joyicity." Ah, that Jimmy Joyce, he knew a bit of the lingo, by jingo.
All alliterative allusion aside, "Joyicity," an Abbey Theater production being presented by the Irish Repertory Theater, is an inspired hour based on the life and work of James Joyce, a celebration of language through the pen of perhaps our century's greatest master.
The material has been judiciously selected and expertly woven together by Ulick O'Connor and is given an enlightened performance by Vincent O'Neill.


Wallace Computer Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Top Businesses Join in Plan To Provide Dependent Care
Eleven of the nation's leading corporations, joining with more than 100 smaller businesses and private organizations, announced yesterday that they would collaborate on a $25.4 million project to help their employees provide care for their children and aging relatives.
The money will be used to finance 300 local programs in 44 cities.
The programs include new day care centers, in-home care for the elderly, vacation programs for school-age children and training for women who care for children in their own homes.


Many Women in Army Favor Ending Combat Ban
A large majority of female Army officers and enlisted personnel favor repealing the military's regulations that exclude women from combat roles, but less than 15 percent say they would volunteer for combat jobs if allowed, according to a new survey.
The survey of 868 women, one of the largest of its kind, also found that 60 percent of female Army officers and 54 percent of female enlisted troops in the Army believed that the combat-exclusion restrictions hurt their chances for promotion.





T. E. Robinson, Ex-College President, 87, Is Dead
Dr.
Thomas E. Robinson, the former president of Glassboro State College and unsuspecting host of an unsuspected East-West summit meeting in rural southern New Jersey in 1967, died on Wednesday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Langhorne, Pa.
He was 87 years old and lived in Holland, Pa.
He died after a heart attack, the college reported.


No Headline
"I can't imagine telling my children as a bedtime story that mommy and daddy got married because of a lawsuit." -- MARIA DILLON.  [ B8:3. ]


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bush's Double Bind
When it comes to dealing with the economy as a campaign issue, President Bush is caught in a trap.
If he advocates bold new ideas for addressing the country's economic problems, that raises the question of why, after all this time in office, he is just now getting around to doing something about the situation.


N.F.L.'s Free-Agency System Is Found Unfair by U.S. Jury
The National Football League's system of free agency, under which teams retain the rights to their best players, was rendered illegal today by a Federal jury in an antitrust lawsuit brought by eight players.
After deliberating for 16 hours over two days, the eight-woman jury found for the players and awarded damages totaling $543,000 to four of the plaintiffs.
Under antitrust law, that figure is tripled to $1,629,000.


Tokyo Journal; Students Get a Saturday Off: Can They Handle It?
One of the biggest changes in Japan's education system since it was established 120 years ago will take place on Saturday.
Schools will be closed.
Public elementary, middle and high schools throughout Japan are to close for one Saturday a month to give overworked students a break.
Government officials say the move is the first step toward a full five-day school week some years in the future.


For Children
La Marqueta 116th Street and Park Avenue East Harlem Manhattan Recommended ages: 4 and up Daily except Sundays
La Marqueta, the dona of enclosed neighborhood markets, is under the Metro-North Railroad tracks in Spanish Harlem.
Once bustling and eclectic, it is now a handful of rather grubby stalls, although visitors will find it worth a visit to glimpse into a different style of shopping.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Bush outlined "a single program, a unified strategy" for reviving the economy.
In a speech to business leaders in Detroit, he presented his philosophy as a broad mix of tax and spending cuts, expanded social programs and new free-trade pacts to lead the nation into the global economy.  [ Page A1. ]
Up to 150,000 American jobs could be lost from the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico, according to Labor Secretary Lynn Martin.  [ D1. ]


Meadowbrook Rehabilitation Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


TV Ruling Favors N.H.L.
SportsChannel America was denied a preliminary injunction yesterday that would have required the National Hockey League to let SCA bid on the same deal that the league struck last week with ESPN.
SCA had argued in State Supreme Court in Manhattan that a clause in its 1991-92 contract with the N.H.L. provided first-refusal rights obliging the league to submit a price it wanted SCA to pay for 1992-93.


Review/Film; A Crime Of the 20's In the Garb Of Today
"Swoon" was shown as part of this year's
New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 27
. The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza, Broadway at 63d Street, Upper West Side.
In "Swoon," his wildly audacious debut feature about the 1924 kidnapping and murder committed by Nathan (Babe) Leopold Jr. and Richard (Dickie) Loeb, Tom Kalin challenges his audience's every assumption about this story, and quite a few assumptions the viewer may never have made.
Mr.
Kalin's objective is to fracture any familiar notions and prejudices that have been incorporated into this much-studied story.


All for the Sake of a Frisbee


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sports of The Times; Knicks Fans: Anybody But The Celtics
THEY could have rationalized Xavier McDaniel's going anywhere but the grubby old barn on Causeway.
Knicks fans know the Boston Celtics have a history of picking up older players like Don Nelson and Bailey Howell, and now the Celtics have done it with McDaniel.
"I have had better days," said Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, who seemed genuinely stunned yesterday when McDaniel stuck it to the Knicks but good by signing with Boston.


How to Deal with a Wounded Russia
Boris Yeltsin deserves sympathetic understanding for his decision not to visit Japan when no face-saving compromise could be worked out for return of four small islands.
And he deserves special praise for his agreement to speed withdrawal of former Soviet troops from Lithuania.
The four southernmost Kurile Islands were Japanese before Tokyo embarked on the course of conquest leading to World War II.
Stalin seized them from a defeated Japan in 1945 under provisions of a secret Yalta protocol.
Now Tokyo wants, at a minimum, restored sovereignty over all four islands.
And it has held up consideration of major economic aid until that goal is achieved.


Jones Spacelink Ltd. reports earnings for Year to May 31


A Utility's Strategy for Life in a Nonnuclear Age
When the voters here decided in 1989 to close the nuclear plant operated by their public utility, many wondered what would replace it.
Rancho Seco ran only fitfully, but its generating capacity was half of the total for the Sacramento Municipal Utility District and could meet the needs of all 457,000 customers in Sacramento County if the weather was not too hot.
Three years later the substitutes are beginning to emerge, some literally from the woodwork.
Dark wooden roofs are being painted white to reflect the sun and thus lower buildings' air-conditioning burdens.
A utility storage yard is filling up with thousands of scrapped refrigerators, as the district pays its customers up to $275 to buy new ones that use 75 percent less power.
While the district will use conventional power sources for the near future, in the next few years scores of windmills will sprout on hilltops.


What's This Happening In 'Joy to the World'?
To the Editor:
" 'Joy to the World,' " David Criscitelli's Aug. 30 letter, made me laugh.
He accuses you of a lack of objectivity for identifying "Mama Told Me Not to Come," rather than "Joy to the World," as the best-known hit of Three Dog Night, a band that played the Republican National Convention


O'Connor Discusses Possibility of a Strike
With teachers in the 298 schools of the Archdiocese of New York working without a contract, John Cardinal O'Connor said yesterday that he would respect the right of the teachers to strike but added that such an action would do little good.
"Unfortunately I do not see how a strike will give us any more money or enable us to increase wages," he said.


Ampal-American Israel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Spoken Word
TELEVISION DISCUSSION, Podell Auditorium, Beth Israel Hospital, First Avenue and 16th Street, Manhattan.
A comparison of the new and the original "Star Trek" television series, sponsored by the Science Fiction Association of Metropolitan New York.
Sunday at 1:30 P.M.
Admission: $2.
Information: (212) 262-3911.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
"Highlights From the Permanent Collection," by Amelia Arenas, today at 1 and 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under 16.
Information: (212) 708-9480.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Upper East Side.
"Recent Acquisitions," by Vivian Bobka, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Homecoming: William H. Johnson and Afro-America," by Ms.
Bobka, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street, Upper East Side.
All free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Music Notes; A Mixed Verdict For a Liszt Revival
Revivals of rare works by famous composers often do little more than confirm history's verdict before the works disappear again.
But revivals also give listeners a fuller perspective on the composer's better works, and that, as well as the eternal hope of finding a neglected masterpiece, accounts for the continued allure of such exhumations.
The latest beneficiary of this interest is Franz Liszt's first large-scale choral work, the "Cantata for the Unveiling of the Beethoven Monument." Raymond Leppard is to conduct the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra in the work's first American performances next Friday and Saturday and 19 at the Circle Theater in Indianapolis.
The cantata is scored for six vocal soloists, orchestra and chorus, and it lasts about 35 minutes.
It has a peculiar history.
Liszt composed it for a festival in Bonn in 1845 during which a bronze Beethoven statue was unveiled.
The program also included Beethoven's Fifth and Ninth Symphonies and the "Emperor" Concerto, with Liszt as the piano soloist and conductor.
The festival was attended by King Wilhelm IV of Prussia and Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of England, but they were still dining at concert time.


Review/Dance; With New Works, New Mysteries
The Yard is celebrating its 20th-anniversary season.
A colony for performing artists, the Yard provides choreographers with housing and rehearsal space each summer in Chilmark, Mass., on Martha's Vineyard.
When the summer is over, the new dances created in Chilmark are taken to New York.
The five works performed on Thursday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater suggested that this year's choreographers favored mysterious, or even ambiguous, imagery.


H. W. Sheridan, 67, Professor and Dean At Brown University
Harriet W. Sheridan, former undergraduate dean at Brown University, died on Tuesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
She was 67 years old and lived in Barrington, R.I.
The cause of death was cancer, said Don DeMaio, a Brown spokesman.


Officials Had Precise Plan For Calm After Ruling
It began with a telephone call early last week from the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, to Deputy Mayor Fritz W. Alexander 2d.
The grand jury investigation into the shooting of Jose (Kiko) Garcia in Washington Heights was winding down, the Deputy Mayor said he was told, and a decision was likely soon.
The call set in motion an elaborate city plan, developed over the summer, to respond to the announcement of the grand jury's decision in the emotionally charged case.


CHRONICLE
KEVIN MAXWELL, the younger son of Robert Maxwell, who died last year, leaving his publishing empire in shambles, turned up at an unemployment office in London this week.
It was not clear whether he would collect benefits.
Mr.
Maxwell, 33, who arrived at the office in a silver Mercedes, said he had not yet gone on the dole, the Associated Press reported, and employees at the office said information on applications was confidential.


A Band of Mothers Battles the Killing
IN 1986, Harlem Hospital treated 12 children 17 years old or younger for gunshot wounds.
In 1991, that number was 52.
Lincoln Hospital in the South Bronx treated 13 children for gunshot wounds in 1986, compared with 69 last year.
Of all the children who die of an injury north of 110th Street in Manhattan, one-third are shot to death, according to Dr.
Barbara Barlow, the chief of pediatric surgery at Harlem Hospital and a Columbia University professor.
"We have to show how this is a public-health crisis," said Barbara A. Lowe, a nurse with a background in public-health policy.
Ms.
Lowe's official title is consultant to Mothers Against Violence, but she seems more like an energetic mother hen, acting as a chauffeur, fund-raiser and sympathetic listener.


3 Democrats Find Separate Wells to Draw From in New York Race
Three distinct constituencies are playing substantial roles in financing the Democratic Senate campaigns of Geraldine A. Ferraro, Elizabeth Holtzman and Robert Abrams, according to Federal campaign-finance records.
Ms.
Ferraro has received nearly a third of her money from contributors, most of them women, who do not live in New York, New Jersey or Connecticut.


New Jersey Congressman Announces His Retirement
In a major blow to New Jersey's influence here, Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo, the moderate Republican who was expected to become the dean of the state's Congressional delegation next year, today announced his retirement.
Mr.
Rinaldo, who was renowned for bucking his party and President Bush on behalf of New Jersey, said he had decided to retire because he was frustrated after two decades in the minority and wanted to give his successor a head start in accruing seniority.


Croatia and Yugoslavia Agree on Linking Capitals
After several months of futile diplomacy in the former Yugoslavia, Cyrus R. Vance, a special United Nations mediator in the Balkans, announced an agreement today between Croatia and federal Yugoslavia to reopen a major road between their capitals and to establish a demilitarized zone on a fiercely disputed peninsula in the west.
Mr.
Vance termed the steps today an "important agreement" that could help in restoring peace in the region.


Review/Rock; Apparently Indestructible After All These Years
Joe Cocker's stage show on Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall looked like the cast from the film "The Commitments" 20 years later.
There were the female backing singers in tight black dresses doing synchronized dance moves; there were the rollicking boogie piano player, and the hunched-over guitarist, and the slicked-up saxophone dude.
And, of course, at center stage, like "The Commitments" singer Andrew Strong's venerable great-uncle, was Mr.
Cocker himself, portly and graying and decked out in sophisticated black.
When "The Commitments" became a hit last year, comparisons were made between Mr.
Strong's voice and Mr.
Cocker's.
And certainly in the 23 years since Mr.
Cocker made his debut with a soulful rendition of the Beatles' song "A Little Help From My Friends," his style has remained relevant.
The rough, vulnerable voice is instantly recognizable, while raspy rhythm-and-blues numbers like "The Letter" and "Feeling Alright" seem practically indestructible.


Judge Leaves Tobacco Trial After Rebuke
The Federal judge who has handled major liability cases on the risks of smoking has withdrawn from a much-publicized case just days after he was ousted from another case following complaints from tobacco manufacturers.
Judge H. Lee Sarokin of Federal District Court in Newark withdrew today from a new trial ordered by the United States Supreme Court in the case of Cipollone v.
Liggett, the first case in which the estate of a smoker who died of lung cancer won damages from the tobacco industry.


6 Killed in Plane Collision in Indianapolis


Why Schools Must Stress Sexual Abstinence
To the Editor:
"A Million Kids Held Hostage," your Aug. 29 editorial on the debate over AIDS education in New York City's public schools, does not take account of vitally important facts, which I point out as drafter of the New York State Board of Regents July 1991 AIDS education guidelines and of the Board of Education's resolution of last May 27 applying those guidelines to the city's public schools.
A New York State Education Department regulation in effect since 1987 mandates that instruction about AIDS must "stress abstinence as the most appropriate and effective premarital protection against AIDS."


Yeltsin Fights for Economic Plan, Assailing Central Bank's Actions
Putting the uproar over his sudden cancellation of a trip to Japan behind him, President Boris N. Yeltsin thrust himself into the center of domestic politics today with a strong warning about the dangers threatening his economic program.
At a conference of local officials in the Volga River city of Cheboksary, Mr.
Yeltsin denounced what he said were policies of "cheap credits and unrealistic social programs" pushing the Russian economy toward an abyss.


ARCO AGREES TO SELL PIPELINE AND WELLS
The Atlantic Richfield Company has agreed to sell 77 miles of natural gas pipeline and interest in gas and oil wells in Texas to a Pennsylvania company for about $94 million, company officials said.
The Castle Energy Corporation of Blue Bell, Pa., will also buy several ARCO gas contracts, Castle and ARCO officials said.
"It's part of an overall strategy of a company to evaluate where its strengths lie and what its needs are," said Albert Greenstein, a spokesman for ARCO, which is based in Los Angeles.
"This particular pipeline system and wells were not central to our operation."


Civil Society, the Police and Abortion
The intensity of the abortion debate in the U.S. has obscured the only question about it which has a valid place on the political agenda.
Nobody is urging abortion, or suggesting that it is the preferable way to decide human fertility.
The issue is the role of the state, whether police power should be called upon to punish a decision to end pregnancy.
A constitutional ban means making abortion a crime.
How that crime would be prosecuted and penalized would then be a proper subject of legislation quite apart from moral, ethical and emotional considerations beyond the reach of state power.


Harold Louis Humes, 66, Novelist And a Paris Review Co-Founder
Harold Louis Humes, a novelist and a co-founder of the literary journal The Paris Review, died on Thursday at St.
Rose's Home in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
Mr. Humes died of cancer, said his daughter Alison, of Manhattan.


Lucrative McDonnell Aircraft Gets a Reprieve
The Bush Administration's decision today to approve a multibillion-dollar sale of F-15 fighter jets to Saudi Arabia will allow the McDonnell Douglas Corporation to retain one of its largest and most lucrative weapons programs.
The sale, which is expected to be approved by Congress, will also preserve thousands of jobs in the military industry at a time when Pentagon spending is declining.
St.
Louis-based McDonnell Douglas, the nation's largest military supplier, has no new orders for the F-15 beyond the 45 that will be delivered to the United States Air Force beginning in 1994.
The contractor had said that without the Saudi order for 72 jets, the F-15 production line would close, leading to the loss of as many as 40,000 aerospace jobs, including those of subcontractors nationwide.


They Wanted Parks as Nice as Cemeteries
To the Editor:
"New Yorkers Can Thank the Dead for Cherished Public Parks" (letter, Aug. 24) erroneously cites the city's early cemeteries as catalysts for the development of public parks.
Cemeteries and their surroundings were considered undesirable settings, thought to breed pestilence, and hardly the milieu that people would choose for relaxation.
Further, the original plan for Brooklyn's Prospect Park did not include the site of the Friends Cemetery.
When a revised design with new boundaries was proposed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, a major impediment to its acceptance was that it surrounded the cemetery.


Tough Anti-Smoking Bill Is Voted By New York City Council Panel
The New York City Council is poised to adopt a law that would make the city the first in the country to force the tobacco and advertising industries to pay for anti-smoking advertisements.
The bill, passed unanimously by the Council's Health Committee yesterday, would also ban smoking anywhere in public schools.
The vote yesterday in the committee virtually assured that the full 51-member council will pass the bill in early October.
The Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, and at least 30 members have pledged to support it.


The Golan Gamble
Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of the reaction to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's stunning assertions of Israel's willingness to withdraw from parts of the Golan Heights has been the equanimity with which his proposals have been received by the Israeli public.
From interviews with Israelis and commentaries in the Israeli press, it appears that part of the reason for the quiet reaction is public confidence in Mr.
Rabin's cunning and the long and politically significant link between his reputation and the Golan, going back to 1967.
That year, as the armed forces Chief of Staff, he directed the campaign that captured the heights from Syria.


Observer; Money's Best Friend
Nobody can go wrong by running against lawyers and bureaucrats so I wasn't surprised Thursday when President Bush lashed these wretched devils with the limp noodle of his campaign oratory.
The luncheon audience of high capitalists at the Detroit Economic Club hooted with delight when the President suggested that lawyers will get a nasty comeuppance in a second Bush Administration.
The audience applause suggested most would gladly give up dessert if the sacrifice could persuade the President to have a half-dozen lawyers hauled to the podium, stripped of their briefcases and birched with wet writs.


Sister Scaglione, 63, Grace Institute Head And an Ex-Teacher
Sister Joseph Maria Scaglione, the director of the Grace Institute in Manhattan, died on Sept. 3 at the institute, where she lived.
She was 63 years old.
She died in her sleep, apparently of natural causes, the institute said.


Douglas D. Couser, Farmer, 84
Douglas D. Couser, a retired farmer and former town and county official in Orange County, died on Sept. 3 at the Arden Hill Hospital in Goshen, N.Y.
He was 84 years old and lived in nearby Pine Bush.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Patents; A Nontoxic Trap To Catch Insects
Robert M. Birdsong, who has a heating and air-conditioning business in Riverdale, Ga., says his nontoxic insect trap is the serendipitous result of having accidentally left a dog bowl under a night light.
The next morning, he found the bowl filled with fleas.
Mr.
Birdsong's trap is a tray that hangs from an ordinary night light and is filled with either a soap solution or a pad covered with a sticky substance.
It catches fleas, mosquitos, moths and other insects attracted to the light, said Mr.
Birdsong, who developed the concept with his wife, Leticia A. Birdsong.
The device has been tested at the University of Florida's department of entomology and found to work, Mr.
Birdsong said.
The inventor says he is currently discussing the prospect of large-scale production with several companies.
Aside from catching insects, the device has the added benefit of serving as "a conversation piece and an air freshener," Mr.
Birdsong said.
Mr. Birdsong received patent 5,142,815.
Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231.


God Returns to National Political Scene
To the Editor:
In "God Bless Us," William Safire's Aug. 23 column, and "Mr. Bush, Crossing the Line" (editorial, Aug. 26), God gets bigger play from you than He or She usually enjoys.
As President Bush boosts God and berates Congress, he might consider that Congress put God into the pledge of allegiance to the flag.
The original pledge, published Sept. 8, 1892, in The Youth's Companion, never mentioned God.
Our republic survived.
In 1954, Congress added "under God."


Maceio Journal; Graft? Brazilian in Huff In His $3 Million Home
In his heyday, Paulo Cesar Farias crisscrossed the skies of Brazil in his personal black-painted Learjet, suitably named the Black Bat.
Indeed, while Brazil's telegenic President, Fernando Collor de Mello, took the limelight, Mr.
Farias, his campaign treasurer, preferred the shadows.


Why Schools Must Stress Sexual Abstinence; Protect Our Children
To the Editor:
The AIDS education battle in New York City is deeply disturbing.
Our adolescents are contracting the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, at an alarming rate.
It is believed that at least 20 percent of new patients with AIDS were infected during teen-age or early-adult years.
Further, the male-to-female ratio of H.I.V. seroprevalence in teen-agers and young adults is much lower than for adults, emphasizing the heterosexual transmission in this age group.
They will die from this disease.
Yet, some of our school leaders are trying to foil AIDS education -- the best means we have of preventing the disease among teen-agers.


Judge Gives Daily News An Extension
A bankruptcy judge yesterday set a new deadline of next Thursday for resolving who is to own The Daily News.
Otherwise, she said she would almost certainly approve an across-the-board wage cut of at least 10 percent at the bankrupt paper.
Effectively, the ruling gives Mortimer B. Zuckerman, who is trying to buy the paper, until Thursday to reach agreements with the Newspaper Guild and the paper's creditors, both of whom yesterday expressed strong opposition to Mr.
Zuckerman's current offer to them.


Orwellian Dream Come True: A Badge That Pinpoints You
Is Big Brother your boss?
Another tool that lets "them" check up on "us" -- where we are and with whom we are -- is on the way.
It is the active badge, a small clip-on microcomputer, about the size of an employee I.D. card, that transmits signals to a central system.
As long as you wear the badge, the system can track your movements around an office building or even a larger area.


U.S. DROPPING PLAN TO BUILD REACTOR
As part of its program to shrink the American nuclear arms industry, the Department of Energy said today that it would immediately scrap its effort to build a new nuclear reactor to produce tritium, a radioactive gas used in atomic bombs.
The announcement was made in a letter from Energy Secretary James D. Watkins to Senator Strom Thurmond, the senior Republican lawmaker from South Carolina.
The Savannah River Plant, a nuclear arms manufacturing center near Aiken, S.C., was considered the likeliest site for building the new reactor, which would have cost at least $6 billion.


Defense Awakening No Echoes for Irish
It would seem difficult for any football team to create a sense of uncertainty with a 42-7 opening-game victory.
But the demanding followers of Notre Dame football, expecting improvements in a defensive unit that allowed an average of 382 yards a year ago, are not sure what to think.
Notre Dame's defensive problems against Northwestern last weekend left questions that the Irish faithful were still trying to answer on the eve of the team's game against Michigan Saturday afternoon in Notre Dame Stadium.


Guidepost; Lists That Pay Off
Making thorough lists and diagrams of important household and personal information has its advantages.
Consultants who specialize in organizing clients' lives say that gathering such information can help with everything from keeping your pets happier to stunning your loved ones with presents theu would like.
Here are some useful lists to make and other ways of keeping data
1.
A record of boxes you keep under your beds, noting each container's contents and location (you might opt to keep this information in night stands near the beds).
2.
A drawing of your fuse box that notes which switches connect to which parts of your home, so that you don't just stare at the box helplessly when your power goes awry.
3. Things you have forgotten when you have traveled in the past.
4.
For pet sitters, the kind and amount of food your pet likes or should have and the number of ventures outside it prefers, along with a way to reach you while you are gone and the phone number of your veterinarian.
5. The combinations of all the locks your family uses.
6.
Any possible gifts you have ever seen or heard friends or relatives lusting after, so you can thrill them at holidays and birthdays.
7.
Everything you normally need when you travel (you might even want to keep some of these items in the suitcases you usually use).
8.
Frivolous things you strongly desire.
Note both great pleasures you want to work toward slowly, like faraway vacations, and little treats, like massages or visits to new museums, that you can use to reward yourself for accomplishments (like finishing a stack of lists).  (Source: "365 Ways To Save Time" by Lucy H. Hedrick (Hearst Books, 1992). )


Patents; Zapping Fat Cells: Weight Loss Aid?
Donald G. Fellner, a New York City businessman trained in physiology, has patented what he hopes will turn out to be major artillery in the battle of the bulge.
Mr.
Fellner's technique would be an alternative to liposuction, in which fatty tissue is surgically vacuumed out of the body.
The Fellner system would kill fat cells by zapping a localized area with radio-frequency, microwave or ultrasound energy.


As Military Cuts Back, It Still Seeks Recruits
At a time when the Pentagon is actually paying people to leave the services, the military is having trouble signing up tens of thousands of new troops, in part because of the overwhelming perception that new recruits are not needed or wanted.
Not so, military officials say.
While they are thinning out the middle and higher ranks for a smaller, post-cold war force, the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps still need recruits to insure that the armed forces are properly proportioned for the future.


COMPANY NEWS: The Gospel According to Windows; Blessed Be the PC Users; They Can Find Any Verse
Perhaps Parsons Technology got its inspiration from the verse in Leviticus that reads in part, "Then the priest shall compute." Parsons's mission has been to allow the clergy and laity to find any word or phrase in the Bible, and add their own commentaries, with a few computer keystrokes.
The company's recently introduced Quickverse 2.0 for Windows (list price $79) lets readers search for words, phrases or topics in any of eight versions, from a Hebrew and Greek transliteration through the King James to the New International.
Searching for the topic "debt" can bring up all those verses having to do with borrowing and lending, even if the word "debt" does not appear.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Bush's Toll-Free Number: Good Call or Political 911?
It is too early to tell whether it will do much for President Bush, but it definitely ushered in a new era of respectability for 800 numbers.
On Thursday night, Mr.
Bush purchased five minutes of prime time on four networks -- ABC, NBC, CBS and CNN -- to inform the viewing public about his "Agenda for American Renewal," as he titled his economic plans.
The commercial, taped in the Oval Office, showed a serious-looking President sitting on his desk and speaking directly into the camera.


Your Money; Choice Available On I.R.A. Payouts
PEOPLE with I.R.A.'s who reach age 70 1/2 this year must begin to take money out of their accounts or be penalized for failure to do so, and the Internal Revenue Service allows them to elect one of two methods for making minimum distributions.
Yet, two experts say, many people -- accountants, lawyers and financial professionals, as well as account holders -- are unaware that there is a choice.
Thus, by default, holders elect the method in the prototype plan of the institution where they have an account.
However, it may not be the better choice for them, particularly for a married couple with some disparity in age.


U.N. Western Powers Plan To Seize Iraqi Funds for Aid
The United States, Britain and France are planning a new Security Council resolution in the coming weeks to seize blocked Iraqi funds to buy food and medicine for needy Iraqi Kurds and to start compensating victims of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
On Thursday, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, warned the Security Council that more than three million Kurds living in the mountains of northern Iraq, who are already short of food and fuel as a result of a 10-month blockade by the Iraqi Army, face the threat of famine and extreme hardship when the winter snows arrive.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMPHENOL CORP., Wallingford, Conn., a manufacturer of electrical connectors and cables, said it had agreed in principle to acquire Times Fiber Communications Inc., a major manufacturer of coaxial cable and related products.
Terms were not disclosed.
CHUBB CORP., Warren, N.J., declared a regular quarterly dividend of 40 cents a share, payable on Oct. 13 to shareholders of record on Sept. 25.
KIRSCHNER MEDICAL CORP., Timonium, Md., a maker of orthopedic medical instruments and devices, and Columbia Hospital Corp. said they had terminated discussions concerning the proposed merger of Columbia's Sutter Corp. into Kirschner.
PHOENIX NETWORK INC., Sausalito, Calif., a long-distance telephone service, said it had signed a letter of intent with BSN Telecom Co. to acquire BSN's long-distance customer base in exchange for Phoenix common stock.


U.S. Urges Long Term In Iraq Case
The Justice Department asked today that the banker at the center of a multibillion-dollar loan scandal involving Iraq receive a heavy prison sentence because of his failure to cooperate fully with prosecutors.
In a sentencing memorandum filed in Federal District Court in Atlanta, prosecutors demanded that Judge Marvin Shoob reject any request to reduce the sentence of Christopher P. Drogoul, who was branch manager of the Atlanta branch of the Italian-owned bank, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro.


INSIDE
Iraqi Assets Sought for Aid
The United States, Britain and France plan a new Security Council resolution to seize blocked Iraqi funds to aid needy Iraqi Kurds.
Page 3.
Hurricane Lashes Hawaii
A potent hurricane hit the Hawaiian island of Kauai, forcing thousands of residents and tourists to flee.
Page 8.


Dr. George Crile Jr., 84, Foe Of Unneeded Surgery, Dies
Dr.
George Crile Jr., the Cleveland surgeon who angered the medical establishment by insisting that some radical procedures for breast cancer and other diseases met the surgeon's needs rather than the patient's, died yesterday at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation.
He was 84 years old and lived in Cleveland Heights.
He died of lung cancer, the clinic said.


CHRONICLE
Archbishop DESMOND M. TUTU has resigned from the Harvard University Board of Overseers, to which he was elected in 1989, saying that the rapid pace of political change in South Africa precluded his service.
"The situation in my home country is volatile in the extreme and very fluid, requiring that many of us should be more available to help in the delicate but exhilarating business of being midwives for the birth of the much awaited new South Africa," the Archbishop wrote to Harvard's president, NEIL L. RUDENSTINE.


Players Have Won, but Will They Be Free?
Now that the jury in the National Football League trial has ruled the league's Plan B system of free agency illegal under antitrust law, the immediate questions that follow deal with three primary groups of players:
1) The eight plaintiffs.


In Police Shooting, a Preponderance of Evidence
The grand jury that cleared a police officer in July's fatal shooting of a drug suspect in Washington Heights that touched off nights of disturbances and a summer of simmering anger against authorities, heard overwhelming evidence that the officer acted in self-defense and that two sisters who said they saw him slay an unarmed man begging for his life gave false or erroneous accounts.
An analysis of the evidence gathered in separate inquiries by the District Attorney, the police, the F.B.I., and by a criminologist and a pathologist hired by the family of the slain man, indicates that the grand jury apparently had abundant information that supported the account of Officer Michael O'Keefe and that undercut the accounts of the sisters, Juana Madera and Anna Rodriguez.


Delay in Seniors Domination for Floyd
The presumption that Raymond Floyd would simply overwhelm the field in his Senior PGA Tour debut was exploded this afternoon as golf reared its ugly head and left him four shots out of the lead.
Floyd's struggling opening round of one-under-par 71 at the Bank One Senior Golf Classic was a study in the frustrating nature of the game.
Floyd failed to birdie three par-5's on which he hit irons for second shots; left a six-foot par putt short, and made only two birdies.


Sports of The Times; Controlling The Line of Scrimmage
THERE was not a lot of high-fiving by either side in Minneapolis on Thursday: not by the National Football League players, not by N.F.L. owners.
Each side attempted instead to put the best face possible on the outcome after a Federal jury decided that the N.F.L.'s Plan B system of free agency violated antitrust laws.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Placed Mike Bielecki, pitcher, on the 60-day disabled list.
Called up Armando Reynoso, pitcher, from Richmond of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Ryan Klesko, first baseman, from Richmond.
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Activated Andre Rison, wide receiver, and Deion Sanders, cornerback, from the exempt list.
Waived John Buddenberg, guard.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Activated Sean Jones, defensive end, and Chris Dishman, cornerback, from the exempt list.
Released Mike Mooney, offensive lineman.
Re-signed Erik Norgard, center-guard.
Placed Bo Orlando, safety, on injured reserve.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Waived Mel Agee, defensive lineman.
Activated Ed Toner, running back, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Signed Claude Loiselle, center, and Brent Grieve, left wing, to multiyear contracts.
Announced that Derek King, David Chyzowski and Dean Ewen, left wings; Uwe Krupp, Gary Nylund and Dennis Vaske, defensemen; Travis Green, center, and Glenn Healy, goaltender, decided to play out the option year of their current contracts.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Agreed to terms with Gerald Diduck, defenseman, on a two-year contract.
College
MASS.-LOWELL -- Named Jim Coppo softball coach; Dena Smith assistant trainer; Rick Machado men's assistant soccer coach; Sean Kiley, Tony Santos and Bob Milinazzo assistant wrestling coaches and Charyl Lauziere women's assistant volleyball coach.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle  SUNDAY: 11:30 A.M., ABC (Channel 7), "This Week with David Brinkley."


Why Schools Must Stress Sexual Abstinence; Fourth-Graders Too?
To the Editor:
The New York City Board of Education may be "obsessed" with the AIDS education issue ("AIDS Obsession on the School Board," editorial, Aug. 26), but the matter is not so clear-cut as you state it.
You present the problem as one of urgency in warning teen-agers about safe sex.
But I note from a news item in Education Week that the major contention between Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and the board over his 119-page teaching guide was whether or not condoms would be discussed in fourth grade.


Airlines Tally the Damage From Summer's Fare War
The half-price summer air fare, the airlines' response to lagging traffic, officially limps to a close tomorrow, when cut-rate ticket holders are required to have completed their travel.
But while the rock-bottom prices succeeded in putting record numbers of passengers into airplanes, executives and analysts say the sale was disastrous for an industry that had already lost more than $6 billion in the previous two years.
Consider some of the actual and probable consequences of that sale:


Why Schools Must Stress Sexual Abstinence; A Million Times Wrong
To the Editor:
"Aids Obsession on the School Board" (editorial, Aug. 26) chastises the four members of the New York City Board of Education who have passed resolutions to emphasize abstinence as a means of preventing AIDS.
You say that since young people are engaged in sexual activity, the emphasis should be on condoms.
It is a myth that if a lot of wrong is done by lots of people, it should somehow become accepted by society.
It is wrong to engage in premarital and extramarital sex.
It has no social redeeming value.
It is prohibited in all religions.
It leads to disease.
It breaks up families and societies.
Even if a million people do it a million times, it still would be wrong.


Ireland's Prime Minister Coming to U.S. to Prospect for Jobs
Preparing for his first trip to the United States since he took office seven months ago, Prime Minister Albert Reynolds has no emigrant illusions about the streets of New York and San Francisco being paved with gold.
In the last few years, the American and European recessions have driven tens of thousands of Irish immigrants back home, where they aggravate this country's serious economic problems.
These become growing political problems for Mr.
Reynolds, whose Government is grappling with what is called a crisis here.
The Irish unemployment rate is 20 percent, more than double that of the European Community and about triple that of the United States.


3 Indicted in Beating of Indian Doctor
Three men, including one who is now a Hudson County police officer, were indicted on Federal civil rights charges today in the beating of an Indian doctor in Jersey City nearly five years ago.
The assault, which left the doctor in a coma for nearly a week and hospitalized for a month, occurred in a rash of attacks and racial slurs against Asian Indians in the summer and fall of 1987 in Jersey City.


Judge Withdraws From Case
A Federal judge removed from a liability case because of complaints from tobacco companies has withdrawn from another case.
Page 23.


A Wise Labor Pact
New York City's tentative settlement with its firefighters sets a prudent but fair tone for talks with other unions.
By giving the union a 4.5 percent increase over 30 months, the administration took an indispensable first step toward keeping municipal wage increases to a minimum as the city rides out the recession.
The next step: to remain firm in talks with other unions.
That will not be easy, but the pact with the firefighters gives city negotiators a useful weapon by setting a precedent for moderation.
The city simply cannot afford to pay workers the substantial increases labor leaders are demanding.
Mayor David Dinkins learned the pitfalls of a weak labor policy when he granted the teachers' union a 5.5 percent one-year wage increase in 1990.
That set a slippery-slope precedent for other union negotiations at the worst possible time -- just as the city began suffering the lost revenues and increased costs imposed by the financial downturn.


Patents; Handy Reminder In a Shootout
In a development with potential implications for "Dirty Harry" sequels, John N. Horne and Michael A. Wolf, both of Los Alamos, N.M., have been awarded a patent for a digital display system that monitors how much ammunition is left in a semi-automatic or automatic firearm.
Under the stress of combat, the inventors say, firearm users often forget how many rounds are left in their weapons, putting them at a tactical disadvantage.


A Detour for Fun on the Walk Home From School


Thousands Flee Hurricane As Hawaiian Island Is Hit
The most powerful hurricane to strike Hawaii this century made a direct hit on the island of Kauai yesterday afternoon, tearing roofs off government buildings, hurling 20-foot-high waves over highways and forcing thousands of residents and tourists to flee inland from beachfront homes and hotels.
Kauai, near the western end of the Hawaiian island chain, took the brunt of Hurricane Iniki (pronounced ee-NEE-key), which registered as a category 4 storm, one short of the "catastrophic" category 5.
Gusts up to 160 miles an hour knocked out all power and telephone service on Kauai at about 3 P.M. (9 P.M. Eastern time), more than an hour before the eye of the storm passed over the island's main city, Lihue.


Women of Russia, Unite!
As the Soviet welfare system collapses, the feminization of poverty may become the new Russia's largest and cruelest problem.
In Moscow, 70 percent of the newly unemployed are women between the ages of 45 and 55.
When I visited one of Moscow's recently established unemployment offices this summer, women in line described the kind of discrimination they now face in the job market.
Some were turned away because they were too old -- in their 40's.
Others had been told that their maternal responsibilities made them unreliable workers.


Hitchcock Plays a Role in a Who-won-it
George Brett said it best before the game even started. Who cares who wins these ones?
The Royals are out of it.
The Yankees are out of it.
Reaching the .500 mark means little, winning one game against another losing team even less.
There must be other things to bring someone out to the ball park.
For Brett, it is the pursuit of hit No. 3,000 -- a milestone that sits 22 hits away.


Demonstrators Clash With Police in Chile on Anniversary of Coup


Ban on Fetal Tissue Research Denies Hope to Ill Americans
To the Editor:
In "The Myth of a Transplant Cure" (letter, Aug. 15), Robert J. White, professor of surgery at Case Western Reserve University, misstates facts about fetal tissue transplants, and his credentials as an academic physician impose a misleading cloak of credibility on his statements.
Data presented by European, Cuban and American clinical researchers at the fourth international symposium on neural transplantation held recently at George Washington University do not support Dr.
White's contention that fetal brain transplants have no therapeutic use in Parkinson's disease.
These workers, notably those from Sweden, have documented clear clinical improvement in patients after fetal cell implants.


Civil Society, the Police and Abortion
The intensity of the abortion debate in the U.S. has obscured the only question about it which has a valid place on the political agenda.
Nobody is urging abortion, or suggesting that it is the preferable way to decide human fertility.
The issue is the role of the state, whether police power should be called upon to punish a decision to end pregnancy.
A constitutional ban means making abortion a crime.
How that crime would be prosecuted and penalized would then be a proper subject of legislation quite apart from moral, ethical and emotional considerations beyond the reach of state power.


A Dress Shoe Proud to Be A Lightweight
For the man who likes the feel of running shoes while jogging but goes to work in dress shoes, formal footwear with some of the running shoes' comforts will be on the market by the end of the year.
New Balance Athletic Shoe of Boston recently introduced a wingtip-style dress shoe with some of the features of the company's leading running shoe, the M997.


Theater in Review
Stuffed Puppet Theater 'Manipulator' and 'Underdog' Through next Saturday


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the new Stuyvesant High School building in Manhattan misstated the size of its swimming pool.
It is 75 feet long, the standard for Public School Athletic League competition.


Theater in Review
Paul Zaloom  'Sick but True' Through tomorrow


Ferraro's Husband Is Said To Have Met Mob Figure
A report by a New York State organized-crime investigator says that in 1985 John A. Zaccaro, the husband of Geraldine A. Ferraro, was observed meeting and talking with Robert DiBernardo, a reputed mob figure who the authorities say ran a pornography business.
Aides to one of Ms.
Ferraro's rivals -- City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman -- in the Democratic race for Senate tipped off a reporter to seek out the report, which then was made available in a matter of hours by the agency that produced it.


Finally, Chavez vs. Camacho
Boxing politics kept Julio Cesar Chavez and Hector Camacho out of the same ring for years.
But once both fighters had the same promoter, Don King, the "Fight for It All" was made.
On Saturday, Chavez, the unbeaten World Boxing Council superlightweight champion, defends his title against Camacho, a former champion in three weight classes, in a scheduled 12-round bout at the Thomas and Mack Center here.


Pistons Reportedly Close to Signing Mills
TERRY MILLS, a restricted free agent forward who played with the Nets last season, is close to signing an offer sheet with the Detroit Pistons, several National Basketball Association officials said.
Detroit needs a forward to replace JOHN SALLEY, who was traded to the Miami Heat this week.
The 6-foot-10-inch Mills grew up in suburban Detroit and played at the University of Michigan.
The offer sheet is believed to be a five-year package averaging $2.2 million per season.
It also includes bonuses intended to make it more difficult for the Nets to match it.
If Mills signs the offer sheet, the Nets must match it within 15 days, or they will lose him to Detroit.
Mills, who is 24 years old, averaged 9 points and 5.5 rebounds a game last season, playing all 82 games.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; CLINTON SAYS FOES SOW INTOLERANCE
Gov.
Bill Clinton today accused his Republican opponents of promoting a renewed "intolerance" that would divide the nation along religious lines.
Speaking at the University of Notre Dame in a tone that was at times confessional and at times like a homily to the converted, Mr.
Clinton, a Southern Baptist, emphasized his ties to Catholicism.
He also extemporaneously defended himself against repeated shouts and heckling from anti-abortion demonstrators scattered around the Stepan Center here.


A New Term, and Cautious Hope at Jefferson High; Brooklyn School Installs Tougher Security Measures Amid Memories of 3 Killings
The students have returned to Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn with the usual back-to-school freshness, excitement and anxiety of new paint, new faces and new classes -- offering the promise of a new beginning.
But they have returned to a battery of new security devices, from X-ray machines like those at airports to electromagnetic door locks linked to a sophisticated central alarm system -- offering a stark reminder of the past.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.98
3.06
5.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.89
5.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.92
5.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.86
5.80
7.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.29
7.24
7.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.44
8.40
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.24
6.24
6.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bad Blood at the Burial Ground
Construction and archeological efforts have stopped at the 18th-century Negros Burial Ground in lower Manhattan, while New York City and the Federal Government devise a plan to excavate and preserve the site.
The hiatus should also give tempers a chance to cool, for the project was being tarnished by accusations of racism.
But while those directing the project were guilty of bureaucratic insensitivity, their mistakes were the result of ineptitude, not racism.
In September 1991, the General Services Administration, the Federal agency responsible for the construction of a courthouse and office building at the site, stumbled onto one of New York's most significant archeological discoveries.
Most of the city's 18th-century African residents, slave and free, were buried on the land, which at the time was outside the walls of the colonial town.
The indigent, alien sailors and British soldiers, all of whom were considered unworthy to be entombed in church cemeteries, were also buried there.
It is estimated that between 1712 and 1790, about 20,000 people found their final resting place in the graveyard.


Washington Heights Calm
About two dozen demonstrators gathered on a street corner in Washington Heights last night in a brief, peaceful protest, one day after the announcement that a grand jury had cleared a police officer in the shooting death of a Dominican immigrant last July.
As of 1:20 A.M., the police reported no arrests or injuries related to the grand jury's decision.
But fires broke out in two abandoned buildings near the scene of the shooting.
The fire department deemed both blazes suspicious but said it did not know whether the fires were set in response to the grand jury's action.


The Times Appoints Three Editors to Major Posts
Appointments to three major editing positions at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times.
Jack Rosenthal, editorial page editor for the last six years, will become editor of The New York Times Magazine and an assistant managing editor on Jan. 1.


For Civil Court: Manhattan, Brooklyn
The disappointing lineup of candidates in this year's New York City Civil Court election makes the case for nonpartisan merit appointment of judges more compelling than ever.
Under the current system, political party leaders hold far more sway than voters in choosing who gets the 13 Civil Court seats in contention in November.
They largely control the petition process by which candidates get on the ballot, and fend off competition with nasty lawsuits over petition technicalities.


Bridge
It would not be easy to identify the world's best octogenarian player, even if the field is restricted to those who are both active and successful in tournament play.
But starting today there is a new candidate for the title: David Treadwell of Wilmington, Del., celebrates his 80th birthday, and his many friends plan a surprise party.
As part of the conspiracy, he will be prevented from reading this column prematurely.
A week ago Treadwell was in Pittsburgh, where he won two titles.
A week before that he was in Rochester, where he had one first, one second and one third place.
Few players, in any age bracket, can match that record of regional success, a record that has been a pattern for many years.
He has won national titles, and last year was a candidate for international honors.
Away from the card tables he has contributed to the welfare of the game.
He used to be the chairman of the appeals committee at national championships, dealing with knotty problems far into the small hours each night.


Patents; Elvis and Other Imitations From a Robot Called Jake
Although animated characters like Steven Spielberg's E.T. appear charmingly anthropomorphic in the movies, their apparently fluid movements are the result of a complicated splicing of different film shootings that can combine puppets, actors in costume or programmed robots.
Now there is Jake, a two-and-a-half-foot, 68-pound, gold-plated robot who "sees" in full color from his right eye (where there is a camera), "hears" out of both of his pointy ears and works a crowd like a polished politician.
The wizard behind this development is Victor H. Lang, a 29-year-old engineer from Fort Collins, Colo., who last week received a patent for an "animated character system with real-time control," the basic technology behind Jake.


Oh, What a Relief He Really Isn't
The job was different, the baseball and the strike zone weren't.
Bret Saberhagen, then, recognized there was no room for excuses after it was all over.
The 82d defeat of his career, suffered in a rare relief appearance, hurt in all the same ways the first 81 had.
"I take pride in pitching," said Saberhagen, the loser in tonight's 4-3 defeat at the hands of the Expos.
"I expected to go out there and do the job that was handed to me."


New Sound Of Music In a Hall Renewed
For more than 10 years, opening night of the San Francisco Symphony was an event to be seen, but not necessarily heard.
The wide, high spaces and U-shaped seating pattern of Davies Symphony Hall provided excellent views across a starched and sequined audience.
The annual event, coupled with the opening of the opera, led off a musical season that has long been the jewel of the city's cultural crown.


Out of Cell (and Sickbed), Biaggi Tries Anew
It is known as the miracle on 234th Street.
Mario Biaggi, the former Bronx Democratic Congressman who was too sick to serve his full prison term, is feeling better.
So much better that he is running for Congress again.


Review/Film; High-Tech Horror and a Body Count to Match
A horror film that starts off in an art gallery deserves at least a little credit for upward mobility.
And "Hellraiser III: Hell on Earth" is also commendable for helping to usher in the age of high-tech horror, with computer-generated special effects that bespeak a definite sophistication.
That's not to say that a head isn't blown to bits 10 minutes into the story.
But it does at least help make sense of this series and its considerable success.
Please don't blame yourself if you come late (or, for that matter, never) to any of this.
The "Hellraiser" phenomenon, which began with a Clive Barker novella and the 1987 film Mr.
Barker directed, was easy to miss.
It is by now so complex that this film's brief attempt to explain its two predecessors (with a special appearance by Ashley Laurence, an earlier star) makes the head spin.
Suffice it to say that Pinhead (Doug Bradley) has already been inducted into the Fangoria magazine Hall of Fame, and that his nail-studded facial grid and S &amp; M leather outfit would be -- and no doubt is -- the envy of many heavy metal fans.


New Italian Premier's Fortunes Taking Fast Plunge With the Lira
With almost bewildering speed, the fortunes of Italy's Prime Minister, Giuliano Amato, have been upended, leaving him to face an autumn of discontent after a languorous summer in which his fragile Government could do no wrong.
Even an unusual spate of arrests of reputed Mafia bosses and their allies -- normally a cause for chest-beating affirmations of Government strength -- has not deflected a sense that his 11-week-old administration has been unable to navigate a way out of deep economic trouble.


Honda Cutting Ties to Auto Racing
The Honda Motor Company said today that it would end its participation in Formula One auto racing at the end of this season -- a sign of changing priorities and tough times for the automobile industry.
Honda, which supplies engines to Formula One teams, said it wanted to turn its attention to making low-polluting engines, not superfast ones.
By suspending its development of racing car engines, Honda will free 100 engineers to work on emissions control, alternative-fuel technology and other projects the company would not specify.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits with Americans; 2 Old Truman Hands Guard the Boss's Name
This year the spin doctors are trying to spin time itself.
But amid the confusion of memories welling up lately from 11 Presidential campaigns ago, there is an old whistle-stop speech writer here who recalls with first-hand authority how his boss, President Harry S. Truman, used a word -- "trimmer" -- to tersely dismiss any fellow politician he rated a hypocrite.
"He'd say 'trimmer' for anyone who would say one thing and do another," recalled David H. Stowe, an 82-year-old veteran of the Truman White House.
"Like Bush saying 'no new taxes,' " said the weathered partisan who served his master variously, from poker table to the now fondly remembered 1948 campaign.
That was the classic come-from-behind victory that, incongruously for this nostalgia-filled retiree, President Bush has lately been invoking.


Unfair Prices Cited in Some Steel Imports
The Commerce Department tentatively ruled today that several foreign steel companies were selling some types of bars and pipes in the United States at unfairly low prices or with unfair subsidies and moved to impose punitive Customs duties on these imports.
The rulings involve narrowly defined categories of pipes and bars.
Imports in these cases totaled $314.5 million last year.
The decisions are important mainly for the precedents they set for the Commerce Department's consideration this winter of 72 legal cases filed by American steel producers on June 30 against flat-rolled and plate steel imports from four dozen countries.
Few British Subsidies
The department found heavy subsidies at most German steel companies, one Brazilian company and at France's main steelmaker.
But it found found few or no subsidies at Germany's largest steelmaker, at British steelmakers and at other Brazilian steel producers.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement described Labor Secretary Lynn Martin's comments incompletely.
In addition to saying that up to 150,000 jobs could be lost, she cited studies predicting that even more jobs could be gained.


In Their Own Words
GOV. BILL CLINTON In a speech at the University of Notre Dame yesterday
"On a hot summer afternoon 29 summers ago, I met President Kennedy in the Rose Garden of the White House as a 16-year-old delegate to America Legion Boy's Nation. That afternoon turned me toward public service. After President Kennedy was killed, another Southerner, Lyndon Johnson, succeeded to the Presidency with the promise to enact John Kennedy's program to get America moving again, and to bring America together.


CHRONICLE
Clearly, MATTHEW MAXWELL TAYLOR KENNEDY, the 27-year-old son of Robert and Ethel Kennedy, is taking his new job as a crime fighter seriously.
On Thursday, his third day on the staff of District Attorney LYNNE ABRAHAM in Philadelphia, Mr.
Kennedy was strolling along Locust Street when he spotted a man breaking into a car.
He yelled at the man, then pursued him on foot for three blocks, "running him right into some policemen," according to Bill Davol, director of communications for the District Attorney.
The man, Julio Jackson, 27, of West Philadelphia, was charged with theft and receiving stolen goods.


Black Baptists Are Buffeted From Within and Without
Heart-felt amens echoed late into the night off the walls of a hotel ballroom here as hundreds of black Baptists answered a lineup of preachers dueling for their souls with hoarse but inspired shouts that were, by turn, slyly comic and deeply pious.
Like handicappers, the more knowledgeable of those in the audience, touted the relative strengths of the lineup.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 IRAQI ASSETS SOUGHT FOR KURDS
The United States, Britain and France are planning new Security Council resolutions to seize blocked Iraqi funds to buy food and medicine for needy Kurds and to start compensating victims of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.  3  BELGRADE AND ZAGREB IN ACCORD
Cyrus R. Vance, the U.N. envoy to the former Yugoslavia, announced that Croatia and federal Yugoslavia had agreed to reopen a major road between their capitals and to establish a demilitarized zone on a fiercely disputed peninsula in the west.  3  A GAULLIST SAYS NO ON EUROPE
If French voters reject a treaty on European union in a referendum on Sept. 20, a 49-year-old Gaullist legislator will undoubtedly take his place in French history as the force who took on the establishment in the campaign to defeat the treaty.  2  ISRAELI EQUANIMITY ON GOLAN
News analysis: Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of the reaction to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's assertions of Israel's willingness to withdraw from parts of the Golan Heights has been the equanimity with which his proposals have been received by Israelis.  4  TROUBLE FOR ITALY'S PREMIER
With unusual speed, the fortunes of Italy's Prime Minister, Giuliano Amato, have been upended, leaving him to face an autumn of discontent after a summer in which his fragile Government could do no wrong.  2  President Yeltsin warned of dangers to his economic program.  3  Ireland's Premier is coming to the U.S. to look for jobs.  4  Maceio Journal: The coastal haven of a top Brazilian aide.  4  National 5-9  BUSH APPROVES JET SALE TO SAUDIS
Once again demonstrating the advantages of incumbency in an election year, the President authorized the sale of F-15 fighter aircraft to Saudi Arabia.
The deal, unlikely to be blocked by Congress, would help secure thousands of jobs.  1  In a new ad, Bush turns hawker, replete with 800 number.  6  Two Truman aides recall how it really was.  6  CLINTON SPEAKS OF VALUES
Extemporaneously defending himself against repeated heckling by anti-abortion protesters, Governor Clinton told an audience at the University of Notre Dame that the Republicans were promoting intolerance that threatened to divide the nation along religious lines.  1  THE ROCK-BOTTOM BOTTOM LINE
The low fares of this summer succeeded in putting record numbers of passengers into airplanes, but executives and analysts say the sale was disastrous to the industry.  1  HARD TIMES IN HOMESTEAD
The first signs of normalcy had barely begun reappearing in the hurricane-battered town of Homestead, Fla., when word came that a Senate committee had declined to provide money to rebuild the Air Force base there.
Yesterday there was more bad news: the Cleveland Indians put off plans to go to Homestead for spring training.  1  HURRICANE BEARS DOWN ON HAWAII
Thousands of people fled beachfront homes and hotels as the leading edge of a powerful hurricane began pummeling the Hawaiian islands.  8  UNCLE SAM STILL WANTS YOU
The military is having trouble signing up recruits, in part because, given the fact that the Pentagon is actually paying many troops to leave, there is a perception that new ones are not needed or wanted.  5  NEW CUT IN ATOM ARMS COMPLEX
Proceeding with its program to shrink the nuclear arms industry, the Energy Department said it would immediately scrap its effort to build a new reactor to produce tritium, a radioactive gas used in atomic bombs.  5  BLACK BAPTISTS MEET IN ATLANTA
Delegates to the 112th annual gathering of the National Baptist Convention U.S.A. talked of being buffeted by a host of secular concerns.  9  Beliefs: Gay rights as the issue of conflict for the 90's.  9  The Times announced appointments to three major editing posts.  9  Preparations proceeded for a shuttle launching today.  5  Metro Digest 23  TOUGH ANTI-SMOKING CAMPAIGN
The New York City Council is poised to adopt a law that would make the city the first in the country to force the tobacco and advertising industries to pay for anti-smoking advertisements.  1  FINANCING A WOULD-BE SENATOR
Money is coming into the Democratic Senate campaigns of Geraldine A. Ferraro, Elizabeth Holtzman and Robert Abrams from different places.
Ms.
Ferraro has received nearly a third of her money from contributors who do not live in New York.
Ms.
Holtzman has relied heavily on investment firms that seek bond underwriting business from her office.
Mr.
Abrams has received hundreds of thousands of dollars from lawyers.  1  BIAGGI'S BACK
Mario Biaggi, the former Bronx Democratic Congressman who was too sick to serve his full prison term, is feeling better.
So much better that he is running for Congress again.  1  Business Digest 33  Consumer's World 11  Orwellian dream come true: a badge that pinpoints you.
More range, less static in new cordless phones.
A dress shoe proud to be a lightweight.
Pricetag: Getting a haircut.
Sanchez Vicario in final.  29  Edberg prevails over Lendl.  29  Obituaries 10  Dr.
George Crile Jr., foe of unneeded surgery.
Dr. Evelyn B. Man, a biochemist.
Harold Louis Humes, a novelist and a Paris Review co-founder.
Harriet W. Sheridan, professor and dean at Brown University.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  The Syrian peace shock.
Family values from family leave.
A wise labor pact.
For Civil Court.
Letters  Russell Baker: Money's best friend.
Robert R. Macdonald: Bad blood at a burial ground.
Flora Lewis: Civil society, the police and abortion.
Katrina vanden Heuvel: Women of Russia, unite!
Jonathan M. Tisch: Mugging the tourists.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; JET SALE TO SAUDIS APPROVED BY BUSH, SAVING JOBS IN U.S.
President Bush tore apart his campaign schedule today to put on another demonstration of the powers of the Oval Office, dropping into St.
Louis to hand out what the White House called a $9 billion deal to sell advanced F-15 fighters to Saudi Arabia.
It was the second time in nine days that Mr.
Bush had dispensed this sort of plum contract to the American arms industry, helping secure thousands of jobs in states like Missouri, Texas and California, where a major part of the battle for the Presidency will be fought this fall.


T.A.C.'s Longtime Leader Is Facing Job Evaluation
The strongest challenge yet to Ollan Cassell's leadership of track and field in the United States will be considered this weekend in Denver, where the executive committee of The Athletics Congress plans to review his performance against newly developed criteria for the job of executive director.
Cassell, a 52-year-old former Olympic quarter-miler, has been T.A.C.'s only executive director since the organization grew out of the Amateur Athletic Union in the late 1970's.
That makes him the longest-serving chief of any governing body within the United States Olympic Committee.
A Survivor
As such, he has often been a target of disgruntled and critical factions within the track and field community, several of whom have tried to unseat him.
But each time he has survived, always emerging stronger, and that could well be the case again this time in the most formal procedure ever used to evaluate his performance as the T.A.C. executive director.


Carnovsky Memorial
A memorial service for the actor Morris Carnovsky is planned for 2 P.M.
Monday on the grounds of the former American Shakespeare Festival Theater, 1850 Elm Street, Stratford, Conn.
Mr.
Carnovsky, who died on Sept. 1 at age 94, played his first Shakespearean role at the theater in 1956.


2 for the Money: Puncher and Counterpuncher
One grunts and one bunts: how convenient that the twin themes of this United States Open will assume human form and take to opposite sides of the Stadium Court today as the defending champion, Monica Seles, the loud one, tries to protect her title from Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the persistent one.
After a pair of lopsided semifinals weeded out the finalists from the wishful thinkers yesterday, Seles and Sanchez Vicario, the favorites heading into their matches, each headed out of them with routine, straight-set victories.


John H. Grossman, 78, A Retired Gynecologist
Dr.
John Henry Grossman, a retired gynecologist in Bridgeport, Conn., and an enthusiast of the magical arts, died on Tuesday at the Yale New Haven Hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Stratford.
A cause of death was unavailable.


Edberg Sees Daylight and Slips Through
He kissed the net, and jumped over it, and although he didn't jump over or kiss Ivan Lendl, he did extend his vanquished opponent a brief but warm embrace.
If this was Stefan Edberg's idea of unabashed joy, he was entitled.
He had managed to overcome the four match points he choked away Thursday night and the fifth-set service break he coughed up yesterday afternoon.
A 3-hour-58-minute United States Open quarterfinal that began with Edberg dominating under the stars ended with the Swede rallying in the sun for a 6-3, 6-3, 3-6, 5-7, 7-6 (7-3) victory over the former three-time Open champion and 1992 Jimmy Connors-buster.


Animals Loaded and Crew Is Set For a U.S.-Japan Shuttle Mission
Technicians today loaded carp, frogs and other animals aboard the space shuttle Endeavour as they completed final preparations for a seven-day cooperative space mission involving the United States and Japan.
Mission controllers said weather appeared to be the only factor that could delay the launching scheduled for 10:23 A.M. on Saturday.
The mission of Endeavour and its crew of seven astronauts is viewed as a prelude to what could become routine international cooperation aboard the proposed Space Station Freedom.
Weather forecasters predicted a 70 percent chance of acceptable weather.


Evelyn B. Man, 87, Biochemist Who Helped Create Thyroid Test
Dr.
Evelyn B. Man, a biochemist who helped develop the first widely used test to detect low hormone levels in the thyroid gland, which enabled treatment to prevent mental retardation, died on Sept. 3 at her home in West Hartford, Conn.
She was 87 years old.
She died of cancer, a funeral home spokesman said.


Family Values From Family Leave
This week's approval by the House of Representatives of a bill guaranteeing unpaid leave to workers facing family or medical emergencies puts President Bush's campaign for family values to a severe test.
Mr.
Bush vetoed another version of the bill in 1990 and is threatening to veto this one.
It's a fate that the bill doesn't deserve.
The Family and Medical Leave Act would guarantee up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for parents of a newborn or adopted child or for family medical emergencies.
Supporters say the bill would enhance job security, worker morale and the ability of families to cope with new babies or emergencies.
It would also be in line with national policies governing such leaves in other advanced countries.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Half-price summer air fares were a disaster for the airline industry, analysts say.
Although the low fares put record numbers of passengers into airplanes, they did little to help an industry that has lost more than $6 billion in the last two years.  [ Page 1. ]
McDonnell Douglas will be able to retain one of its largest and most lucrative weapons programs and preserve thousands of jobs as a result of the Bush Administration's decision to approve a multibillion-dollar sale of F-15 fighter jets to Saudi Arabia.  [ 35. ]
Honda will end its participation in Formula One auto racing to turn its attention to making low-polluting engines.  [ 35. ]
A U.S. decision not to build a nuclear plant used to make atomic weapons is a blow to two groups of industrial companies.  [ 5. ]
The New York Times announced three major editing appointments.
Jack Rosenthal, editorial page editor, will become editor of The New York Times Magazine and an assistant managing editor; Howell Raines, Washington editor, will succeed him, and Warren Hoge, an assistant managing editor and editor of the magazine, will take charge of culture and style coverage and other features.  [ 9. ]
A bankruptcy judge set a new deadline for resolving who is to own The Daily News.
Mortimer B. Zuckerman now has until Thursday to reach agreements with those opposing his bid.  [ 25. ]
G.
Fox &amp; Company stores will be closed and merged into the Filene's chain by their parent, May Department Stores.  [ 26. ]  The Economy
The Justice Department sought a heavy prison sentence for the manager of the Atlanta branch of the Italian-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, who pleaded guilty to charges involving an estimated $5 billion in unauthorized loans to Iraq.  [ 33. ]
Prices paid by wholesalers rose only one-tenth of 1 percent in August despite big increases in fruits and vegetables.  [ 34. ] International
London's standing as a financial center is being challenged byEuropean unification, the expansion of stock markets on the Continent and the growing dominance of Germany.  [ 33. ]
The Commerce Department moved to impose punitive customs duties on steel from certain foreign companies.  [ 33. ]
With Italy's lira slipping closer to devaluation and the country's huge deficit swelling, the Prime Minister faces an autumn of discontent after a summer in which he could do no wrong.  [ 2. ]
Boris N. Yeltsin denounced the Russian central bank, saying its policies were pushing the Russian economy toward an abyss.  [ 3. ]
Ireland's prime minister is coming to the United States to urge companies to open operations in his country.  [ 4. ]  Markets
The stock market drifted through an indecisive session, with the Dow average inching ahead 0.54 point, to 3,305.70.  [ 36. ]
Treasury bond prices fell despite good news on inflation as investors sold securities for technical reasons.  [ 36. ]
The dollar rose against most currencies amid growing pressure on Germany to lower its interest rates.  [ 43. ]  The forecast for a larger wheat and soybean harvest sent grain prices lower.  [ 43. ] Today's Columns
Jake, a 2 1/2-foot gold-plated robot who "sees" in color through a camera in his right eye, "hears" out of both his pointy ears and works a crowd like a politician is a new kind of Hollywood movie star, according to his inventor.
Patents.  [ 33. ]
I.R.A. holders who reach 70 1/2 this year must begin taking money out of their accounts or be penalized.
But most people, including financial professionals, don't know that there are two methods allowed by the I.R.S.
Jan Rosen: Your Money.  [ 34. ]


Suspect Says She, Not Daughter, Called 911
A pregnant mother of six, whose 11-year-old daughter was said to have called 911 in a frightened plea for help, said today that it was she, not her daughter, who summoned the police to her home and then begged them to let her smoke "just one more hit" as the children looked on.
The woman, Joyce Howard, said in an interview with a local television station that she had called 911 and pretended to be her daughter because "I needed someone to help me."


The Syrian Peace Shock
If peace should ever break out between Syria and Israel -- and that's still a big if -- sheer astonishment might silence some of the world's most vocal antagonists.
At the start of the Mideast peace process, no relationship seemed more hostile and unlikely to yield to diplomacy.
But when regional negotiations resume in Washington on Monday, there may now occur the first serious, substantive talks between Israel and its most adamantly rejectionist neighbor.
Israel's new Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, took the first step by declaring that the Golan Heights between Syria and Israel were covered by United Nations resolutions calling for an exchange of land for peace.


More Range, Less Static in New Cordless Phones
For those who appreciate the convenience of cordless telephones but often find them irksome to use, a new, somewhat friendlier generation is on the way.
Although many consumers like the mobility of cordless phones, they often have to cope with several irritations: the snap, crackle and pop of static; inexplicable gaps in signal coverage; the annoying occasional bother of neighbors listening in, and telescoping antennae that sometimes snap in two instead of gliding back into the phone.


Eight Islanders Are Playing Out Options
Eight Islanders will play out the option years on their contracts, the team announced yesterday.
They are UWE KRUPP, GLENN HEALY, DEREK KING, DAVID CHYZOWSKI, DEAN EWEN, GARY NYLUND, DENNIS VASKE and TRAVIS GREEN.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
A HARDER LINE  AGAINST SMOKING
The City Council is poised to adopt a law that would make the city the first in the country to force the tobacco and advertising industries to pay for anti-smoking advertisements.
The bill, passed unanimously by the Council's Health Committee yesterday, would also ban smoking anywhere in public schools.
Page 1.
THE RETURN OF MR.
BIAGGI
Mario Biaggi, the former Democratic Congressman who was too sick to serve his full prison term, is feeling better.
So much better that he is running for Congress again.
And while his opponent in Tuesday's Democratic primary, Representative Eliot L. Engel, grumbled that his predecessor "must have gone to Lourdes," Mr.
Biaggi attributes his remarkable recovery to the healing power of politics.
Page 1.
NEW DEADLINE AT THE NEWS
A bankruptcy judge set a new deadline of Thursday for resolving who is to own The Daily News.
Otherwise, she said she would almost certainly approve an across-the-board wage cut of at least 10 percent at the bankrupt paper.
Page 25.
REGION
THE CANDIDATES  AND THEIR FUNDS
Three constituencies are playing roles in financing the Democratic Senate campaigns of Geraldine A. Ferraro, Elizabeth Holtzman and Robert Abrams.
Ms.
Ferraro has received nearly a third of her money from contributors who live outside the New York metropolitan area.
Ms.
Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, has relied on investment firms that seek bond underwriting business from her office.
And Mr.
Abrams, the State Attorney General, has received large donations from lawyers around the state.
Page 1.
REPORT ON FERRARO'S HUSBAND
A report by a New York State organized-crime investigator says that in 1985 John A. Zaccaro, the husband of Geraldine A. Ferraro, was observed meeting and talking with Robert DiBernardo, a reputed mob figure who the authorities say ran a pornography business.
Aides to one of Ms.
Ferraro's rivals in the Democratic race for Senate tipped off a reporter to seek out the report.
The Holtzman officials were apparently seeking to draw attention to the report because they believe it contradicts an assertion by Ms.
Ferraro that Mr.
Zaccaro had never met Mr.
DiBernardo.
Page 24.
A DESPERATE PLEA FOR HELP
A pregnant mother of six, whose 11-year-old daughter was said to have called 911 in a frightened plea for help, said today that it was she, not her daughter, who summoned the Suffolk County police to her home.
Page 26.
A KEY JERSEY CONGRESSMAN IS RETIRING
Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo, the moderate Republican who was expected to become the dean of New Jersey's Congressional delegation next year, is resigning.
Page 26.
AN APOLOGY TO BLACK STUDENTS
The President of the State University of New York's College at Oneonta apologized for allowing the names of all 125 male black students to be given to the police investigating an assault case.
Page 26.
Three men, including a police officer, indicted in a 1987 bias attack.
Page 26.
About New York by Felicia R. Lee 25


God Returns to National Political Scene; Not a Name
To the Editor:
William Safire's Aug. 27 column and other articles on "God" cause me to wonder.
I've wondered about this question with fellow theologians and never had a satisfactory answer.
"God" is not a name.
It is a title, like "king." There are many such names: Yahweh, Elohim, Adonai, Zeus, Baal, Allah (which may be in the same category as "God")


Mitterrand Undergoes a Prostate Operation
President Francois Mitterrand underwent an emergency prostate operation today and was later described by his doctors as being in satisfactory condition.
They said they expected him to remain hospitalized for about a week.
A statement from the Elysee Palace, which had announced that Mr.
Mitterrand entered the Cochin Hospital Thursday night for today's operation, also said everything had proceeded normally.
Dr.
Bernard Debre, head of urology at the hospital, added that the President was "feeling fine."


Theater in Review
Theater Drak  'Pinokio' Through tomorrow


Corrections
The "Candidates on Television" listing yesterday misspelled the name of the Vice President in some editions.
It is Quayle, not Quale.
The Tmise regrets the error.


Pride, Not Payment, Is Reward for McNeil
The antitrust lawsuit brought by eight players against the National Football League bore the name of Jets running back Freeman McNeil.
But he was one of four players who was not awarded monetary damages in the case on Thursday after a jury found for the players and rendered the N.F.L.'s Plan B free-agency system an illegal restraint of trade.
A 12-year veteran whose career is winding down, McNeil is unlikely to be around to benefit from any long-term rewards that might come through free agency as a result of the verdict.


Collins Profits And Mara Shrugs
Mark Collins was happy because he was an obvious winner.
Wellington Mara said he found things to be happy about and did not consider himself a loser.
That was the reaction at Giants Stadium today to Thursday's verdict by a jury in Minneapolis in a Federal antitrust suit.
The suit challenged the National Football League's system of limited free agency.


No Headline
People say they've never seen me looking so well.
MARIO BIAGGI, campaigning for Congress after ill health got him out of prison.  [ 1:2. ]


Expressionist Architect Is Subject of 2 Lectures
The German Expressionist architect Hans Poelzig is the subject of two lectures to be given next week in Manhattan by Julius Posener, a former student and friend of the architect.


G. Fox to Close, Ending Retail Era
G.
Fox &amp; Company, this city's last downtown department store and for decades a symbol of Connecticut's capital city, will close early next year, company officials announced today.
The closing of the 145-year-old flagship store and headquarters will eliminate 955 jobs from downtown, although the store's owner, the May Department Stores Company, said as many as 450 of those workers might get jobs elsewhere in the company.
The city's other retailers will also feel the impact, with no remaining anchor store left to attract shoppers.


Homestead, Trying to Get Up, Is Knocked Flat by Base Vote
Just as the first glimmers of normalcy have started to appear in the hurricane-battered city of Homestead, more setbacks are arising.
A Winn-Dixie supermarket finally opened Wednesday, the Rite-Aid Pharmacy is filling prescriptions and the traffic light is again operating in the center of Homestead's old downtown, small signs to weary people living without electricity and drinkable water since Aug. 24 that life might someday again be normal.


Corrections
A front-page article on Thursday about John McNamara, the Long Island car dealer who bilked General Motors in a $6 billion scheme, referred incorrectly to the case of Michael R. Milken, the junk bond entrepreneur.
Mr.
Milken pleaded guilty to six felonies related to securities law, but not to insider trading.


Beliefs
Politically, homosexual rights will be in the 1990's what abortion rights were in the 1980's.
People on all points of the political spectrum are making that observation these days, a few with relish, most with dread.
They know that the abortion conflict inflamed public life without even moving society very far toward a point of resolution.
It need not have been that way.
Not that reaching a workable political consensus about a moral issue like abortion is easy under the best of circumstances: the political process is attuned to splitting the difference, not examining basic principles.
But the task certainly became harder once the debate managed to eliminate a broad middle range of opinion that favors neither abortion on demand nor a ban on abortion in nearly all circumstances.


Correction
In Thursday's column, the name of a winner of a duplicate tournament at the Murray Hill Club was rendered incorrectly.
He is Faishon Bafna.


Challenge to London's Lofty Role
This city's standing as a major financial center has survived the end of the British Empire, the rise in economic power of New York and Tokyo and the rapid changes that have swept banking, insurance and the securities business.
Now London is being challenged again, this time by the fitful movement toward European unification, the expansion of stock markets on the Continent and the growing dominance of Germany over Europe's economic affairs.


Gas Production Still Off in Gulf
Daily gas output from the Gulf of Mexico remains 2 billion to 2.25 billion cubic feet below pre-hurricane levels even though about 500 million cubic feet of production was restored this week, the Federal Government said today.
The report came after the trading ended on the New York Mercantile Exchange, where natural gas prices finished higher.
The price of the October contract was up 2 cents, to $2.148 for 1,000 cubic feet, a gain of 0.1 cent for the week.


A French Deputy, Tilting at Europe, Woos History
Philippe Seguin grimaced noticeably as he was introduced to the crowd as the man who changed the history of France.
Perhaps he felt embarrassed.
Perhaps he just considered the description premature.
Yet if French voters reject a treaty on European union in a referendum on Sept. 20, the burly 49-year-old Gaullist deputy will undoubtedly take his place in French history as the force who took on the French establishment in the campaign to defeat the treaty.


Last Downtown Department Store to Close in Hartford


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Christopher Street between Seventh Avenue and Greenwich Avenue will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Christopher Street East fair.
Fourth Avenue between Fifth Street and Astor Place will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Fourth Avenue fair.


DOW CHEMICAL'S LINE OF SUCCESSION APPEARS SET
The line of succession at the Dow Chemical Company has apparently been established, with the company announcing yesterday that William S. Stavropoulos, now a senior vice president, would become president and chief operating officer in April.
The current president, Frank P. Popoff, who is also chief executive, will assume the additional title of chairman in December but will relinquish the presidency to Mr.
Stavropoulos five months later.
Mr.
Popoff is 56 years old.
The executive shift started with the scheduled retirement of the current chairman, Paul F. Oreffice, on Dec 1.
Mr.
Oreffice had given the chief executive title to Mr.
Popoff in 1987 but had continued as chairman until reaching the retirement age of 65.


Why Schools Must Stress Sexual Abstinence
To the Editor:
"A Million Kids Held Hostage," your Aug. 29 editorial on the debate over AIDS education in New York City's public schools, does not take account of vitally important facts, which I point out as drafter of the New York State Board of Regents July 1991 AIDS education guidelines and of the Board of Education's resolution of last May 27 applying those guidelines to the city's public schools.
A New York State Education Department regulation in effect since 1987 mandates that instruction about AIDS must "stress abstinence as the most appropriate and effective premarital protection against AIDS."


Car Dealer's Guilty Plea Adds to Corruption Taint
For more than 20 years, rumors and accusations have floated around the Town of Brookhaven, L.I., about corruption and cozy relations between local officials and favored developers.
Last week, the rumors took on new credibility with the court admission by John McNamara, a car dealer, that he had engaged in a scheme to defraud General Motors of $6 billion in loans and used some of the money to bribe Brookhaven officials to gain approvals for real-estate ventures.


In Russia and Japan, Once Again, National Egos Block Cooperation
FROM the start, Japan's postwar troubles with Moscow have never really been about ideology, or even about the four frozen "Northern Islands" that the Soviets seized from Japan in a last-minute sweep through the Sea of Okhotsk as World War II was ending.
The territorial dispute over who is the rightful owner of the islands, of course, has long been the ostensible cause of the frostiness between the world's proudest former superpower and the world's richest almost-superpower.
But the real issue has been a century-long clash of national egos.
And after decades in which that clash was subsumed by the cold war, it erupted again last week, like a stubborn virus contracted during the Russo-Japanese war and never really shaken.
Boris N. Yeltsin, who was caught between increasingly strident nationalist demands at home that he not give back an inch of Russian territory and Tokyo's unyielding refusal to make large-scale contributions to saving the moribund Russian economy unless Japan first retrieved sovereignty over the islands, did the only thing that seemed to make sense.
He ducked.
At the last minute, he abruptly canceled a long-anticipated trip to Japan that had been scheduled to begin today.


Concrete and Metal In Striking Repose
VISITORS cannot miss David Wurtzel's "Arc" at the Kouros Sculpture Center in Ridgefield.
The work stands in a huge field; a 19-foot sluice, V-shaped and cantilevered on a pair of boulders, it could double as a roadblock.
Roughly half a chestnut tree cut into slabs went into its making, along with several mammoth bolts.
One can miss the center, despite instructions to turn off Route 116 onto Wallace Road and stay on it until the dirt changes to blacktop.
At that point the Kouros drive is visible on the left, as is "Arc," together with other works new to the center.
One of these is an especially handsome Tom Doyle piece that consists of cherry wood beams cunningly faceted and joined to each other at obtuse angles by means of large dowels.


The Ridiculous Vision of Mark Leyner
Mark Leyner has a dog problem.
Her name is Carmella.
She's a modified golden retriever with the nervous temperament of a racehorse and the criminal tendencies of a cat.
The tongue is all dog, and it moves over your hand, finger by finger, with playful nips, again and again and again.
Leyner sort of approves.
"I'm determined not to teach her anything, so I can enjoy her in a feral state," he says.
"A well-meaning guest taught her to sit. It took two days of deprogramming in a motel room to bring her back."


THE REPUBLICANS
MEYER RANGELL
Bloomington, N.Y.


Sarah Rockwell, Andrew Strauss
Sarah McFarland Rockwell, a daughter of Bishop and Mrs.
Hays H. Rockwell of St.
Louis, was married yesterday to Andrew Dennis Strauss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Strauss of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Harvey H. Guthrie Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of St.
George's School in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Strauss, 28 years old, was until recently a training-program coordinator at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father, a former rector of St.
James' Church in New York, is the Bishop Coadjutor of the Episcopal Diocese of Missouri in St.
Louis.


INSIDE
Anthony Perkins Dies
The actor, best known for his role as the mad killer in Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho," died of complications from AIDS.
He was 60.
Page 61.
Seles Wins U.S.
Open
Monica Seles won her second consecutive Open title.
Stefan Edberg will meet Pete Sampras today in the men's final.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the end of the day's matches.
Section 8.  50th Shuttle Mission
The first Japanese-American shuttle flight blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Fla., with a number of other firsts as well.
Page 42.


TENDER TRAP
What a sad commentary on how far women have come in the pursuit of equality in the workplace that Barbara Walters ("Tender Trap," by Bill Carter, Aug. 23) is still concerned about being taken seriously by the ABC brass.
Women of my generation owe a tremendous debt to women like Barbara Walters, who, when she conducted interviews on the "Today" show with co-host Frank McGee, was not permitted to speak until he had asked the third question of the interview.
Sadly, not nearly enough has changed since then, Walters's high salary (hurrah!) notwithstanding.


Move Over, Everyone: Here Comes A.P. Indy
A.P.
Indy, undefeated in his last seven races but unraced in three months because of an injured hoof, will return to the stage today as the favorite in the Molson Million in Toronto and as the ranking candidate for the championship of the class of 3-year-old colts in North America.
But the horse, a royally bred son of Seattle Slew and grandson of Secretariat, will be challenged not only by his long layoff but also by two accomplished rivals, the Canadian star Alydeed and the American star Technology.
They will race a mile and a quarter in a field of seven for a purse of $1 million, and all three will be trying to take giant strides toward the Breeders' Cup Classic on Oct. 31.


Colleges Balance Cutbacks and Growth
MORE students are enrolled in colleges this fall but colleges have fewer dollars to work with despite increases in tuition and fees.
Deep cutbacks in state aid have put many colleges, especially public ones in the state, in their most severe financial straits in a decade, said Dr.
Sheldon N. Grebstein, president of the State University of New York at Purchase.


IRAQ SAID TO PLAN NEW CONTROL POST
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has moved vans full of communication equipment to his ancestral home of Tikrit, and Administration officials said he appeared to be establishing an alternate command post, possibly as a precaution against a potential coup.
The equipment is suited for the command and control of military forces and for directing other Government functions.
According to classified intelligence reports, the equipment has been moved in recent weeks, and some of it is believed to be operating.


Competition, the Japanese Way
To the Editor:
The analytic viewpoint in "A Lower Gear for Japan's Auto Makers" (Aug. 30) might be reconsidered.
Consider the conclusion that flat growth may make lifetime employment, a pillar of worker loyalty, untenable.
From an American perspective, a threat to the lifetime contract is at least plausible.
A leveling in demand for autos in the United States is only one in many volatile market swings.


Raising the Stakes In a War of Plastic
The plastic thicket of credit cards has grown denser in the last two weeks with announcements from General Motors and General Electric that they will market new cards.
More junk mail can be disorienting for anyone trying to find the best terms available, but the new cards are nevertheless welcome news for consumers.
Taken together, they provide a good indication of how the growing competition in the business has forced credit-card issuers, including a growing number of companies that are not banks, to offer better terms to attract or hold on to customers.


Prison as Usual/A special report.; More Familiar, Life in a Cell Seems Less Terrible
The day Theodore Russell got out of jail after a long stay, a group of neighborhood boys, including his little brother, surrounded him as if he were a rap star passing out concert tickets.
They followed him down the street of his struggling neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago, admiring his crudely drawn cellblock tattoos and marveling at the new muscles he had developed from hours of lifting weights in the yard.
Then they sat on the steps of his mother's porch, looking up at the man they call Dirty Red, and fired questions at him about life in the world behind the bars, the same questions that he asked when he was their age.


TENDER TRAP
Walters's quotes reveal an acute understanding of her audience and what it wants to know.
She is a master of extricating information from her subjects with a slick, schmoozy expertise, and she knows how to juggle the demands of journalism and entertainment.
Because -- like it or not -- that is really what television news is about.
Savvy animal in the broadcast jungle, Walters knows this only too well.
DAVID CUTHBERT
New Orleans


Making a Difference; He Still Knows How to Win and Influence
The venerable lessons of Dale Carnegie, the apostle of self-confidence, have often been made light of.
But Stuart R. Levine would be the first to say that they certainly worked for him.
Mr.
Levine last week was appointed chief executive of Dale Carnegie &amp; Associates Inc. and he said the lessons are more important today than ever.
Fear by employees and managers is often a byproduct of change these days as companies strive for quality and overturn the old ways of doing things.


T.A.C.'s Cassell Gets Recommendation
The executive committee of The Athletics Congress, the national governing body for track and field, voted yesterday to recommend a new two-year term for OLLAN CASSELL, T.A.C.'s executive director.
The committee, meeting in Denver, did not disclose the vote or the terms of the contract.


Parents Find Lessons in Exeter's Sex Scandal
Some see scandal, but many parents see a lesson to be learned at Phillips Exeter Academy, where a drama teacher was arrested this summer on charges of possession and distribution of child pornography.
Sitting down to a picnic lunch after moving her 15-year-old son into a red brick dormitory at Exeter this week, Heidi Spector of Greenwich, Conn., said that despite her initial concern, she had decided the scandal provided an opportunity to discuss such crimes with her son and her 10-year-old daughter.


Lauren Kay Jones And Adam Wacht
Lauren Kay Jones, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Roger K. Jones of Marshall, Tex., was married yesterday to Adam Wacht, a son of Mrs.
Hugh Knowlton Jr. of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., and the late Rennold Wacht.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Wacht, 29 years old, graduated from Southern Methodist University.
She is a model with Wilhemina Models Inc. in New York.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is a specialist in internal medicine in Marshall.


Woman in the News; A Determined Breaker of Boundaries -- Mae Carol Jemison
As a young girl growing up on the South Side of Chicago, Mae C. Jemison watched telecasts of the Gemini and Apollo spaceflights and knew that that was her destiny.
No matter that all the astronauts were male and white and that she was female and black.
She simply knew she would be a space traveler.
Now a 35-year-old doctor and engineer, Dr.
Jemison has realized her dream, launching into orbit yesterday as one of the shuttle Endeavor's seven-member crew.
In the process she has become the first African-American woman to go into space.


A Rough Ride
HE was the kind of man who owned his own pool cue.
He would line up his shot with exaggerated concern, leaning out over the green felt and staring down the wooden stick forever.
He had green eyes -- "killer eyes," said the last woman who lived with him -- dark brown hair and the easy, square features that women dream about.
If he smiled at you once, you'd be his friend.


Imagining the Worst
THE IMMORTALS
By Michael Korda. 559 pp. New York: Poseidon Press. $20.


Alma Hale, John Paty 3d
Alma Phillips Hale, a daughter of Mrs.
Winfield B. Hale 3d of Rogersville, Tenn., and the late Mr.
Hale, was married yesterday to John Collins Paty 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paty Jr. of Bristol, Tenn.
The Rev.
Dr.
David L. Hale performed the ceremony at the Rogersville Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Paty, 32 years old, is the director of public lands and mineral policy for the American Mining Congress, a trade association in Washington.
She was formerly a staff member of the Mining and Natural Resources Subcomittee of the House Interior Committee.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in geology from the University of Kentucky.
Her father was a senior partner in the law firm of Phillips &amp; Hale in Rogersville.
Her grandfather the late Winfield B. Hale Jr. was a judge at the Nuremberg war crimes trials.


Technology; Promethean Plans for the Next Generation of Cars
Within a few years, a person may be able to drive a car in the thickest fog with full confidence of being warned if another vehicle or a pedestrian is nearby.
To provide greater comfort, the driver may set the cruise control to maintain a space two seconds behind a vehicle immediately ahead on the highway.
If there is a truck stopped in the road, an infrared camera will alert the car's computer, which will take control of the brakes and steering to bring the car to a safe stop.
Features of this sort are already being tested, and some options are expected to be available at car dealerships within five years.
Some of the improvements are simplified versions of devices used in the airplanes, tanks and missiles that helped to defeat Iraq in the Gulf War.


Hurricane Hits Hawaii; 2 Reported Dead in Kauai
Sugar cane fields were flattened, trees and telephone poles were flung through the air and hundreds of homes were ripped apart Friday as a monster hurricane roared across the lush island of Kauai, but remarkably few deaths and injuries were reported.
Today, after a helicopter tour of the island, Kauai Mayor JoAnn Yakimura estimated the damage at $1 billion and described "an incredible alteration of the landscape" in which miles of vegetation were leveled and huge chunks of the coastline had been swallowed up by the ocean.


Giants Were a Pawn In Games by Owners
Walter O'Malley and Horace Stoneham didn't have this much trouble shipping the Giants from New York to San Francisco.
Bob Lurie, Stoneham's successor as the Giants' owner, has had about as much fun trying to sell the Giants as the St.
Petersburg-Tampa area has had trying to get a team.
Lurie, who thought he could pick up a quick $115 million and get out, has stumbled into a belated effort to salvage the team for San Francisco.
That follows the effort by some owners to hold hostage the sale and move of the Giants to the movement to oust Fay Vincent as baseball commissioner.


Teachers' Union Calls for Checks on Lead Paint
The teachers' union has called for systemwide checks for lead-paint problems in public-school classrooms in New York City after the closing of a Greenwich Village elementary school where high levels of the toxic substance were found in the dust on the floors, an official said yesterday.
The United Federation of Teachers said it would ask members to check schools in the city for peeling paint and dust from construction.
Tests will be conducted if necessary.


Primary Voters Deciding 7 County Contests
WESTCHESTER voters will choose candidates in seven primary races when they go to the polls on Tuesday, including an unprecedented election for the Republican nomination for New York State Senate in the 37th district.
In that closely contested race, which affects voters in 10 northern Westchester communities, all of Putnam County and part of Dutchess County, the 14-year incumbent, Mary B. Goodhue, the only Republican woman in the Senate, faces a strong challenge from a 4-term State Assemblyman, George E. Pataki, the former Mayor of Peekskill.


SEPT. 6-12: Washington Heights; A Policeman Is Cleared And Street Violence Defused
New York City officials feared that the announcement that a grand jury had failed to indict a police officer in the fatal July shooting of Jose Garcia, a Dominican immigrant, in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan would lead to a repetition of the nights of rioting that had followed the killing.
All they had to do was look at what happened in Los Angeles after a jury failed to convict several police officers in the televised beating of Rodney King.


Lisa P. Reinke, Todd Rockefeller
Lisa Paige Reinke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert O. Reinke of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday in Mount Kisco, N.Y., to Richard Todd Rockefeller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard K. Rockefeller of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jack Silvey Miller performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Mount Kisco.
Mrs.
Rockefeller, 22 years old, graduated from Hood College.
She is a graphic designer for Reinke Graphics Inc., in Chappaqua; her father is president of the company and her mother, Geraldyn O'Neil Reinke, is vice president.


Darlene Sheehan, Steven B. Cohen
Darlene Margaret Sheehan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Sheehan of Fort Salonga, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Steven Bruce Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Cohen of Schenectady, N.Y.
Robert Baum, village justice of Nissequogue, L.I., performed the ceremony at Nissequogue Golf Club.


Corrections
The Gazetteer chart in the Real Estate section last Sunday with an article about living in Belmar, N.J., misstated the rush-hour train fares to Manhattan.
They are $18.90 round trip and $265 monthly.


Susan Mattisinko, Robert De Leon
Joan and Norman Mattisinko of Huntington, L.I., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Susan Chana Mattisinko, and Robert Scott De Leon, a son of Dr.
Judith Stiller and Sanford De Leon, both of Elizabeth, N.J.
Ms.
Mattisinko, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, received a master's degree in public administration from Columbia University and is now a law student at New York University.


Colleen Meehan, David Borenstein
Colleen Meehan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gregory Meehan of North Arlington, N.J., was married yesterday to David Borenstein, a son of Ruth Harrington of Woodbridge, Conn., and the late Dr.
Morris Borenstein.
Kenneth Kremenick, Town Justice of Milan, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the residence of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Aldrich in Barrytown, N.Y.


Harriet Hubbard, Peter McKendry
Harriet Ford Hubbard, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Hubbard of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday in Cornwall, Conn., to Peter James McKendry, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James R. McKendry of Manchester, Me.
Kenneth Keskinen, a justice of the peace, officiated at the bride's parents' country home.
Mrs.
McKendry, 30 years old and a Smith College graduate, is a freelance graphic artist.
Her father is the chairman of the New York Botanical Garden and the Metropolitan Opera Guild.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CAPITALIST FOOLS  Tales of American Business, From Carnegie to Forbes to the Milken Gang.
By Nicholas von Hoffman.
Doubleday, $22.50.


U.S.-JAPAN MISSION IS A SHUTTLE FIRST
The first cooperative space shuttle mission of the United States and Japan got off with unusual punctuality today as a crew of seven rose to orbit aboard the shuttle Endeavour after a nearly flawless countdown.
The 50th flight of the shuttle program left the launching pad at exactly 10:23 A.M., the first flight since 1985 to get off precisely on time.


Louisa M. Smith, Colin James Ives
Mary V. T. Cattan and F. Clawson Smith, both of Cos Cob, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Louisa Morris Smith to Colin James Ives, a son of Philip and Joan Ives of New Canaan, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Smith, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the New York executive-recruiting firm of Johnson Smith &amp; Knisely.
Her mother is the director of spiritual life at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Ms.
Smith is a stepdaughter of Edmond W. Cattan and Olivia Holt, both of Cos Cob.


Unloved in Manly
LONGLEG
By Glenda Adams. 339 pp. New York: Cane Hill Press. Paper, $10.95.


Time to Take Stock of the Hits and Misfits
SEPTEMBER is a great month for gardeners.
All the fruition of summer's labors come forth.
Harvest time is here with corn and tomatoes first on the lists.
Asters, goldenrods and mums are starting to burst open with bloom.
And the annual flowers seem to be getting their second wind and are performing gloriously.
Maybe this year everything looks particularly bright because the sunshine has come back.
Also, the soil has been consistently moist with abundant summer rainfall.
Annuals are blooming at their greatest, thanks to the cooler evenings.
Marigolds are brilliant.
Zinnias are perky.
Spider flowers look elegant.
Even petunias are at it again with their parades of colorful petals.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
Campbell implies that love is no excuse for two people of different race to date or marry.
It is, in fact, the only good excuse in this race-obsessed society, where excuses are still neccessary.
I'm an African-American man who happened to fall in love with a white woman.
Yes, it can be that simple, with no rejection or insult to black womankind.
Every personal decision one makes cannot be based on what is politically correct or socially acceptable at the moment.
I will not let the color of my skin limit my life's possibilities, and I'm certainly not going to worry about what a stranger thinks of me and my lover.
MICHAEL HORNSBY
Brooklyn


Miss Humphreys, Robert Heckler 2d
Maureen Kelly Humphreys, a daughter of Henry J. Humphreys of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Eileen K. Humphreys, was married there yesterday to Robert P. Heckler 2d, the son of Linda Eck of Phoenix and the late Robert J. Heckler.
Bishop Patrick J. Sheridan, an Auxiliary Bishop of New York, performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Heckler is a regional administrator at Gracecare Inc., a nursing-home corporation in Blue Bell, Pa.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is the executive director and vice president of the American Association of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.


Streetscapes: The American Banknote Company Building; A Bronx Hybrid: Mill, or an Arsenal?
IT'S a point of reference for millions of motorists, the biggest building on either side of the Bruckner Expressway.
But the sprawling hillside complex in the Hunts Point section of the Bronx has always had a mysterious, fortified air -- a cross between a textile mill and an arsenal.
Now the American Banknote Company Building at the corner of Tiffany Street and Lafayette Avenue is up for landmark designation.
The owners are not protesting.
They have the larger problem of keeping the Bronx Apparel Center filled with tenants.


Virtual Reality
There you sit, a
real person
(my readers are neither robots nor androids nor phony-balonies) reading this in
real time
(meaning "now," not photographing it in your mind for perusal later) and secure in the knowledge that the real you and the real information you draw from the real page you hold in your real hand at this very moment constitute
reality
.
Don't let anybody shake that certainty out of you.
Cling to it.
You'll need it as we pass into the world of
virtual reality
.


For Dr. Grebstein, There Comes a Time'
DR.
Sheldon N. Grebstein, a literary critic and scholar who has served as the president of the State University of New York at Purchase since 1981, announced last Wednesday that he will resign the post in July.
In making official the news that he had told the faculty here some weeks ago, Dr.
Grebstein said he was not leaving in defeat or to protest the budget cuts that have plagued the 64 State University campuses but because "it's time."
"I will have been in the job for 12 years, which is more than twice the national average of college presidential terms," Dr.
Grebstein said.
"There comes a time when it's good for the university and good for me, too."


On Sunday; To a Neighbor, The Big Issue Is D'Amato
The feminists who have been to the Hamptons fund-raisers are choosing between Elizabeth Holtzman and Geraldine A. Ferraro for the Democratic Senatorial primary Tuesday.
Ms.
Holtzman has Betty Friedan.
Ms.
Ferraro has Bella Abzug and the Hollywood Women's Committee.
The National Organization for Women endorsed both.
Annette Snow will vote for Attorney General Robert Abrams.
Who is Annette Snow?
Nobody, really, a 36-year-old mother of two who is involved in Nassau County Democratic politics and who recently got her real-estate license and is married to Peter Snow, the plumber.


Relief in the Philippines for Victims of Mount Pinatubo


Noise Pollution
To the Editor:
In the mid- to late-70's, Alex Baron organized a group he called For a Quieter City.
It unfortunately disbanded after his death a few years later.


The New Season, Strictly by the Numbers
DATAILS, DETAILS, IT TAKES time, money and a lot of other ingredients to make the new season happen.
You need picture wire.
Piano tuners.
Wigs.
Bees (for the horror flick).
Never let it be said, however, that there are too many details to count.
Here are 50 selected sums that may add up to a winning year.
*Estimated pairs of toe shoes worn out by American Ballet Theater members during the company's eight-week spring season at the Metropolitan Opera House: 3,500


Very Much a Do
Tompkins Square Park was all decked out Sept. 7 at the annual hair-raising Wigstock celebration.


Plastic May Have Some Advantages Over Metal Plumbing Pipe
PLASTIC plumbing pipe is a boon for amateurs.
It is easier to install than metal pipe, not as heavy and cheaper.
Corrosion is never a problem, and burst pipes caused by freezing are rare.
Plastic pipes also have insulating properties that prevent condensation on pipes carrying cold water and reduce heat loss through pipes carrying hot water.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
Expressing the pain of being made to feel unattractive or "not good enough" as a black woman because of our cultural definition of beauty is an excellent topic for a Hers column.
But the pain is not justification enough for the dissemination of prejudicial stereotypes of white women and black men in relationships together.


Ms. Murphy, Richard McClintic
Katherine Anne Alden Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Murphy of New York, was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to Richard Douglas McClintic, a son of Mrs.
Stephen H. McClintic of McLean, Va., and the late Mr.
McClintic.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, Dean of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
McClintic, 35 years old, is a vice president of J. P. Morgan; she expects to join the London office later this year.
She graduated from Pomona College.
Her father is a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.


Similar Silence?
To the Editor:
In "Cage Merely an Inventor? Not a Chance"  [ Aug. 23 ] , John Rockwell, assessing the importance of John Cage, writes of "4'33"," a composition characterized as Cage's "best-known score": "The idea was simplicity reduced to genius: a performer or performers come on stage, assume positions of readiness and then do nothing for 4 minutes 33 seconds -- in three movements.
This is conceptual art with a vengeance. . . .
Like so much of Cage's artwork . . . '4'33" ' had a philosophical agenda. It was to call attention in a formal context to the richness of ambient sound: to tune the audience's ears to ever-present sonic wonders, and hence to enrich lives through meditative awareness. Instant Zen, if you will."


At 91, State's Senior Citizen of Year
WHEN R. Eugene Curry found out that he had been selected 1992 New York State Senior Citizen of the Year by the State Senate and Assembly Standing Committees on Aging, he was, he said, "absolutely surprised." But the selection of Mr.
Curry, now 91 years old, came as no surprise to those familiar with his work over the years.
"He is the founding father of aging services in Westchester," said Mae Carpenter, director of the Westchester County Office for the Aging.
"He was instrumental in starting one of the first advocacy offices for the aging in this country. He accomplished this before the Federal funding came through to officially start such an office in 1973."


J. Edgar Hoover's Files
To the Editor:
Alfred Kazin, in reviewing Scott Donaldson's biography of Archibald MacLeish (July 12), is right to be cautious in this statement: "The 600-page F.B.I. file on  [ MacLeish ] , Mr. Donaldson tells us, is the longest on any American writer."


Putting Millions to Work
To the Editor:
I write, as one of a dwindling remnant of 1930's New Deal liberals, to comment on J. Anthony Lukas's review of "The End of Equality," by Mickey Kaus (July 12).
My husband and I were among the small but doughty band of fanatics who struggled, under the leadership of Harry Hopkins, in 1933 and 1934 to replace "this business of relief" (in Franklin Roosevelt's words) with a work program.
In 1934, with money transferred from the Public Works Administration, we made a fantastic start with the Civil Works Administration, under which four million people -- half from the relief rolls and half just plain unemployed -- were put to work in four weeks at Government jobs.


Jaji Packard, Luther Flurry
Jarmila Teresa Packard, the daughter of Mrs.
Peter F. Packard of New York and the late Mr.
Packard, was married yesterday to Robert Luther Flurry 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Flurry Jr. of New Orleans.
The Rev.
Edward Kearney, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Ms.
Packard, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is known as Jaji.
She is a computer consultant in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Yale University, as did her husband.
Her father was a vice president at Packard-Bamberger Inc., a diversified conglomerate in Hackensack, N.J.


Kansas City, a Midwestern Beauty
WILLIAM ROCKHILL Nelson, founder of The Kansas City Star, is credited with saying this about his adopted hometown: "I decided that if I were to live here, the town must be made over." However imperious that might have sounded back then -- and sounds even now -- anyone who has lived or visited Kansas City is a beneficiary of his surety and determination.
In the early years of this century, Nelson -- and a number of other equally tenacious and benignly tyrannical entrepreneurs -- went about imposing their own ideal of beauty on Kansas City.
Fortunately, their ideal is a hard one to dispute.
It is centered on the notion of giving people lots of parks, boulevards, outdoor art and grand public buildings.
What makes their achievement even more noteworthy is that the exigencies of urban life in America in the last few decades, to which Kansas City has not been immune, have failed to mask or tarnish their handiwork.
Kansas City is still a beautiful city.
To visit is to get a welcome respite from the world of shrinking expectations.


Amy M. Conovitz, Robert Lindsay
Dr. and Mrs.
Myron W. Conovitz of Great Neck, L.I., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Amy Merrill Conovitz and Dr.
Robert Lindsay, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Lindsay.
Miss Conovitz is a senior account executive with Klemtner Advertising Inc., the medical advertising division of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is an internist in Great Neck and a clinical associate professor of medicine at Cornell University Medical College.
Her mother, Ellen E. Conovitz, is the director of administration-appointments for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in Albany.


Seneca Falls
An article on Aug. 23 about pubs in London misstated the location of the pub featured in the novel "London Fields" by Martin Amis.
It is on Portobello Road in the Notting Hill Gate section.
A map with the article misstated the location of the Bull's Head in Barnes.
It is on Lonsdale Road near Barnes High Street.


Hundley's Ups and Downs at Bat Have Him Thinking
It was a slump, a baseball cliche.
Todd Hundley had endured dry spells before, and he had read the accounts of those suffered by others, often considering those tales overwrought, overdramatized.
Only now, the cliche was tearing him apart.
The cycle was more than vicious for the 23-year-old catcher for the Mets.
No hit, no answers, no sleep, no hit.
The total of empty at-bats was 4, then 10, then fast closing in on 20.


A New Gallery at Winterthur
Winterthur, the museum of American decorative arts near Wilmington, Del., is taking a step toward greater accessibility this fall with the opening of a gallery in a new 22,000-square-foot exhibition building.
The museum stands on the former 980-acre estate of the late Henry Francis du Pont.
Previously its holdings of 89,000 objects could be seen only on a guided tour of period rooms.
The gallery, which is scheduled to open Oct. 10, is the first of three being built adjacent to the existing museum; all will be connected to it by a new visitor reception area.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 29  MANHATTAN Chelsea 220,000
575 Ave. of the Americas (16th St.)  1 bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; elevator, 11 1/2-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $764, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson Ginsberg Real Estate-Bellmarc Realty)  Chelsea 265,000
181 7th Avenue (21st St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 8-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 3 exposures, Hudson River view; common charge $1,100, taxes $4,800 (Broker: Coleman Neary Realty) Greenwich Village 430,000
18 East 10th Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining room, library, fireplace, 13-ft. ceilings; maintenance $920, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Cathy Fields)  Upper East Side 12.5 million
834 Fifth Avenue (64th St.)  4-bedroom, 7 1/2-bath, 7,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, 6 maid's rooms, library, 5 fireplaces, Central Park view; maintenance $10,800, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Key Ventures)  Upper West Side 152,000
257 Central Park West (86th St.)  (Orwell House)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 650-sq.-ft. co-op in a recently renovated prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, Central Park view; maintenance $825, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt Kennedy)  BRONX  Kingsbridge 190,000
124 Van Cortlandt Avenue West  3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area in simplex; 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,561 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy)  Riverdale 220,000
3610 Irwin Avenue  3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 2 terraces in other; 1 bath in each; hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 1/4 acre lot; taxes $1,820 (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park 262,500
101 Marlboro Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, 2 fireplaces, sunroom, remodeled kitched, finished attic, 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Park Slope 685,000
238 Berkley Place  2-family, 5-story, brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 3 baths, double parlor, rear deck in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath; original moldings and details in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,885 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty Group)  Sheepshead Bay 205,000
2134 East 29th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  QUEENS  Astoria 97,000
21-30 79th Street  (Garden Bay Manor)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 851-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining room, basement storage room, 2 exposures; common charge $365, taxes $1,065 (Broker: Rose Marie Realty)  Bayside 217,500
45-34 Oceania Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other, dining room in each; 1-car garage, 29- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Kremer Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Grant City 125,000
49 Highland Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, den, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Oakwood 155,000
312 Isabella Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, colonial; dining area, den, full basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


Miss Callagy, Mr. McCloskey
Susan Elizabeth Callagy, a daughter of Robert and Lynn Callagy of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Matthew Patrick McCloskey, a son of Matthew and Donna McCloskey of Villanova, Pa.
Msgr.
James Kidder performed the ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Callagy McCloskey, 26 years old, is a fashion editor at Glamour magazine in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the senior partner in Satterlee Stephens Burke &amp; Burke, a law firm in New York.


Seneca Falls
To the Editor: We were pleased to see the article on Seneca Falls, a beautiful village in a historically important area.
However, it may have left some readers confused.
The Urban Cultural Park is a venture of New York State; the Women's Rights National Historical Park, for which my firm, the Stein Partnership, is the architect, is a project of the National Park Service.
As architects, we were fortunate to have been entrusted with the responsibility for this work by the National Park Service.
The design of the Wesleyan Chapel Block in the Women's Rights National Historical Park is based on a competition entry by Ray Kinoshita and Ann Marshall, who later participated in the development of the project, now under construction.


A Way of Life in Ruins At Wind-Swept Camp
No one is certain how many people lived in the Everglades Migrant Camp before Hurricane Andrew struck.
Once an orderly grid of trailer homes and squat concrete houses, the sprawling, now badly broken camp in Florida City, about 30 miles south of downtown Miami, is the kind of place where destruction was so great that people cannot even agree on how many died there.
While residents of other neighborhoods have started cleanups two weeks after the hurricane came slamming through, at the Everglades camp there is still nothing but long, terrible heaps of twisted metal and shattered dreams.


'Kosher-Style'
To the Editor: In her article "The Total Resort, Catskill Style" (Aug. 9) Terry Trucco refers to chopped liver and gefilte fish served at the Nevele as being "kosher-style." The term "kosher-style" is misleading, inaccurate, and if used in commerce in New York State, illegal.


Catskills Towns Waking Up to Zoning
LAST July, a remote little town in the Beaverkill Valley of the Catskill Mountains decided to take control of its future development by passing its first zoning law.
Hardenburgh, a sparsely settled community lying on two sides of the Millbrook mountain range, is the westernmost township in Ulster County, just north of the town of Denning on Route 47.
It is one of the last of the towns of the county to go unzoned.


Mary Mercein and Arthur Mann Jr.
Mary Karen Mercein, a daughter of Chuck Mercein of New York and Marilyn M. Mercein of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Arthur Kenneth Mann Jr., a son of Arthur and Bess Mann of Lancaster, Pa.
The Rev.
Stanley W. Combs performed the ceremony at Trinity Lutheran Church in Wrightsville, Pa.
Mrs.
Mann, 24 years old, is a law student at New York University.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University, where her husband also graduated.
Her father, a former fullback for the New York Giants and the Green Bay Packers, is a co-publisher of Giants Extra, a weekly sports tabloid in Green Brook, N.J.


A League of Their Owners Strikes Out the Manager
WHEN chief executive officers of giant corporations are dismissed in extravagant buyouts, the public tends to shrug and say, "That's business." When Cabinet members are summarily replaced, the public usually yawns and says, "That's politics."
But when a commissioner of baseball is forced out, the way Fay Vincent was last week, a large segment of the population begins to brood about some kind of violation of sacred trust.
What is this position -- and why do so many people care?


Beth K. Zadek, Joph Steckel
Beth Kate Zadek, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Engle Zadek of Baltimore, was married last evening to Dr.
Joph Steckel, a son of Cantor and Mrs.
Harold Steckel of Bayside, Queens.
The bridegroom's father and Rabbi Ira Schiffer officiated at the Baltimore Museum of Art.
Ms.
Zadek, who is 31 years old and keeping her name, is an advertising account manager for the New Yorker.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is an assistant professor of orthopedic surgery at Johns Hopkins University and an associate professor in the same subject at the University of Maryland in Baltimore.
Her mother, Miriam Zadek, is the director of social work at the Hearing and Speech Agency of Baltimore.
The bride's paternal grandfather, the late Dr.
Isadore Zadek, was chief of orthopedic surgery at the Hospital for Joint Diseases in New York.


In Their Own Words
GOV. BILL CLINTON
In a speech to the Black Family Reunion celebration at the Washington Monument yesterday.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to an appropriations bill that would have killed the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's space station program.
Rejected 63 to 34, Sept. 9.
2.
Court Nomination: Vote to confirm Edward E. Carnes, an Alabama prosecutor, to the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals.
Approved 62 to 36, Sept. 9.
3.
Liability Suits: Vote to cut off debate and begin consideration of a bill to establish Federal standards for state product liability laws with the aim of discouraging jury trials in injury suits.
Failed, with 58 in favor and 38 opposed (two votes short of the 60 needed), Sept. 10.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
N
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
Y
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
N
N
House
1.
Family Leave: Vote on passage of a bill requiring unpaid family and medical leave for many workers.
Approved 241 to 161, Sept. 10.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
A
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
A
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
A
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
A
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
Y
27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Met Home's First Gateleg Gatefold: Who Else But Buatta?
Metropolitan Home is redefining the centerfold.
In its October issue, the magazine is publishing a two-page pullout photograph of Mario Buatta, the society decorator known as the Prince of Chintz.
"I was hoping for Playgirl, but they said it would take too much paper," said Mr.
Buatta, who posed fully clothed in a parlor filled with pillows, Aubussons and overstuffed chairs.
"We got down to the bare facts," he said, "which is my signature blue blazer, a blue-and-white-striped shirt, and gray flannels, which I wear every day."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Chester 270,000
22 Cramer Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; in-ground pool, 2-acre plot, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,100.
Holmdel 375,000
5 Sentry Court
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 8-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, c/a, full basement; $5,918.
Long Valley 310,000
5 Lois Court
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; master-bedroom with whirlpool, fireplace in living room; taxes $7,400.
Millburn 200,000
18 Mountainview Road
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, family room, fireplace; taxes $3,362.
Millstone 168,000
125 Stillhouse Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; c/a, full basement, 2-car garage; taxes $2,400.
Short Hills 340,000
35 Sequoia Place
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-half bath, 27-year-old colonial; family room with fireplace, in-ground pool; taxes $5,110.
OTHER AREAS West Hartford, Conn. 220,000
14 Oak Ridge Lane  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, oversized rooms, wooded setting, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,535.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 287,000
55 Campfire Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old unique; 2 fireplaces, 2 family rooms, private entrance, French doors; taxes $6,713.
East Meadow, L.I. 170,000
587 Benton Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement; taxes $5,100.


Seles Is Too Much, Too Late for Sanchez Vicario
In her seventh and final match of the United States Open, Monica Seles faced her stiffest challenge yesterday.
Unfortunately for Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, it wasn't until match point.
Before she succumbed, 6-3, 6-3, Sanchez Vicario saved five of them, a clear demonstration of the grit and determination that elevated her to her first Open final and makes her one of the most determined players in the world.
She just wasn't strong enough to beat the defending champion, the grunting, groundstroking assassin who is clearly the best.


Yale Recitals Usher In New Season
A RUSH of concerts next weekend suggests that the winding down of summer is just about complete.
Friday evening at 8, the first in a cycle of free Yale University faculty recitals offers a performance by the musicians Sidney Harth and Peter Frankl in a program of three violin and piano sonatas Brahms.
On Sunday evening at 8, another member of the Yale faculty, the organist Charles Krigbaum, opens the Sunday Evening Music Series at Woolsey Hall, playing works of Ives, Parker and Widor.
A $3 donation will be requested at the door (432-4157).
Another Friday evening recital, this one at 8:30 P.M. at the Pequot Library in Southport, finds the Sartory Trio playing Dvorak, Mendelsohn and a new "Jazz Semi-Suite" by Joe Utterback. (227-6943 or 226-1076).
Saturday evening at 8, Robert Cumming, founder and director of the Connecticut Gilbert and Sullivan Society, plans to include at least one Sullivan anthem in his recital of "Sacred Song Masterpieces" but works by about a dozen other composers, including Mr.
Cumming, will be represented as well.
Accompanying the program at the First Church of Christ Scientist in Guilford is the organist of the church for the last 16 years, Esther Barto, and since the concert has been designed as a benefit for Meals on Wheels of Guilford, donations to that organization constitute the admission charge (421-4098).


It's All Downhill in Deadrock
NOTHING BUT BLUE SKIES
By Thomas McGuane. 349 pp. Boston: Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.


On the Economy, Bush Tries to Keep Focus on the Future
"THE ECONOMY, STUPID."
That sign on the wall of Bill Clinton's headquarters in Little Rock is a reminder to the campaign staff.
Stick to the basics.
Avoid diversions.
The economic slump of the last four years is George Bush's chief weakness and Mr.
Clinton's greatest strength.
Few people doubt that if the election turns on that issue, the Governor of Arkansas will be the next President of the United States.
The most recent New York Times/CBS News Poll, in late August, found that 77 percent of registered voters disapproved of the way Mr.
Bush had dealt with the economy, compared with only 17 percent who approved.


California's Pied Piper of Clean Air
The Clean Air Act may have been written in Washington, but the nation's most influential regulatory body is here.
Anything in this country with a tailpipe, smokestack or vent is likely to be regulated eventually with rules first worked out by the California Air Resources Board.
The board lays down the toughest regulations, forces the biggest changes and generally blazes the path for everyone else, including the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
That is particularly true when it comes to cars and trucks and the fuel to run them.
Now the board and its determined chairwoman of the last seven years, Jananne Sharpless, are pushing hard for the biggest change of all, the Low-Emission Vehicle Program, which prescribes successive generations of ever-cleaner cars, ending with vehicles that emit no pollution.
But success is catching up with the agency, which is known by its acronym, CARB.


POSTINGS: For People in Princeton; Indoor Team Sports Center
A developer has won approvals to build a major indoor recreation complex at College Park, next to the Princeton Forrestal Center in Princeton, N.J.
The developer, National Business Parks, an affiliate of Lawrence Zirinsky Associates, a Manhattan real estate company, is seeking an operator and joint-venturer to build the 21,000-square-foot dome, which would be made available to corporations in the Princeton area.


Lebanon and Syria Chiefs Discuss Troop Pullback
Presidents Hafez al-Assad of Syria and Elias Hrawi of Lebanon met today at the Syrian seaside resort of Latakia to discuss the withdrawal of Syrian troops from the capital and most of Lebanon this month.
Officials here said a joint Lebanese-Syrian military committee is expected to be formed to set a timetable for the redeployment of about 35,000 Syrian troops to the Bekaa region and areas near the Syrian border.


Protests Mount Over Police Confiscations
LAWYERS, legislators and civil liberties groups are demanding major changes in a state law that gives the police broad powers to confiscate money, personal property and real estate from people charged with crimes.
Law-enforcement officials say that the law, known as the forfeiture statute, is a potent weapon in the fight against crime, particularly drug trafficking, because it deprives criminals of the tools of their trade, particularly their cars.
The sale of confiscated property has also yielded $83 million since the passage of the statute in 1986, a boon for increasingly tight police budgets.


Montana Undergoes Minor Surgery
Quarterback JOE MONTANA underwent minor elective surgery yesterday to remove scar tissue in his right elbow, the San Francisco 49ers said.
The team physician, Dr.
MICHAEL DILLINGHAM performed the surgery at Stanford University Medical Center.
"It's just a minor procedure," said a 49ers spokesman, RODNEY KNOX.
"All they did was release some scar tissue. It had been putting some pressure and pain on his elbow."


Ashe Is Hospitalized With Mild Heart Attack
Arthur Ashe was hospitalized because of a mild heart attack on Thursday night, but he seemed to be taking his latest medical setback in stride.
"He really isn't very sick," his cardiologist, Stephen Scheidt, said yesterday after checking on his patient at the cardiac care unit at New York Hospital.


Amey Winterer, John Marrella
Amey Cutler Winterer, an associate in the Washington law firm of Wilmer, Cutler &amp; Pickering, was married yesterday in New York to John Anthony Marrella, a trial lawyer in the Tax Division of the Justice Department in Washington.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz officiated at St.
James' Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Richard K. Gross, the Roman Catholic chaplain at the University of Connecticut in Storrs, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Winterer, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Williams College and received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip S. Winterer of New York.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
Her mother, Patricia D. Winterer, is a deputy national executive director of the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. in New York.
The bride's previous marriage was annulled.


N.F.L. to Look at New Labor Game Plans
On the heels of having their Plan B system of free agency struck down by the jury decision in Minneapolis last week, the National Football League club owners will meet in Dallas on Thursday and plan a course of action: either continued fighting in the courts or a new proposal on a collective-bargaining agreement.
A seven-member committee of owners plus Commissioner Paul Tagliabue and the league's lead lawyer, Frank Rothman, held a telephone conference call on Friday morning, one day after the verdict in the McNeil vs. the N.F.L. trial: that Plan B is too restrictive and illegal under antitrust law.
This group will be very likely to arrive in Dallas with specific recommendations in mind.


Time to Take Stock of the Hits and Misfits
SEPTEMBER is a great month for gardeners.
All the fruition of summer's labors come forth.
Harvest time is here with corn and tomatoes first on the lists.
Asters, goldenrods and mums are starting to burst open with bloom.
And the annual flowers seem to be getting their second wind and are performing gloriously.
Maybe this year everything looks particularly bright because the sunshine has come back.
Also, the soil has been consistently moist with abundant summer rainfall.
Annuals are blooming at their greatest, thanks to the cooler evenings.
Marigolds are brilliant.
Zinnias are perky.
Spider flowers look elegant.
Even petunias are at it again with their parades of colorful petals.


Fortay Sent to Bench And Rutgers Takes Off
Rutgers acquired its first victory of 1992 today, by a 41-0 score over Colgate, and the coach, Doug Graber, acquired an unexpected quarterback controversy likely to dog him.
In the second period of a scoreless contest, Graber took Bryan Fortay, the heralded but struggling transfer quarterback from Miami, out of the game and replaced him with Ray Lucas, an untested redshirt freshman.
When Lucas left, at the end of the third quarter, Rutgers was ahead, 34-0.


Louis M. Fribourg, 84, Former Housing Judge
Louis M. Fribourg, a former New York City judge and author on real-estate law, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


In the Firehouse, Some Like It Haute
IT would test the patience of any chef.
Tom Houlihan was just pulling his stuffed fillet of sole out of the oven.
The rice pilaf and the baby carrots were ready to be served.
But an alarm came in and the entire meal had to be put on hold.
It's just business as usual if you are a firefighting cook.


'She Lived by Theft and by Enchantment'
THE LAST MAGICIAN
By Janette Turner Hospital. 309 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $23.


Time to Take Stock of the Hits and Misfits
SEPTEMBER is a great month for gardeners.
All the fruition of summer's labors come forth.
Harvest time is here with corn and tomatoes first on the lists.
Asters, goldenrods and mums are starting to burst open with bloom.
And the annual flowers seem to be getting their second wind and are performing gloriously.
Maybe this year everything looks particularly bright because the sunshine has come back.
Also, the soil has been consistently moist with abundant summer rainfall.
Annuals are blooming at their greatest, thanks to the cooler evenings.
Marigolds are brilliant.
Zinnias are perky.
Spider flowers look elegant.
Even petunias are at it again with their parades of colorful petals.


Business Diary/September 6 - 11
COMPANIES Two Nations, Flight Patterns Indivisible


Bradford K. Bachrach, 81, Head of Family's Portrait Studio Chain
Bradford K. Bachrach, the retired president of Bachrach Photographers, the noted portrait studio chain, died on Thursday at his home in Wellesley, Mass.
He was 81 years old.
He died in his sleep, apparently of natural causes, his family said.


Campaign Finances; Democrats Awash in Money While G.O.P. Coffers Suffer
Signaling problems with President Bush's campaign, his fund-raisers say they have fallen dramatically behind both their own projected targets and the pace of the Democratic money machine as the race heads into its final seven weeks.
Precise financial figures through the end of August will not be filed for another eight days, but officials in both parties who discussed the status of their money-raising efforts expressed surprise at the turn of events.
Until the Democratic convention in July, the Republicans had held a formidable lead in fund raising, outperforming the Democrats by a margin of greater than two to one.


On Meaner Streets, The Violent Are More So
LAST week Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey promised that the state would join Newark in its long-running battle with bands of young car thieves who have bedeviled local law enforcement officials.
Over the summer, the city's chronic car theft problem turned particularly violent as police were injured during high-speed chases or when their patrol cars were rammed by taunting teenagers in stolen vehicles.
And the officers, who have said they feared for their lives, in turn shot and sometimes killed the young offenders.


Serendipity Strikes on the Guilford Green
ONE of the delights of going out to eat is the pleasure of discovery.
That's how we serendipitously found the Bistro on the Green in Guilford several weeks ago.
While strolling along the shopping street facing the huge Guilford Green late one Saturday afternoon, we wandered into a large, high-ceilinged restaurant and immediately were taken by its clean, trim, plain but welcoming all-white look punctuated by a few ficus trees and bright original framed art on the walls and glass bowls of fresh red rosebuds on each table.
A glance at the small dinner menu, with its intriguing pasta options, looked inviting enough for a return visit.
We then went on to the restaurant we planned to dine at, in a nearby shore town, but were depressed by its cute tearoom decor, the smell of fried food that even an exhaust fan at the entrance could not mask, and its cliche-riddled menu.
Fortunately, we had not made reservations so we sped back to Guilford and the Bistro on the Green.


Thomas Gives First Public Speech Since Confirmation Battle
Clarence Thomas finally emerged from the United States Supreme Court this weekend, giving his first speech in his first public appearance in his first trip out of Washington since his searing confirmation battle nearly a year ago.
In brief remarks on Friday morning to a group of Federal judges and lawyers, Justice Thomas steered clear of saying anything substantive either about himself or the Supreme Court.
Instead, he spoke of the warm reception he had received from his new colleagues, the "avalanche" of letters that had poured in and the schoolchildren he had entertained in his chambers.
He also talked about what he said was the surprisingly intense, isolated and insulated life that Supreme Court Justices live.


A Life Outside
The house of the painter Richard Diebenkorn, in the northern California town of Healdsburg, sits along a narrow, winding road that hugs the Russian River, slices through woods and spills into the lush plain of the Alexander Valley.
It is a simple two-story white box built in the 1880's and ornamented only with a crown of iron tracery.
Directly in front of the house is one of the area's many vineyards, which in the spring becomes shot through with brilliant yellow mustard plants.
At 70 years old, Diebenkorn is a shy, bespectacled figure, prone to corduroys and button-down shirts, who in his professorial and studiously unbohemian way seems the antithesis of the cliche of the slick SoHo artist-enterpreneur.
He likes to speak of the "tension beneath calm" in his work, but he could also be describing himself.
Having spent almost his whole life in California, he has inevitably been viewed as an outsider by the New York art world, toward which he, in turn, bears a not always hidden aversion.
He once briefly contemplated life there, but he now insists that the distance from Manhattan has been healthy for his career.


Israel's Leader Hints At New Hope for Peace
THE clearest thing in Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's stunning assertions that his Government is willing to give Syria back parts of the Golan Heights -- an area seized by troops under his command in 1967 and virtually annexed in 1981 -- is that for the first time in 15 years an Israeli Government leader has expressed a willingness to trade land for peace with Syria.
But beyond that, Mr.
Rabin, who riveted Israel with his comments over a period of two days, has kept the largest margin of freedom on exactly how much land he is prepared to cede on the strategic heights and over how much time he may propose to do so.
He suggested he wanted immediate movement in the negotiations, but he also spoke of leasing the Golan Heights from Syria for 90 years.
"We never defined the lines and we won't go into the territorial issue before knowing that Syria is indeed prepared for a peace treaty," Mr.
Rabin told the army radio Thursday.


Hrbek Doubtful for Rest of the Season
The Minnesota Twins expect to be without first baseman KENT HRBEK for the rest of the season.
Hrbek experienced pain in his right shoulder during hitting drills before Friday night's game with California.
"I don't think he'll play at all," said Manager TOM KELLY, discounting the idea that Hrbek might be able to be a designated hitter.
"I wouldn't think this year. He can't swing the bat."


Lucy Townsend, Bradford Wheler
Lucy Mills Townsend, a daughter of Mrs.
Louis Busch Hager of New York and Lyman B. Townsend of Pittsford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bradford Gordon Wheler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Gordon Wheler of Cazenovia, N.Y.
The Rev.
George F. French performed the Episcopal ceremony aboard the yacht Chief Uncas on Otsego Lake near Cooperstown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Wheler, 37 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College.
She owns L. M. Townsend Catering in Cooperstown.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is the vice president of the R. W. Mitscher Company in Buffalo, which represents electronics manufacturers.
Her stepfather, the late Louis Busch Hager, was a theatrical producer in New York and a great-grandson of Adolphus Busch, the founder of Anheuser-Busch, for whom the Chief Uncas was built.
She is a stepdaughter of Elizabeth C. Townsend.


MCMILLAN'S MILLIONS
I had just finished reading "Waiting to Exhale" by Terry McMillan when the magazine came out with a piece about McMillan's work ("McMillan's Millions," by Daniel Max, Aug. 9).
I thought it was too bad that Max focussed so much on the impact of the book on the African-American community.
I felt that the story of the four women could easily have portrayed the life of any middle-class, upwardly mobile hen session, at least the ones that I have enjoyed.
The book is for anyone, no matter their skin color, who has ever had a relationship with a member of the opposite sex.
LOUISE ROSS
Washington


Traffic Alert
Broadway between Houston and Eighth Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. today for the Broadway festival.
Third Avenue between 14th and 34th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. today for the Lower Third Avenue fair.


U.N. Begins Monitoring Some Gun Sites in Bosnia
Facing a deadline to put their heavy weapons under United Nations supervision, Serbian forces in Sarajevo complied today, but there was heavy shelling in other areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina that were subject to the same deadline, witnesses said.
The relative calm in Sarajevo, which was punctuated only by desultory gunfire and mortar fire, raised hopes that the worst of the five-month siege was over.
But United Nations diplomats were cautious about the prospects for a quick end to the fighting in the former Yugoslav republic.


THE GUIDE
FREE-TRADE LECTURE
The North American Free Trade Agreement, if ratified by the participating countries of the United States, Canada and Mexico, will eliminate customs duties on thousands of products and create changes in other areas of trade.


Manhattan's Hotel Bars: Clubby Comfort
FOR most of New York's history, a good bar has meant a hotel bar.
Before the advent of the high-concept saloon, the kind that thinks of itself as a fun factory, only hotel bars offered luxury, fantasy, quality and inventiveness in the drinks department.
The great bartenders and the classic cocktails all came from the grand 19th-century hotels like the Metropolitan, the Hoffman House and the Knickerbocker.
New York will never see their like again, but the tradition lives on.
Even today the city's best hotel bars offer that seductive blend of high style, attentive service and the opportunity to live like a lord for the brief period that it takes to sip a glass of champagne and nibble at a bowl of salted almonds.
It's the best deal in town.
The Bull and Bear at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel offers a direct infusion of the old-time atmosphere of conspicuous wealth and even more conspicuous consumption.
In scale and weight, it harks back to the days when plutocrats came jumbo-size and demanded a lot of legroom.
At the center of the barroom, which is reached through the Bull and Bear restaurant off the Lexington Avenue entrance to the hotel, a rectangular mahogany bar stakes out about an acre of floor.
Within the bar perimeter stands a kind of altar stacked with liquor bottles and surmounted by a bronze bull and bear.
These traditional symbols of the stock market are relics of the Old Waldorf, which operated virtually as an annex to Wall Street.
Customers, many executives from the big banks in the neighborhood, can keep up on the market by consulting an electronic tickertape that scrolls across the west wall of the bar.


Three Twisting Plots
NOW at the Arena Players Second Stage Theater in East Farmingdale is "Letters From the Devil," an umbrella title for three one-act plays by Henry Slesar.
Mr.
Slesar is looking to create the clever plot twist with an O. Henry ending in each play.
But where O. Henry's short stories gained their power from insights into the bittersweet poignancy of human foibles, Mr.
Slesar never manages to progress beyond the mundane.


2 New Hotels In Downtown
Lower Manhattan hardly qualifies as hotel country.
Still, two of New York City's newest hotels are situated south of 14th Street.
The 561-room Hotel Millenium, which opens officially Tuesday, is a gleaming black glass 55-story tower across from the World Trade Center.
And the 223-room Hotel Maria, which opened in February, occupies a renovated 14-story building that for years was a warehouse in Chinatown.
The Millenium, built by the real estate developer Peter Kalikow, offers speaker phones, conference lines and voice mail in its rooms.
The rooms display a businesslike crispness, with beige walls, chrome and glass table lamps and clean-lined maple and teak furnishings.


Rangers and Leetch Agree
The Rangers tentatively agreed to terms with Brian Leetch tonight, offering the league's premier defenseman a pact at least seven years in length -- the longest contractual commitment in the club's history.
Jay Grossman, the New York-based agent for Leetch, planned to meet with Madison Square Garden's legal staff on Sunday to complete language on bonuses and options.
Grossman and General Manager Neil Smith came to their agreement tonight after a series of telephone calls stretching over the past week.


New &amp; Noteworthy
PANAMA: The Whole Story, by Kevin Buckley. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $11.) Mr.
Buckley chronicles the stormy course of the marriage between the United States and Panama, showing how the American Government wooed Manuel Antonio Noriega, only to dump him when he became a political embarrassment.
"This book is an extraordinary account of a largely untold, dramatically underreported and often unbelievable story," Jorge G. Castaneda said here last year.
MAUS: A Survivor's Tale II.
And Here My Troubles Began, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $12.) By creating what superficially appear to be comic books, thecartoonist Art Spiegelman, the son of Holocaust survivors, has made pictorial accounts of the Nazi period that are at once personal and universal histories.
In both "Maus," the book that related his parents' experiences up to 1944, and in this volume, which follows his father through the concentration camps and beyond, he has cast himself, his family and other Jews as mice, the Germans as cats.
Last year our reviewer, Lawrence L. Langer, said of the books, which won a special Pulitzer Prize: "Perhaps no Holocaust narrative will ever contain the whole experience. But Art Spiegelman has found an original and authentic form to draw us closer to its bleak heart."
WALL TO WALL: From Beijing to Berlin by Rail, by Mary Morris. (Penguin, $10.) This memoir traces Mary Morris's 1986 journey from China through Europe, conducted mostly on the Trans-Siberian Express.
"Ms. Morris has a novelist's gift for characterization," John Maxwell Hamilton said here last year.
"Apparently, she could find interesting people in a closet -- or, more accurately, she could be found by them."
THE GOLD BUG VARIATIONS, by Richard Powers. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Time, affection and DNA's double helix are all interconnected in this novel, which explores the relationship between two sets of lovers: one trying to uncover the secret of genetics and the other trying to uncover the secrets of the first.
Last year our reviewer, Louis B. Jones, felt that "the joy to be taken in reading the book is, like the pleasure of studying crystal multiplication, in seeing a pattern swarm mosaically over everything." Harper Perennial has also reissued Mr.
Powers's 1985 novel, THREE FARMERS ON THEIR WAY TO A DANCE ($11), in which two men try to imagine the futures of the title characters, figures in a 1914 photograph.
"His writing engages," Marco Portales said in The Book Review.
SQUANDERED FORTUNE: The Life and Times of Huntington Hartford, by Lisa Rebecca Gubernick. (Avon, $5.50.) Huntington Hartford, the A.&amp;P. heir, had enormous wealth, but, perhaps in part because of that, he never had much promise.
Ms.
Gubernick examines his decline from privileged youth to drug-addicted dissolute.
She "handles her subject with the touch of a natural storyteller," Michael Lewis said here last year.
THE ALCHYMIST'S JOURNAL, by Evan S. Connell. (Penguin, $10.) Evan S. Connell's novel consists of the diary entries of seven 16th-century alchemists, men who hoped to create gold from base metals and truth from mystical musings.
Last year our reviewer, Sven Birkerts, said of reading the book, "We may at times feel as though we have stepped into a new place."
THE JOY OF INSIGHT: Passions of a Physicist, by Victor Weisskopf. (Basic Books, $15.) A physicist and Renaissance man, Victor Weisskopf relates his history from his youth in Vienna to his work on the Manhattan Project and his American teaching career.
"His memoir provides a bright tile in the mosaic that our descendants will study in seeking to understand his scientific generation," Timothy Ferris said here in 1991.
A RED DEATH, by Walter Mosley. (Pocket Books, $4.99.) Ezekiel (Easy) Rawlins, a street hustler from the Watts section of Los Angeles who has turned private detective, tangles with the Government in this mystery, set during the McCarthy era.
The result is something "most readers will find far more riveting than the crime pages of their newspapers," Herbert Mitgang said in The New York Times last year.
WAITING FOR THE WEEKEND, by Witold Rybczynski. (Penguin, $10.) Witold Rybczynski has analyzed how our two days of leisure became officially established and how we have come to spend them.
Last year our reviewer, Laura Shapiro, described this extended essay as "a book that really should have been packaged with a porch swing and a glass of lemonade."
IN DAYS OF AWE, by Eric Goodman. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $8.) Like many professional athletes, "Jewish Joe Singer" is an overgrown boy, goodhearted but a bit of a reprobate.
This novel sees him mature through a series of crises generated by his failure to play by the rules, both on and off the baseball field.
Last year one critic called him "one of the most lovable characters to bound off the pages of recent fiction. . . . Eric Goodman pitches straight for the heart."
THE POWER AND THE GLITTER: The Hollywood-Washington Connection, by Ronald Brownstein. (Vintage, $13.) Entertainment and politics have much in common, and over the years representatives of the two spheres have had sometimes helpful, sometimes adversarial, relationships with each other.
Last year our reviewer, David Freeman, found Ronald Brownstein's look at their mutual pasts "an astute and rewarding book . . . a match made in celluloid heaven."


'Salt-Water Moon': Another View
I was very disappointed in Alvin Klein's review of "Salt-Water Moon" at the Penguin Rep ("It All Began With Ardor and Persistence," Aug. 9).
Indeed, he seems hardly to have heard the production he describes as being of "flabbergasting uneventfulness" in spite of his use of quoted phrases and terms from the play, which naturally sound outdated as the play is set in 1926.


Chunky Marmalade, A Scottish Tradition
BRITISH travelers used to be identifiable in Continental pensions by the jars at their tables containing their preferred brands of marmalade.
Not so many travel that way today and in many hostelries in Britain, as elsewhere, bowls of the rich, amber spread, thick with chunky chips of orange peel, have been replaced by sealed plastic packets or pale little jars.
Nevertheless, visitors to Britain can find some of those tasty old-fashioned thick varieties, as I did recently on a visit to Scotland, which is considered the birthplace of marmalade.
Catherine Houston, proprietor of the Larchfield Hotel, a guesthouse in Inverness, sets her tables each morning with freshly curled butter balls ("I don't like those little foil wrappers") and jars of marmalade prepared by her chef, Robert Chisholm.
The Laigh Bakehouse and Coffee Shop, an Edinburgh institution, serves big mounds of Baxter's thick-cut Vintage marmalade with its made-on-the-premises rolls and scones.
Babbity Bowster, an inn in Glasgow, prides itself on the excellence of the local jams and marmalades it serves with its coffees and teas.


Time to Take Stock of the Hits and Misfits
SEPTEMBER is a great month for gardeners.
All the fruition of summer's labors come forth.
Harvest time is here with corn and tomatoes first on the lists.
Asters, goldenrods and mums are starting to burst open with bloom.
And the annual flowers seem to be getting their second wind and are performing gloriously.
Maybe this year everything looks particularly bright because the sunshine has come back.
Also, the soil has been consistently moist with abundant summer rainfall.
Annuals are blooming at their greatest, thanks to the cooler evenings.
Marigolds are brilliant.
Zinnias are perky.
Spider flowers look elegant.
Even petunias are at it again with their parades of colorful petals.


Toasts All Around At Harper's Bazaar
Hearst celebrated Elizabeth Tilberis and her revamping of the magazine at a champagne reception at the Metropolitan Club, Sept. 8.


Joan M. Keyes, Peter W. Burton
Joan Marie Keyes, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George W. Keyes of Tenafly, N.J., was married there yesterday to Peter W. Burton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Burton of Larchmont, N.Y.
Walter Hemberger, Mayor of Tenafly, performed the ceremony at the Knickerbocker Country Club.
Mrs.
Burton, 23 years old, is an account executive for Cass Communications, a media communications company in New York.
She graduated from Pace University.
Her father, an orthopedic surgeon, is the founder and senior partner of the Eastern Orthopedic Association of New Jersey in Teaneck, N.J.


Jenny Krasner and Erik M. Quam
Jenny Krasner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar Krasner of Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday to Erik Mitchell Quam, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Quam of Dunwoody, Ga.
Sidney Slayton, the town justice of Woodstock, N.Y., officiated at La Duchesse Anne Inn in Mount Tremper, N.Y.
Ms.
Krasner, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a sculptor in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College and Oxford University in Oxford, England.
She received her master of art degree from Oxford and her M.F.A. in sculpture from Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was the director of the Krasner Gallery, a onetime art gallery in New York.
Her mother, Joanna Krasner, is a painter in Huntington.


The Warmus Murder Case Hits TV, but Real Life Holds More Mysteries
Of course, it was going to be a television movie. Or two.
Carolyn Warmus was a blonde school teacher with a history of obsessive love affairs.
Paul Solomon was married, and someone shot his wife to death at their apartment in this Westchester suburb shortly before he had sex in a parked car in nearby Yonkers with Ms.
Warmus.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Meadow 170,000
587 Benton Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, den, finished basement; taxes $5,100.
East Williston 540,000
23 Meritoria Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 60-year-old brick colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, veranda, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $8,500.
Glen Cove 250,000
4 Stirrup Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $7,700.
Hicksville 161,500
24 Seymor Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34- year-old ranch; basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Sea Cliff 305,000
3 Dubois Court  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 31-year-old split level; dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,700.
West Hempstead 159,000
295 Spruce Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished attic; taxes $3,400.
OTHER AREAS West Hartford, Conn. 220,000
14 Oak Ridge Lane  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, oversized rooms, wooded setting, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,535.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 287,000
55 Campfire Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old unique; 2 fireplaces, 2 family rooms, private entrance, French doors; taxes $6,713.
Long Valley, N.J. 310,000
5 Lois Court
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; master bedroom with whirlpool, fireplace in living room; taxes $7,400.


The Downside of Iron-Rich Blood
Iron has long been considered safe and a promoter of good health.
But a new study from Finland raises the possibility that high levels of iron may increase the risk of heart attacks.
The study of more than 1,900 men from 42 to 60 years old found that the risk of heart attacks was greater among men with high levels of iron than those with lower amounts.


Joanne K. Silbert, Thomas Windas
Joanne Karen Silbert, a daughter of Betty Silbert of Cornwall Bridge, Conn., and Dr.
Robert Silbert of New York, was married last evening to Thomas Michael Windas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roman Windas of North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph Gelberman officiated at the National Arts Club in New York.
Msgr.
Robert Arpie took part in the service.
Mrs.
Windas is a vice president of fixed-income sales for Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the investment firm, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
OLD BLACK FLY.
By Jim Aylesworth.
Illustrated by Stephen Gammell.
Henry Holt. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9) Inside the text to this tale, a meditation on just how much chaos a black fly can cause in summer, are highlighted capital letters that spell out the alphabet.
That's all fine, but it's much more fun to search for that red-eyed fly in the funny illustrations.


Primaries Find Party Lines A Bit Blurred
IN an election year that finds Connecticut voters struggling with unemployment and higher taxes -- and little hope that either will be alleviated soon -- primary elections in four of the state's six Congressional districts on Tuesday are offering candidates whose attempts to satisfy as many people as possible often leave the contenders straddling party lines.
The most dramatic example is in the First Congressional District, where Representative Barbara B. Kennelly, a five-term Democrat from Hartford, has enjoyed wide popularity in a largely Democratic district.
A time-honored belief is that no Republican can win in the First District (the last one was elected in 1956 and trounced two years later), and to counter that, the state Republican Party this year has endorsed a Democrat to run against Mrs.
Kennelly.
That candidate, Robert F. Ludgin, a former deputy mayor of Hartford, is running on the slogan "A Choice for a Change," and faces a Republican primary challenge from Philip L. Steele, a Hartford lawyer.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PLAIN JANE  By Eve Horowitz.  Random House, $20.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; Quayle Visits Hurricane Victims in Tent City
Vice President Dan Quayle came to this hurricane-flattened city today to hear from victims of the disaster and to reassure wary Florida voters that the Bush Administration cares.
"We're still committed to Homestead," said Mr.
Quayle, who was accompanied by his wife, Marilyn, and two of the couple's three children.
"We've come to hear from the people and see what kind of requests we get."


New York's Other Boroughs; Brooklyn: From the Heights To a Well-Stocked Museum
PEOPLE who live in Brooklyn Heights say "New York" when they mean Manhattan; but if we are not New York, we can see it from here.
"New York" is the vast picture show that ascends the sky across the East River from the Heights Promenade.
The tourist will therefore inevitably turn first to the Promenade; walk west on any street between Remsen and Orange and you will see the tunnel of your vision expand till you encounter the overwhelming view made available by this work of engineering both wise and clever, which hides the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway under your feet and reflects its racket toward the East River.
You will spend a while here, gawking; if you have any viewing strength left, you can't go far wrong by just wandering in a historic district small enough to walk in, too small to get lost in, and too old and idiosyncratic to be bored by.


Candidates On Television
The candidates for the Democratic Senate nomination in New York have scheduled these television appearances today:
11 A.M: WCBS-TV, Channel 2, "Sunday Edition," separate pre-taped interviews with the four candidates.


SEPT. 6-12: Homestead Still Hurts; Most Florida Storm Victims Regain Power and Water
As Hurricane Iniki, an Andrew-strength Pacific storm, battered Hawaii Friday and Saturday, 30,000 soldiers and an even larger army of civilian volunteers worked around the clock throughout the areas of South Florida devastated by Hurricane Andrew on Aug. 24.
By Friday, power had been restored to 90 percent of the homes and stores in Dade County, and all its 2 million residents except about 50,000 living in or near the town of Homestead had been told they can safely drink their tap water.


SEPT. 6-12: Exxon Kidnapping; Ex-Officer Pleads Guilty And Tells of a Fatal Fiasco
The kidnapping and killing of an Exxon executive in April reached a denouement last week when a 45-year-old former policeman admitted the crime and said his dreams of getting an $18.5 million ransom turned to ashes when the victim died in his arms.
Arthur D. Seale, who had worked as a security guard at Exxon, pleaded guilty in Federal Court in Trenton to seven counts of conspiracy and extortion.


Lori Moskowitz, William Lepler
Lori Debra Moskowitz, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip K. Moskowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there last evening to William Ben Lepler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Lepler of Cupertino, Calif.
Rabbi Dennis Math officiated at the Quaker Ridge Golf Club.


Mary Kahng, K. Daniel Riew
Mary Hai-Yun Kahng, a daughter of Raymond Kahng of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and the late Choon Hi Choi Kahng, was married yesterday to Dr.
K.
Daniel Riew, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
C.
Keith Riew of Akron, Ohio.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wontae Cha performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Riew, 26 years old, is a strategic-planning analyst for Kaiser Permanente, a health maintenance organization in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
Her father is president of C. H. C. Technologies Inc., a trading company in Fort Lee, N.J.
Her mother was a researcher at the Ewha Woman's University in Seoul, South Korea.


It's A Shoe Thing


Brooke Allen, Peter Aaron
Brooke Allen, the managing editor of the literary magazine Grand Street, was married Wednesday in New York to Peter Aaron, an architectural photographer with Esto Photographics in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Judge Emily Jane Goodman of the New York State Supreme Court officiated in her chambers.
Mrs.
Aaron, 36 years old, is the daughter of Lewis M. and Jay Presson Allen of New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and received master's degrees in philosophy and in French and linguistics from Columbia University.
Her father is a theatrical producer and film producer.
Her mother is a playwright and screenwriter.


Abigail Sadler, B. L. Shneider
Abigail Emerson Sadler, the daughter of Sheila E. Sadler and Harry M. Sadler Jr., both of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Benjamin Leighton Shneider, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon B. Shneider of Elburn, Ill.
The Rev.
Nancy Arnold, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Stonehenge Inn in Ridgefield, Conn.
Mrs.
Shneider is a research associate in pediatric neurology at Yale University School of Medicine in New Haven, where her husband is an instructor of pediatric gastroenterology.
She graduated from Vassar College and received master's degrees in psychology and neuroscience from Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was a consulting engineer in New York.
Her mother, also retired, was the founding director of the Village Community School in New York.


A Cold Fish From Frankfurt
INFANTA
By Bodo Kirchhoff. Translated by John Brownjohn. 424 pp. New York: Viking. $24.


Conjuring Worlds of Mystery and Realism
PHILADELPHIA is 90 miles from New York City -- not as far away as Boston but far enough to make communication about art difficult.
New Yorkers get word of museum exhibitions there, but as far as the gallery scene goes, they are probably better informed about Los Angeles or Minneapolis.
Sigmund Balka, who serves Krasdale Foods as both general counsel and gallery director, deserves credit for trying to remedy this situation by inviting two Philadelphia artists, Harry Anderson and Smokie Kittner, to round up 27 more.
The result is "Philadelphia 1992," on view at the Krasdale Foods Gallery, in Hunts Point.


After a Liberty Cup Is Canceled, the Pondering Begins
The recent cancellation of New York's 1992 Liberty Cup Match Racing Regatta came as a surprise to a yacht-racing circuit that has been riding a wave of increasing popularity and prize money the last few years.
In a sport known for the cold shoulder it generally gives to professionalism, competitive sailors find it hard to make a living.
But match racing has represented a source of hope for career yachtsmen.


TENDER TRAP
Walters simply cannot -- and will not -- pursue a point.
I recall her saying that the follow-up question is her specialty in interviewing.
And George Bush's specialty is precise speech.
RICHARD E. VATZ Professor of Rhetoric and Mass Communication, Towson Sate University
Towson, Md.


Wendy P. Crisp, E. T. Henderson
Wendy Parsons Crisp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter O. Crisp of Mill Neck, N.Y., was married yesterday at Fishers Island, N.Y., to Edward Thomas Henderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. Henderson of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert A. Bryan, an Episcopal minister, officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Russell Abata, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


Islanders Battle It Out in Squad Games
Czechoslovak forwards excelled yesterday when the Islanders opened training camp with two scrimmage games at the Knickerbacker Recreational Facility in Lansingburgh, N.Y.
In the first game, DAVID VOLEK -- captain of Volek's Vulcans -- scored four times in a 5-1 victory over STEVE THOMAS's team, the Thomas English Muffins.
In the second game, ZIGMUND PALFFY scored two goals to lead Vukota's Mixters to a 6-3 victory over the DEREK KING's Court.
The four teams will rotate opponents for the first three days of the four-day tournament, with the medal round scheduled for Tuesday.
The winner gets the Arbour Cup, named after Coach AL ARBOUR.
Arbour was impressed by Palffy, a rookie right wing with a left-handed shot.
"Ziggy knows where the net is, eh?" said Arbour.
"He gets involved."


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Vice President Quayle


Notre Dame and Michigan Sputter at the End to a 17-17 Tie
They don't cheer ties at Notre Dame.
With boos filling Notre Dame Stadium at the end of a long, imperfect afternoon, the Fighting Irish ran two running plays to begin their final possession in the last 65 seconds and did not call their last time out until seven seconds remained in a bizarre 17-17 tie with Michigan.


Sports of The Times; Edberg Can Appreciate His Effort
STEFAN EDBERG took off the stoic persona he keeps in a jar by the door.
He said he was proud of what he has done at the United States Open, and he used words like "unbelievable" and had every right to do that.
He is a compulsive man, according to those who have had a glimpse of his private life, the kind of person who likes everything in order.
He would prefer not to be playing matches at odd hours, sitting out rain delays.


Q and A
Rules on Outdoor Cooking  Question: I live in a new condominium building and we do not yet have rules concerning outdoor grilling.
Some of the residents want to use terraces or patios for cooking.
Are there any fire codes or air-quality rules in New York City that ban the use of gas, charcoal or electric grills? . . .
Andrew Ertman, Manhattan.
Answer: Yes.
Although smoke emitted from family-sized barbecue equipment is specifically excluded from the Department of Environmental Protection's air-quality rules, which regulate other types of smoke emissions, the Fire Department's rules for outdoor cooking make the use of charcoal, electric or gas grills on most apartment building balconies illegal.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
Will the Americana treasures at the Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum in Winterthur, Del., look better in gallery settings than in the pseudo-period rooms in which they've been ensconsed for 40 years?
We will find out when the $19.5 million addition to this house-museum opens on Oct. 10 with displays of about 800 period objects.
The 18th-century desk-bookcase at which du Pont worked in his sitting room has been placed center stage in the rotunda of the new addition.
A Baltimore album quilt from 1854 has been taken from storage to be exhibited for the first time since du Pont acquired it in 1969, the year he died.
Equally provocative, perhaps, is a new gallery of fakes and forgeries that will feature some items du Pont bought in the belief that they were the real thing.


It Could Have Been a Debate That Foreshadowed a Campaign
It looked innocuous enough on its face: an invitation from a constituent group to Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey to take part in a forum on Sept. 22 on the domestic and foreign-policy plans of the Presidential candidates.
It sounded fine to the Governor, who agreed to look at his schedule.
But that was not quite the way the news release from the New Jersey Bush-Quayle Committee put it on Friday.
What it said was that "Governor Jim Florio has tentatively agreed to represent Governor Bill Clinton" in a Presidential debate before the Jewish Community Relations Council.
Mr.
Bush's surrogate, the release said, would be Cary Edwards.


Bill to Curb Consumer Lawsuits Falls Short
THE much-maligned tasseled-loafer lawyers won a victory last week when the Senate voted to reject a bill that would have made it harder for consumers to sue companies over defective products.
But the country's way of resolving product-related lawsuits remains troubled and is likely to stay so.
The wide-ranging problems with such litigation include the percentage of damage awards that go to lawyers, the years of court time taken up by lingering suits and even bitter disputes over how to tally the number of lawsuits in the system.
The issue has spawned a small industry of lobbyists, researchers and policy institutes; manufacturers and lawyers' groups have contributed millions of dollars to politicians.
"The division of views on this issue is as intense as they are on abortion," said Robert Litan, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a policy center in Washington.


Sarah S. Patton, Michael Duncan
Sarah Smith Patton, a daughter of Mrs.
Albert H. MacLeod of Highland Park, Ill., and the late Price A. Patton, was married yesterday to Michael Gilchrist Duncan, a son of Bruce G. Duncan of Sausalito, Calif., and the late Virginia B. Duncan.
The Rev.
Douglas M. Spence performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Highland Park.


U.S. ORDERS TESTING OF POOR CHILDREN FOR LEAD POISONING
Responding to new medical concerns about the harmful effects of exposure to even low levels of lead, the Federal Government is requiring that virtually all young children on Medicaid be screened for lead poisoning.
But the Federal directive allows states to continue using a test known to be inaccurate in measuring small amounts of lead in the blood.
The new policy, in instructions to state Medicaid officials that take effect later this month, is intended to prod states to be more aggressive in testing children for lead poisoning.
The policy reflects the conclusion of Federal health officials that levels of lead once thought to be safe can cause mental retardation, learning disabilities, stunted growth, hearing loss and behavior problems in children.


Montenegrin Town, All but at War, Shows Danger That Fight Will Spread
As one of his volunteer soldiers removed a leather jacket to reveal a Luger pistol strapped to his belt, Misko Ceko, the local Serbian warlord, declared, "For us guerrillas, a gun is like underwear."
There is a lot of such underwear on display in this Montenegrin town 25 miles from the Bosnian border, where a series of 27 unexplained explosions in Muslim stores and homes has raised the tension between the Muslim and Serbian communities to the breaking point.
The bombs have also illustrated the growing danger of the spread of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina into the extensive Muslim-populated areas of the rump Yugoslavia, which includes Montenegro and Serbia.


Caveats on the Ultrafast Cardiac Scanner
To the Editor:
"A New Way to Look Into the Heart and Detect Killer Plaque" (Aug. 23) described the use of an Ultrafast CT cardiac scanner in the diagnosis and screening of cardiovascular disease.
There are a number of grievous misrepresentations:


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Aug. retail sales, percent change
0.5
0.1
Aug. consumer prices, percent change
0.1
0.2
Late Aug. auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.2
6.0
Wednesday
Aug. industrial production, percent change
0.4
-0.2
Aug. capacity utilization, percent
78.9
78.5
Aug. business inventories, percent change
0.6
0.1
Thursday
Aug. trade deficit, billions
$6.59
$6.6
Early Sept. jobless claims, thousands
394
390
Tuesday: Johnson-Redbook survey of retail sales  Wednesday: Russian President visits South Korea OPEC ministers begin meeting  Friday: Group of Seven finance ministers meet


Concrete and Metal In Striking Repose
VISITORS cannot miss Daniel Wurtzel's "Arc" at the Kouros Sculpture Center in Ridgefield.
The work stands in a huge field; a 19-foot sluice, V-shaped and cantilevered on a pair of boulders, it could double as a roadblock.
Roughly half a chestnut tree cut into slabs went into its making, along with several mammoth bolts.
One can miss the center, despite instructions to turn off Route 116 onto Wallace Road and stay on it until the dirt changes to blacktop.
At that point the Kouros drive is visible on the left, as is "Arc," together with other works new to the center.
One of these is an especially handsome Tom Doyle piece that consists of cherry wood beams cunningly faceted and joined to each other at obtuse angles by means of large dowels.


THE REPUBLICANS
When I saw the cover of the Aug. 16 issue of The New York Times Magazine, I thought the feature must be a Diane Arbus retrospective ("The Republicans: Can They Get It Together?" by Judith Miller).
Perhaps photos from the lost negatives uncovered in her deceased attorney's wall safe.
But no, these are the current pictures of discontented mainstream Republicans.
The photos by Edward Keating are a story unto themselves.
LOUIS A. GINOCCHIO JR.
Cincinnati


Catherine Sanok And Basil Dufallo
Catherine Ann Sanok, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gregory Sanok of Mount Laurel, N.J., was married yesterday to Basil John Dufallo, a son of Richard Dufallo of Denton, Tex., and Zaidee Parkinson of New York.
The Rev.
Charles Ford, an Anglican priest, officiated at St.
Paul the Apostle Church in New York.
The Rev.
Marcos Zamora, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Sanok, who is 22 years old and is keeping her name, and her husband, also 22, graduated from Yale University.
Both were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
They are to begin graduate studies later this month at the University of California at Los Angeles, she in medieval English and he in classics.


Political Memo; In Primary Race for Senate, Ads Are Costly and Caustic
No one will ever say the TV commercials of the Democratic Senate candidates from New York are too slick.
While the hottest trend on Madison Avenue may be artsy, elliptical imagery, there is nothing subtle in the way the three leading candidates in New York have packaged themselves -- and hammered each other -- in the last weeks before the Democratic primary.
This weekend, when political advertising will hit the airwaves most intensely, even the subliminal messages scream out for attention.


At Work; The Future Wealth of the Nation
The schools have for years been an easy and popular target of social critics from every stance on the political spectrum.
But in the last decade or so, as American economic fortunes have declined relative to powerhouse nations like Germany and Japan, criticism has grown especially intense from the business sector.
Employers complain that young Americans arrive at the workplace bereft of the academic and social skills needed for jobs and without the ability to adapt as external forces inevitably reshape employers' needs.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; Though Advisers Differ, Clinton's in Tune With All
If a man is known by the company he keeps, Bill Clinton is clearly a left-leaning liberal.
Also, a right-leaning moderate.
In foreign policy he is a United Nations multinationalist and an America-first interventionist.
In a city where every Democrat suddenly wants to be a "friend of Bill," Mr.
Clinton is a man for all advisers.
The Democratic Presidential nominee's economic advisers include a former planning commissioner for Santa Monica, Calif., a city so determinedly of the left that some conservatives call it "the People's Republic of Santa Monica." They also include policy analysts for a group so determinedly of the center that some liberals accuse it of trying to turn Democrats into Republicans.


Points of Departure
A man slips on a Dolce &amp; Gabbana sweater and immediately drowns in a cascade of wool.
"My God! What do I do with all this?" he cries to any sales help within reach, as he slowly sinks into Yarn Lake.
Another man steps into a pair of Henry Duarte's trousers and discovers they have no pleats and almost skintight legs.
"They're going to look pretty stupid with wing tips, huh?" he asks the salesman.
The salesman smiles.
"Can I get away with penny loafers?" The salesman is silent.
"Well, then, what do I buy?"
A businessman fixates on an Armani leather parka as if witness to the miracle at Guadalupe -- until he tries it on.
"My suit jacket's longer than this coat," he says, stating the obvious.
"How can I wear this?" Informed that the silhouette is deliberate, he remains unyielding.
"When I wore my baseball jacket over my good clothes, my mother always said it looked terrible. All of a sudden, it's okay?"


Mutual Funds; The Bank Funds' Best-Seller List
Fresh from its acquisition of John Templeton's group of mutual funds, Franklin Resources has captured first place in the most recent Alliance Bank Mutual Fund Survey ranking banks' top-selling funds.
Franklin, based in San Mateo, Calif., was fifth in 1989, when the survey was last conducted.
This year's survey of 135 banks and thrifts with assets of more than $1 billion found that 70 percent of banks offered mutual funds, up from 46 percent in the first survey in 1985.
The list of best sellers is dominated by companies with strong fixed-income portfolios.
Banks do roughly 85 percent of their business in fixed-income products, said Kurt Cerulli of Cerulli Associates, a Boston consulting firm.


Stop And Pullover


Old Dummies Never Die; They Just Fade
This ventriloquist's dummy has seen a lot of action, to judge by his beat-up state.
He's probably Charlie McCarthy, but his natty suit is long gone and his clever eyes need a touch-up.
The mechanics are still there: his wooden head swivels madly and his smart-aleck jaw still drops.
He was made by hand out of wood in the 1940's, when ventriloquism had its heyday and all youngsters wanted to learn to throw their voices.
Pat Butler of Marlboro, N.Y., who sells at the Grand Street market every weekend, bought him from another dealer for $60.


MCMILLAN'S MILLIONS
To McMillan's query "Who gives a  [ expletive ]  about Rabbit?" I reply, "I do." And I've given several  [ expletives ]  about John Updike's work for the past 30 years.
I'm female, professional, middle-aged, black and from the industrial Midwest.
But don't rush to place me in the target audience for "Waiting to Exhale." I'll read what I read because I choose to read it.
MARY LOU SMITH
Grand Rapids, Mich.


Corrections
A report in the A La Carte column last Sunday about wine-tasting dinners at the Mirabelle Restaurant in St.
James misidentified a host and misstated his affiliation.
He was Kip Bedell of Bedell Cellars in Cutchogue.


SURFACING
PUBLISHING --
Pocket-size biographies:
From Dell Yearling, celebrity stories for $1.49 each.  RELIGION --
Female mohels:
Women are now performing the ritualistic circumcision of week-old Jewish boys.
FASHION --
Oversize knit caps:
To top off the baggy-jean look.  DRY CLEANING --
Nylon garment bags:
Replacing plastic.
Leave a deposit with your cleaner and "borrow" the bag until your next visit.
NIGHT LIFE --
Home blood-alcohol test:
Before driving home, check your sobriety (before the police do) with Final Call.


Airport Hustlers Are Arrested In New York
Nearly 2,000 limousine and baggage hustlers at New York's three major airports were issued summonses or arrested during the first two months of a crackdown by Port Authority of New York and New Jersey Police.
The hustlers, the Port Authority says, overcharge tourists for basic services and cut into the livelihood of legitimate ground transportation operators and skycaps.
Port Authority police officers have been deployed in plainclothes teams to pose as tourists at the Kennedy International, La Guardia and Newark International airports, which the agency operates.
Once a hustler solicits a plainclothes officer, he or she is arrested and usually issued a summons that must be answered in a local criminal court, says a Port Authority statement, which adds that whenever possible the hustler's vehicle is impounded as well.
More than 350 vehicles have been impounded.


Q and A
Great Smoky Mountains
Q.
We are planning a trip this fall to the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
When will the foliage might be at its peak?
Are there any guidelines on campgrounds? -- T. Terra, Rockville Centre, L.I.


Frank McKinney, 53, Ex-Olympic Swimmer, Dies
Frank E. McKinney Jr., the former Indiana University swimming champion who won an Olympic gold medal and shared six world backstroke records in the 1950's and 60's before becoming a leading banker in Indiana, was killed Friday in the collision of two small planes near Indianapolis.
He was 53 years old and had retired in 1990 as chairman of Bank One Indiana and as president of its Ohio-based parent company, Banc One.


U.N. Vows to Step Up Aid Efforts
Senior United Nations officials said today that they would increase their aid efforts in Somalia, while at the same time acknowledging that the organization had been slow to respond to the disaster.
Two officials -- Jan Eliasson, Under Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, and James Grant, head of the United Nations Children's Fund -- ended a two-day visit to Somalia today.
They said more food, more seeds, improved water supplies and better health services would be delivered in the next 100 days.


The Peace Dividend's Collateral Damage
IT MAY be victory.
But the thrill of winning the cold war is all too quickly giving way to the agony of defense industries.
While Washington is shrinking the great war machine that deterred Soviet expansion, hardly anyone wants to talk about how at least one million soldiers, sailors, bomb-builders, submarine designers, welders and other workers will be redeployed in the civilian economy.
Judged solely by the numbers, the military build-down ought to be easy.
"Compared to the big conversions after World War II, Korea and Vietnam," said Robert Reischauer, the director of the Congressional Budget Office, "this one is small potatoes."


How Big a Disaster Can Insurers Survive?
As insurers add up the damage wrought by Hurricane Andrew, what is striking is not only the unprecedented size of the losses but also the frightening thought that the toll could have been much worse.
Now American insurance companies and regulators are asking troubling questions: Just how big a natural disaster is possible?
And is the insurance system strong enough to endure it?
For more than a decade, some large insurers say, they have been horrified by the prospect of a giant earthquake in a major city -- perhaps the size of the quake that struck San Francisco in 1906.
Such an event, some economists argue, could result in insurance claims of $40 billion or more, and it could result in widespread insolvencies and a disruption of insurance markets across the country.


Doing O.K. By Doing Good
A few of the chief executive officers who ran America's 100 largest charitable foundations in 1991 took home paychecks the equal of some bosses' in the grubby for-profit sector.
But most were paid more modestly, between $100,000 and $200,000.
A survey published last week by The Chronicle of Philanthropy, a newspaper, reported three foundation executives were paid more than $500,000 in salary and benefits.
They were among 37 foundation chiefs getting $200,000 or more, according to foundation tax returns for 1991.
Six foundations paid less than $100,000.


Repaired QE2 To Sail Oct. 4
The Queen Elizabeth 2 is expected to resume sailing on Oct. 4 with a seven-day Iberian cruise from Southampton, England.
Passengers had to be evacuated from the ship on Aug. 8 after it was damaged off Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
The Cunard liner was on the last leg of a cruise from New York to Newfoundland and Nova Scotia.
No one was injured.
The ship, which sustained a 74-foot gash in its hull, is being repaired in Hamburg, Germany.
Eleven sailings were canceled, including cruises Aug. 23 and Sept. 14 and nine trans-Atlantic crossings in August and September.
A Cunard spokesperson said passengers booked on canceled trips would receive a full refund plus a credit of $500 a person toward any Cunard cruise taken in 1993.


Holy Cross Streak Crashes
Army, the last team to beat Holy Cross, did it again today, 17-7, to end the Crusaders' 20-game winning streak, the longest in collegiate football.
In the process, the Cadets unveiled in sophomore Mike Makovec a quarterback who can pass, something the Cadets have lacked in recent years in their wishbone offense.
And Army displayed a hitherto untested fullback, Steve Weber, who demonstrated that he can run over and around defenders effectively as he gained 89 yards in 24 carries.


Chinese Bite Back at Beijing With Lawsuits
Just days after 30,000 copies of the unorthodox political essays that he edited were packed on trucks and shipped all over China, Yuan Hongbing found out that the authorities had banned his book.
Mr.
Yuan, a 40-year-old law teacher at Beijing University, then did what more and more Chinese are doing when they feel unjustly harassed by the authorities: he sued.
The Government, which is accustomed to using the law as a mechanism to send its critics to prison for long terms, is suddenly finding itself the target of lawsuits by dissidents and others all over China.


POSTINGS: In Place of Tennis Bubbles; New Stores for Woodside
Recession or not, the Meyer family can't resist a chance to develop a piece of Queens.
It is now involved with store construction in the Woodside section, a $1.5 million project at Northern Boulevard, 51st Street and Broadway.
The family-run Cord Meyer Development Company of Forest Hills is the developer of what it chooses to call the Woodside Shopping Center.
"The community was underserved in the retail segment," said Scott E. Mollen, a spokesman and lawyer for Cord Meyer.


Hong Kong Scuttles Civil Service Bon Voyage
Every year, newspapers here carry front-page pictures of retiring civil servants waving farewell to the colony from the gleaming white decks of a luxury ocean liner, pictures that enrage most Hong Kong residents.
Taxpayers here find the pictures wildly provocative because the smiling retirees are enjoying the ultimate perquisite of colonial service in Hong Kong, an all-expense-paid sea passage back to Britain.


TENDER TRAP
Walters simply cannot -- and will not -- pursue a point.
I recall her saying that the follow-up question is her specialty in interviewing.
And George Bush's specialty is precise speech.
RICHARD E. VATZ Professor of Rhetoric and Mass Communication, Towson Sate University Towson, Md.


Oilers Waive Cornerback Johnson
The Houston Oilers waived cornerback RICHARD JOHNSON yesterday, clearing a roster spot for defensive end WILLIAM FULLER, who ended his holdout on Friday.
The Oilers said Fuller, obtained in a trade with the Los Angeles Rams in 1986, will be in uniform for today's game at Indianapolis.
He led the American Football Conference in sacks last season with 15 and was selected to the Pro Bowl.


Shoot Wide, Zoom In, With Just One Lens
YEARS ago, when the 10-to-1 zoom lens appeared on 8-millimeter and 16-millimeter motion picture cameras, still photographers began dreaming about the day when a similar lens might be available for the 35-millimeter still camera.
Now, Canon Inc. has made the dream come true.
This week at Photokina, the international photo equipment show in Cologne, Germany, Canon will introduce the new EF 35-millimeter-to-350-millimeter zoom lens, f/2.8 to f/5.6, that's just 6.6 inches long and weighs only three pounds.


Recitals at Grace Play Up the Exotic
THE fifth season of Downtown Music at Grace, which began last week, continues Wednesday at 12:35 P.M.
The series of outdoor recitals in the garden at the front entrance of the Episcopal church in White Plains maintains an exotic tone, with performances this week by the Fantini Choir of Natural Trumpets, the Belmont Alphorn Trio on Sept. 23 and the Highland piper Jonathan Henken on Sept. 30.
On Friday at 8 P.M. the Downtown Series introduces the Choir of Gonville and Caius College, from Cambridge University in England.
The ensemble, originally a boys' chorus, now consists of men and women who are students at the college.
Its offerings in White Plains, under the direction of Geoffrey Webber, range from 16th-century Anthems to Herbert Howells's "Motet in Memory of President J. F. Kennedy." For reservations or information about future events at Grace Church, call the Downtown Music office at 949-0384.


Innovations Will Be Radical, but There's a Fierce Battle Brewing
Video hardware is hardly the stuff of glamour, but occasionally a new device arrives with undeniable eclat.
This is clearly the case with wide-screen video, which will make its appearance this fall on the first television screens designed with the same ratio of width to height as the screens in movie theaters.
This year, too, viewers with older sets will benefit from new quality standards in prerecorded videotapes.
Standards are also the issue in the increasing use of the Extended Play mode, a recording process that lowers price but compromises quality.


Keep-It-Simple Retailing Catches On
MINIMALIST retail design reached an apogee in New York this year with the opening of the Equipment shirt store: a stainless-steel shelf in the center, a mahogany cabinet to one side and not very much else except the boldly patterned, brightly colored product.
But while this happened in Madison Avenue's rarefied atmosphere, the impulse toward spare design, where architectural features are subordinated to the merchandise, can be found almost anywhere one looks or shops.


Susan Lehman, Trent Carmichael
Susan Reynolds Lehman, the daughter of Orin Lehman of New York and the late Jane Bagley Lehman, was married yesterday to Trent Andrew Carmichael, the son of Trent and Marilyn Carmichael of Palo Alto, Calif.
The Rev.
Judith Baumer performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Green Gables Estate in Woodside, Calif.
Mrs.
Carmichael, 27 years old, is a project manager for Community Housing Developers, a low-income-housing developer in San Jose, Calif.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University.
She received a master's degree in public policy from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father is the New York State Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.
Her mother founded the Tides Foundation in San Francisco.
The bride's great-great-uncle Herbert H. Lehman was a Governor of New York.
Mrs.
Carmichael is a stepdaughter of Wendy Lehman of New York.


Video Dial Offers Opportunities for All
To the Editor:
"The Video Dial Tone, Strangled," your Aug. 31 editorial about the transmission of television and other video services over telephone lines, is nothing more than one more attempt by the publishing industry to scare consumers and conjure up fears that telephone companies -- if they are given the freedom to participate fully in the video programming market -- would somehow restrict access to future services.


Susan G. Flinn, Vincent E. Fultz
Susan Greenleaf Flinn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Macdonald Flinn of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Vincent Edmund Fultz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Fultz of Mayfield Village, Ohio.
The Rev.
Vincent Anderson, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the summer home of the bride's parents in Lakeside, Mich.
Mrs.
Fultz, 26 years old, is an account service manager at Goble &amp; Associates, a Chicago advertising agency.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father retired as a partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.


Paying Off Debts, With Relish
CITIZEN KOCH
An Autobiography.
By Edward I. Koch with Daniel Paisner.
Illustrated. 281 pp.
New York: A Thomas Dunne Book/ St.
Martin's Press. $22.95.


Disease Joins Death and Famine in Somali Tragedy
Disease has joined starvation as the killer in this town of perpetual misery, the epicenter of Somalia's famine.
Seasoned relief workers, overwhelmed by the continuing high death rate here, say the dearth of medical care for those suffering from measles, malaria, respiratory ailments and diarrhea has kept the death toll higher than it should be, even though increased amounts of food are arriving daily by the American airlift and other planes.


Cynthia Hyatt, James Shorris
Cynthia Lee Hyatt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Hyatt of Sarasota, Fla., was married yesterday to James Sasson Shorris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl Shorris of New York.
The Rev.
Edmund Mayo, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Astors' Beechwood in Newport, R.I.
Ms.
Hyatt, who is 31 years old and keeping her name, graduated from Northeastern University and received a master's degree in school psychology from the University of Nebraska.
She is a school psychologist and therapist at the Harmony Hill School in Chepachet, R.I.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Marshall &amp; Williams Company, a textile machinery manufacturer in Providence, R.I., and Greenville, S.C.


Ruth Nelson, 87, an Actress for Nearly 70 Years
Ruth Nelson, an actress in the legendary Group Theater that transformed American acting and whose career on stage, film and television spanned nearly 70 years, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old.
She died of cancer complicated by a stroke and pneumonia, her family said.


It Wasn't Close: Chavez Stops Camacho in Decision
Julio Cesar Chavez gave Hector Camacho an old-fashioned beating tonight.
From start to finish Chavez was a nonstop aggressor, pounding Camacho liberally with both hands while winning a lopsided, unanimous 12-round decision at the Thomas and Mack Center here.


Ralph Lauren's Revised Guest List
THE Ralph Lauren amusement park has a new attraction.
Head past the false-front saloons of Roughwearland, breeze by the tawny postcolonial Safari land and turn left, just after Gatsbyland, and check out Multicultural Urbanland.
Hang out with the homeboys.
Project attitude.
Or be fabulous and downtown, in that special New York way.
New and unfamiliar influences have crept into the Lauren vision.
They are on full display in the fall advertising campaign for Polo, the heart and soul of Mr.
Lauren's grand reinterpretation of American life as a series of styles.
It's a 25-year project as ambitious as, and remarkably similar to, Walt Disney's, or the Golden Age Hollywood films in which Jewish immigrants projected an idealized America back to itself.


Madonna's Doctor of Spin
For those who have followed Madonna through her marital woes with Sean Penn and her battles with Pepsi, MTV and the Toronto police, it may come as a revelation that there is actually someone paid to keep her out of trouble -- or, better yet, turn her long-running controversies to the best possible advantage.
That person is Liz Beth Rosenberg, who enjoys the reputation as spin doctor to the most famous, and infamous, woman in rock.
The 44-year-old Ms.
Rosenberg is actually a vice president at Warner Brothers Records, where she is publicist for Seal and K. D. Lang and other musicians.
Running interference for the label's biggest gun, however, consumes nearly two-thirds of her time -- maybe more starting next month, when Madonna's newest album, with the provocative title "Erotica," is scheduled to be released, along with a related book of photographs, called "Sex." She will also co-star with Willem Dafoe in the thriller "Body of Evidence," due to open in January; the film has received a NC-17 rating because of its erotic content.


The Hungriest Writer: One Fan's Notes on Frederick Exley
WHEN I read in early summer that Frederick Exley, best known as the author of "A Fan's Notes," was dead of a stroke at the age of 62, I wasn't surprised.
He smoked too much, he drank too much, he ate too little.
He didn't so much sleep as pass out, and the energy he expended in talk might have powered a generator.
If he was essentially sedentary, his mind raced as furiously as a hamster in a cage, and just as circularly.
I doubt there was a moment in his life when Fred was ever free of himself.
So, as I said, I wasn't surprised.
Although Exley tried doggedly to connect with people -- his letters and phone calls to his fellow literati were legendary -- he was irredeemably solitary.
The outer reaches of all of us, he was forever chasing his potential, and that's a run one does alone.
He was also irredeemably impossible, a professional mess.
I'd given up on him; I hadn't thought of him in years.
Then, looking through an old folder, I found a bundle of letters in a familiar schoolboy scrawl.
Some Polaroid pictures of a stocky, brown-eyed, grizzle-bearded man sitting in a shiny, stiff-backed chair and grinning.
The same man, grinning even more broadly because he was standing beside two marlin, which he probably hadn't caught himself but who was to know?
"Fred's dead," I said to myself, and this time I couldn't believe it.


Camilla Campbell, Oliver Platt
Mary Camilla Bonsal Campbell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Campbell of York Harbor, Me., was married yesterday in Kittery Point, Me., to Oliver Platt, a son of Ambassador and Mrs.
Nicholas Platt of Islamabad, Pakistan, and Washington.
The Rev.
Jill Staples performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
The bride, who is known as Camilla, is a freelance assistant producer of documentary films in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a member of the New York law firm of Curtis, Mallet, Prevost-Colt &amp; Mosle.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 13, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
33
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
22
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
3
3
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
4
9
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
3
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Life as lived by writers, critics and editors in the Pennsylvania Dutch country and New York.
6 *
11
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
7
13
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
8
33
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
9 *
10
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
10
5
AGAINST THE WIND, by J. F. Freedman. (Signet, $5.99.) A lawyer undertakes to defend a gang of bikers against a ruthless district attorney.
11
3
EXCEPTIONAL CLEARANCE, by William J. Caunitz. (Bantam, $5.99.) A New York police detective on the trail of a serial killer.
12
2
SEE JANE RUN, by Joy Fielding. (Avon, $5.50.) A woman awakens not knowing who she is and with a premonition of horrors to come.
13
3
A TREASURE WORTH SEEKING, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman's quest for a brother she never knew.
14 *
2
THE COLOR OF HER PANTIES, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) Continuing the "Xanth" fantasy series: women band together to stop a dreadful man from becoming family chieftain.
15
3
DANIEL'S BRIDE, by Linda Lael Miller. (Pocket, $5.50.) A 19th-century woman is saved from the hangman's noose by a marriage of convenience.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
21
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington and Wall Street have benefited only a few Americans.
3
8
ME: STORIES OF MY LIFE, by Katharine Hepburn. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The actress's memoirs.
4
3
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How four men plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
5
61
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
69
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7 *
462
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
8
12
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
9
4
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of Government waste.
10
132
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
11 *
17
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
57
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
105
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
86
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
21
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what various people have learned about life.
5
1
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) The revised edition of a book offering counsel for parents-to-be.
6 *
6
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1992 edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Seneca Falls
To the Editor: Richard Moore's article on Seneca Falls and its role in feminist history ("Birthplace of American Feminism," Aug. 2) overlooked the Equal Rights Amendment.
Alice Paul led the militant women's suffragists of the National Woman's Party to one goal with the passage and ratification of the 19th Amendment in 1918-20.
The Women's Party began its offensive for the Equal Rights Amendment with a women's conference in Seneca Falls on July 20 and 21, 1923; it marked the 75th anniversary of the first women's conference in 1848.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton's demand for suffrage, had just been won: the Seneca Falls conference in 1923 revived Lucretia Mott's demand for full equality.
The conference took place in the Presbyterian Church and Alice Paul read the text from the pulpit:


Not the First Time
To the Editor:
Your review of "Judaism, Human Values, and the Jewish State" (July 19) says that this volume "for the first time makes  [ Yeshayahu ]  Leibowitz's writing available in America." At least one other book, "The Faith of Maimonides" (1987), has been available.
LEONARD ROGOFF Chapel Hill, N.C.


Facing Voter Rebellions, Incumbents Hope to Eke Out Victories
In a year marked by fierce anti-incumbent sentiments nationwide, several members of New York's Congressional delegation are locked in testy primary battles.
But as the races enter their last days, the voter rebellion has been overshadowed by racial and ethnic appeals and tempered by redistricting, which has sent incumbents scrambling into new territory.
Just days before Tuesday's primary, some voters in some of the most hotly contested Congressional districts -- from Brooklyn's Bedford-Stuyvesant across Queens and the Bronx to suburban Great Neck on Long Island -- are still undecided.
In a sign of the volatility of the electorate, people railed against any and all officeholders, but then admitted that they knew little or nothing of the challengers.


This Time, Jets Are Planning to Play at Own Level
Jets tackle Irv Eatman thinks he knows the reason his team dropped its season opener last Sunday, against the Falcons in Atlanta -- in addition to the two missed field goals by Jason Staurovsky and a fumble near the goal line by fullback Brad Baxter.
"Last week, we played at Atlanta's level and we didn't execute our game to the fullest," Eatman said.
"If we do that, we'll be fine. We might have been too cerebral for them. We outsmarted ourselves a little bit. They didn't do one thing that we didn't prepare for. As a matter of fact, they didn't do half of the stuff that we did prepare for."


Wall Street; Scooping Up Disappointing Shares of the Pie
Nothing is supposed to be better for investors than knowing where the smart money is going, and then following along.
But what if the smart money ain't so smart?
Investors who recently started scooping up shares of Eskimo Pie, the ice cream maker that went public earlier this year, must be asking themselves that question these days.


Ms. Perkins, Peter Clifford
Stephanie Hagen Perkins, the daughter of Carla L. Perkins of Kennebunkport, Me., and Norman B. Perkins of Palm Springs, Calif., was married yesterday to Peter Clifford, a son of Paul Clifford of Lewiston, Me., and the late Ann Clifford.
The Rev.
Mary Louise Stevens officiated at St.
David's Episcopal Church in Kennebunk, Me.
The Rev.
Richard Clifford, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the service.
Mrs.
Clifford, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University, and she and her husband received law degrees from the University of Maine.
Her father, who is retired, was a litigation manager in Los Angeles for I.B.M.
Her mother owns two Carla's Corner clothing boutiques, in Kennebunkport and Ogunquit, Me.


Susan E. Rice, Ian Cameron
Susan Elizabeth Rice, the daughter of Dr.
Emmett J. Rice and Lois Dickson Fitt, both of Washington, was married there yesterday to Ian Officer Cameron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Newton D. Cameron of Victoria, British Columbia.
The Rev.
Kwase Thornell performed the Episcopal ceremony at the St.
Albans School chapel.
Mrs.
Cameron, 27 years old, is a management consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company, the international management consulting company, in Toronto.
She graduated from Stanford University and received a doctorate in international relations from Oxford University, where she was a Rhodes Scholar.
Her father, a retired senior vice president at the National Bank of Washington, is a former governor of the Federal Reserve.
Her mother is a guest scholar at the Brookings Institution.


How We All Became Yankees
ELLIS ISLAND TO EBBETS FIELD
Sport and the American Jewish Experience.
By Peter Levine.
Illustrated. 328 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $25.


Results Plus
HARNESS RACING  Western Hanover Nears Crown  It's two down, one to go for Western Hanover.
Last night, the horse captured the $366,750 Messenger Pace at Rosecroft Raceway in Fort Washington, Md., the second jewel in pacing's triple crown.
Western Hanover covered the mile in 1:531/5 with regular driver Bill Fahy in the bike.
Safely Kept was second, 2 1/4 lengths back, and Humstinger was a nose farther back in third.
The winner paid $2.10.
Having won the Cane Pace two weeks ago at Yonkers Raceway, Western Hanover now stands on the verge of becoming the first horse since Ralph Hanover in 1983 to capture the triple crown.
The final jewel in the series, the $575,000 Little Brown Jug, is scheduled for Sept. 24 at the Delaware County, Ohio, Fairgrounds.
The victory in the Messinger, worth $188,375 to owner George Segal of Highland Park, Ill., pushed Western Hanover over the $2 million mark in career earnings, the 15th pacer in harness history to reach that milestone.
His career earnings now stand at $2,028,662 after his 20th win in 31 career starts. (AP) GOLF  Lietzke Keeps Lead Despite a 73  Bruce Lietzke went nine shots higher than the day before.
His four-stroke lead was cut in half.
But he accomplished what he set out to do yesterday in the third round of the Canadian Open in Oakville, Ontario.
"I'm still in position," Lietzke said after watching Greg Norman shoot a one-under 71 and trim his lead to two strokes.
"That's what we're all trying to do; get in position on Saturday to be part of the golf tournament on Sunday." Lietzke is now at eight-under 208 after a 73 on the Glen Abbey layout.
The group chasing him includes Fred Couples, Norman, Curtis Strange and Nick Price. (AP) Barrett Seizes L.P.G.A.
Lead: Tina Barrett shot a three-under-par 69 to take a two-stroke lead over Jane Crafter, the first-round leader, yesterday after the second round of the Ping-Cellular One Golf Championship in Portland, Ore.
Barrett has a 9-under 135 total on the 6,266-yard Columbia-Edgewater Country Club course.
Crafter, who tied the tournament record Friday with an 8-under 64, shot a 73.
Nancy Lopez, who won last week's Rail Charity Classic, was five back at 140 along with Vicki Fergon, Marta Figueras-Dotti and Kelly Robbins. (AP)


Sandra DeJong, Stuart B. Brown
Sandra M. DeJong, a daughter of Drs.
Mary and David DeJong of Montreal, was married Monday to Stuart B. Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Brown of Carrboro, N.C.
The Rev.
Jane Gould, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Cochran Chapel at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
Mrs.
Brown, 33 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a second-year medical student at University of Massachusetts in Worcester.
Her father, now retired, was an internist in Montreal, where her mother, also an internist, still practices.


A Meal With a View in Rome
RETURNING to Rome as a tourist after living there for more than a decade, I find the thing I miss most is my own terrace.
In theory I agree with Eleanor Clark, who wrote in "Rome and a Villa" that the streets belong to everybody and "in Rome to go out is to go home." But to see the city from above is to take possession of it in a way that's impossible when you're scuttling over the cobblestones, dodging cars and other pedestrians, like a frantic marionette in a Punch-and-Judy show.
I much prefer quiet and privacy, and a commanding view of red tile roofs, crumbling ruins, church domes and campaniles, and neighboring terraces banked with flowers.
Better yet, I delight in having Rome spread out in front of me like one vast lesson from an architect's notebook while I enjoy a bowl of pasta and a good bottle of wine.
For a visitor, the best way to replicate this experience is to check into a luxury hotel and order room service.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
Campbell's separatist philosophy may be based on deeply felt convictions, but it is morally repugnant to me.
"I want my people to date and marry each other, and I don't think it will ever give me pleasure to see black men with white women" may be an honest emotional response, but it is still a racist statement.


. . . And Intellectuals Rally to the Cause
SOMETIME in August, the French Government of Francois Mitterrand and Pierre Beregovoy began to realize that their Sept. 20 referendum on the Maastricht Treaty was in trouble.
They decided to mobilize everything necessary in support of the treaty, and the person they chose to organize that effort -- their James Baker, if you will -- was Jack Lang.
Mr.
Lang is the Minister of Culture, and it has been his stewardship of French culture in all the years since 1981 that the Socialists have held power, which has been most of them, that has defined Mr.
Lang's image.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the famine in Somalia misidentified the region most severely affected.
It is the southwest of the country, not the southeast.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.30
123.08
134.08
per Dollar
German Mark
1.4495
1.4017
1.6900
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2173
1.1988
1.1357
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9210
1.9960
1.7297
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$340.90
$339.75
$344.20
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Public &amp; Private; 5 Years Old
The life story of Randi Anderson is sickening because its horrors have become commonplace.
Born to crack addicts, reared in a tenement apartment with an empty refrigerator -- they'd sometimes put a neck bone on the radiator and heat it up for a meal, one brother remembers -- the little girl went to one foster home, then another.
She was difficult to love.
She stole, drew on walls with lipstick and defecated on the floor, perhaps to get attention.
I don't know if a therapist would agree with that; although everyone seems to have known she needed counseling, Randi somehow never got it.
She had pigtails and big brown eyes and once she ran in front of a car and screamed "I want to die." She got a good smack for that.


New York's Other Boroughs; The Bronx: Botanical Wonders in the Park
SINCE presidents trod its streets 15 years ago, the Bronx has been unjustly upstaged by its battered southern reaches.
A similar, although less malevolent, fate has befallen the Bronx Park, a sprawling stretch of green smack dab in the borough's center.
The park's southern half -- better known as the Bronx Zoo -- with its elaborate natural habitats and exotic creatures, gets the lion's share of attention.
But nestled in the rolling hills of the northern end is a pastoral gem, the New York Botanical Garden.


In Pursuit of Peace and Ecological Balance
IN the 50's, when poodle skirts, sock hops and the cold war were in full swing, Lou Friedman met Judi Cron.
As a student at Williams College in Massachusetts, Mr.
Friedman recalled, he was immediately drawn to the Vassar student, who was known among their friends for her unconventional ideas and earthy manner.
"In other words," he said, "she was considered really strange music. And because I too never quite understood or accepted the norm, we found solace in each other."


Whistling While It Works
The tea kettle wars continue.
For Alessi, the Italian manufacturer, the architect Frank Gehry has designed the Pito ($495), with a hand-carved mahogany handle in the shape of a fish, one of the architect's favorite shapes, and a whistle to match.
When the water boils, the whistle sounds like a whale's mating call.
(If you boil tea by the seashore, who knows what might happeen?)


Into Autumn, Inch by Inch
Women were not stampeding into longer skirts during the first two weeks of September.
A survey on Fifth Avenue showed that lengths varied from six inches above the knee to ankle length, plus trousers, jump suits and leggings.


Mary E. Cummins and Jeffrey A. Caty
Mary Elizabeth Cummins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Cummins of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Andrew Caty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Caty of Hudson, Mass.
The Rev.
Charles Kavanagh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
John and St.
Mary.
Mrs.
Caty, 25 years old, is an assistant manager in executive banking at Citibank in New York.
She graduated from Boston College, as did her husband.
Her father is a partner in the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York, an adjunct professor of taxation and accounting at Columbia University and a director of the New York Mets.
Her mother, Jackie M. Cummins, is a personal fashion consultant.


From Older Heads, Business Ideas
THE other side of 65 has its advantages.
"You're able to draw on experience and you're not afraid to take chances," said Philip J. VanderWoude, who started an environmental engineering company, Applied Technology Services, four years ago when he was 70.


Fischer Counterpunch Wins Game 7 After Tough Attack
After a spell of losses and near-losses, Bobby Fischer swept aside the cobwebs yesterday and hurled back a dangerous attack by Boris Spassky to win Game 7 of their exhibition chess match in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
The contest is now even at two victories apiece; it will take 10 to win.
Spassky may have been conned into his enthusiastic onslaught by Fischer's timid, conservative opening play.
But Fischer threw off his sheep's clothing and stopped his opponent's attack while simultaneously devouring the two pawns that produced his margin of victory in the endgame.
Fischer's concluding technique was relentlessly accurate, robbing Spassky of any real chance to put up a fight.


Children's Books
GOING TO SLEEP ON THE FARM
By Wendy Cheyette Lewison.
Illustrated by Juan Wijngaard.
Unpaged.
New York: Dial Books for Young Readers.
ASLEEP, ASLEEP
By Mirra Ginsburg.
Illustrated by Nancy Tafuri.
Unpaged.
New York: Greenwillow Books. $14. (Ages 1 to 3)
WHOO-OO IS IT?
By Megan McDonald.
Illustrated by S. D. Schindler.
Unpaged.
New York: Orchard Books. $14.95. (Ages 2 to 5)


New York's Other Boroughs; Staten Island: Art From Tibet And a Preserve for Wildlife
STATEN ISLAND is the wallflower at the party, so quiet and unobtrusive that the rest of the city tends to forget it's alive.
And that's its charm.
The 30-minute ferry ride from the Battery has kept the borough innocent in ways that even the 28-year-old Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, its link to Brooklyn, has barely touched.
There are more trees than high-rises, more backyards than alleys, more bait-and-tackle shops than parking garages.


Promoting The Harpist As a Hunk
Call it the MTV approach to Mozart.
Some classical musicians are now being promoted as hunks.
Earlier this year, to promote Tzimon Barto's "Chopin Preludes" album, EMI Classics sent out publicity photos of the 29-year-old pianist and body builder from Florida showing him with no shirt on.


Why Russia Can't Easily Give Islands to Japan
To the Editor:
"Between Four Rocks and a Hard Place" (editorial, Aug. 28), on the post-World War II dispute between Russia and Japan over the Kurile Islands, suggests Russia should follow the United States example of giving Okinawa back to Japan.
Okinawa was populated by Japanese.
The Kuriles are populated by Russians.
Even the name "Kurile" is Russian, and the islands are indexed under that name in the 1911 and 1936 editions of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, not under the Japanese "Chishima," although the islands were Japanese territory in those years.


Pitt Falls Very Hard To W. Va. At Home
In the last five years, the fans of the Pitt-West Virginia rivalry have come to expect high-scoring, closely played games.
West Virginia had averaged 25.8 points a game and Pittsburgh has averaged 24.8, and the winning team had scored at least 30 points in the four previous meetings.
But this afternoon, before a sparse crowd of 41,723 at Pitt Stadium, only one of those expectations was realized, and then only partly.
It was a high-scoring game by West Virginia, but it wasn't even close for Pittsburgh as the Mountaineers buried the Panthers, 44-6.


Asheville
For many people, a getaway in North Carolina's Blue Ridge Mountains means a remote campsite or cottage, a place where the pileated woodpecker is the biggest noisemaker around.
Travelers who take smaller doses of wilderness may prefer Asheville.
Hiking trails, whitewater rivers and the meandering Blue Ridge Parkway are all within easy reach, yet so are out-of-town newspapers, imported beer and the occasional foreign movie.
Not by accident is Asheville's professional baseball team called the Tourists.
The city has catered to visitors since the mid-19th century, when it began to be known both for lavish hotels and sanitariums.


SEPT. 6-12: 10,503 Deaths Reported; As Bosnian War Drags On, U.N. Plans More Troops To Protect Convoys
The full complexity of the Bosnian conflict emerged in boldface last week, as Muslim Slavs, who have most often been victims of aggression, were accused of killing United Nations peacekeepers and trying to violate an arms embargo.
Officials in neighboring Croatia intercepted a planeload of Iranian arms and ammunition bound for the Muslim fighters in clear violation of a United Nations arms embargo.
A few days later, United Nations officials charged, a pair of Muslim militiamen opened fire on a convoy of peacekeepers, killing two French officers.
Bosnian officials denied the accusation.


World Markets; A Week-Long Nightmare in Sweden
It was something out of a financial nightmare: interest rates as high as 75 percent, a skittish currency, falling share prices and a banking system decimated by real estate losses.
But the nightmare was all too real last week in Sweden, the latest nation to be rocked by the turmoil in the European economies.
Sweden's problems have been festering for months.
But they were brought to a head by Finland's decision last week to allow its currency to float freely, a move that was tantamount to a devaluation of between 10 percent and 20 percent.
Having seen currency speculators start to sell Swedish kronas in the belief that Sweden would also be forced to devalue, the nation's central bank, the Riksbank, immediately stepped in with a highly aggressive policy.


Headdresses Show Team Solidarity
THOSE who saw the Olympic Games in Barcelona six weeks ago will recall the dramatic gesture of the American volleyball players who, smarting after a controversial defeat, proceeded to shave their heads in imitation of a bald teammate.
This gave them a considerable lift, although they failed in the quest for gold.
Something parallel, although less drastic, occurred at the NEC World Team Championships in Salsomaggiore, Italy, on Sept. 4.
The American team had had a dismal start in the final against France, and after 48 deals, the midpoint of the match, it trailed by 61 imps.


Fresh Apples Warm Hearts of Bakers
FALL is the one time of year you can bite with confidence into a fresh apple.
At farmers' markets and roadside stands, the apples arrive just as the leaves begin to turn and the evenings start to get shorter.
Now is the time for apple pies, charlottes, puddings and tarts -- straightforward, comforting desserts that get you ready for winter.
One of my favorites is the French upside down apple pie known as tarte Tatin, served warm with creme fraiche or vanilla ice cream.
The apples are baked under a pastry shell in a cast-iron pan and when they are turned out, they are coated with a caramel glaze. (The glaze is the secret to a good tarte Tatin. It must be cooked to a deep caramel color before the apples are added.)


Europe's Future Hangs on the French Voter's Whim
THE campaign for next Sunday's French referendum on a treaty on European union has become a grim affair.
Supporters of the treaty say a French "no" will threaten the survival of the European Community, while opponents contend ratification will strip France of its very identity as a nation.
Who should French voters believe?
Polls suggest they are now evenly split between "oui" and "non" -- and Europe is holding its breath.
That both camps should be resorting to the tactics of fear illustrates how much Western Europe's mood has soured since the treaty was approved at a community summit in the Dutch city of Maastricht last December.
The region is sliding into recession, rising xenophobia in Germany has sent shudders through its neighbors, the war in Yugoslavia constantly reminds that history is not over, confidence in the future has evaporated.


No Headline
Some young men have said to me, going to prison in their community is like going to the Army was for my generation.
You spend a couple of years in the Army, we spend a couple of years in prison. -- BARRY KRISBERG of the National Council on Crime and Delinquency.  [ 40:3. ]


Editors' Note
An article on page 38 of The Times Magazine today about a territorial dispute between Russia and Japan says President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia is scheduled to arrive in Tokyo today.
He was to discuss the dispute, over islands in the Kurile chain in the northern Pacific.
On Wednesday, after the magazine went to press, the Russian Government announced that the trip had been canceled.
Strong public opinion in both countries has made a solution seem increasingly hard to attain.


Corrections
Because of a typographical error, an article last Sunday about a dispute in Westport over building athletic fields on a town-owned farm misstated the size of the farm.
It is 38 acres, not 338.


Tech Notes; Instant Sports Stats on the Fly
For eight years, the Data Broadcasting Corporation of San Mateo, Calif., has been providing financiers and traders on the go with constantly updated pricing data and news flashes on hand-held devices known as Quotrexes.
Some 8,000 are in use.
Now comes Datasports Inc. with the thought that lots of people will pony up big bucks to use the same technology to keep posted on scores, betting odds and other fast-changing sports information.


It's the Christie Brinkley Show
Christie Brinkley, the supermodel whose interests range from designing dresses to herding cattle, is joining the Cable News Network this week.
At 10:30 A.M.
E.D.T. tommorrow, "Living in the 90's With Christie Brinkley," a daily half-hour show, will premiere on the nuts-and-bolts news channel.
Ms.
Brinkley has worked as a reporter only once before -- she did a four-part series on beauty tips for "Good Morning America" in 1983 -- so being in CNN's newsroom is still fresh for her.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
Don't bother me with sappy endings, special effects or flabby plots.
All I want is a tough-minded director, and this season there are a few.
Stephen Frears's work has been so varied he seems to have no signature style, unless you count fierce honesty.
After revealing the sensitive side of post-modern punks in "My Beautiful Laundrette," the seamy side of 18th-century aristocrats in "Dangerous Liaisons" and the lethal extremes of greed in "The Grifters," he takes on the media, and society's need for idols, this season with "Hero," opening in October.


Amelia A. Cooper, Timothy J. Coffin
Amelia Ann Cooper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Cooper of Hopewell, N.J., was married there yesterday to Timothy Jethro Coffin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Jarvis Coffin of Eden, N.Y.
The Rev.
Harold Robinson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Cooper.
Mrs.
Coffin, 30 years old, is a computer consultant to educational institutions in Wilton, Conn.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is a vice president and a bond salesman at Vantage Securities, a brokerage firm in Edison, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara A. Cooper, owns an antiques business in Hopewell.


No Cows, No Boys
You don't need to know a fetlock from a forelock to enjoy western wear's new maturity.
Its intricate balance of highly contrasting textures, the sleek elegance of its body-hugging cut and its deft weave of mythic and inherent masculinity now influence all phases of men's clothes, from suits to underwear, looking as brand-iron hot on a subway platform as against a Texas horizon without a palomino in sight.
True, the hats require the extra burst of bravado, but western wear welcomes gutsiness as long as the image isn't taken too seriously.
Just keep in mind Linda Ellerbee's comment that "If you think about it, it's men who should be riding sidesaddle," and save the spurs for your next rodeo.


In a Field Studded With Novices, 2 Senate Candidates Vie in Primary 1
Connecticut voters, battered by the recession and angered by a new income tax, are a weary and irascible group whose reactions to this year's candidates for Congress are far from certain.
In the primary here Tuesday, Republican voters will choose a candidate for the United States Senate, as well as candidates in two Congressional districts.
Democrats also have a choice in two Congressional races.


Sports of The Times; As the Saying May Go, Too Many Suits Spoil the Sports
ONCE upon a time, sports in September meant athletes in action.
Whether in newspaper photos or videotape, quarterbacks were throwing passes or sluggers were hitting home runs.
But none of those athletes was wearing a business suit.
If somebody was wearing a business suit in a newspaper photo, you knew to keep searching for the sports section.


Why It Pays to Dress Well
THE ANT AND THE PEACOCK
Altruism and Sexual Selection From Darwin to Today.
By Helena Cronin.
Illustrated. 490 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press. $39.50.


Catherine Nguyen, W. G. Connolly 3d
Catherine Tam Nguyen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nguyen Huy Loi of Virginia Beach, Va., was married yesterday to William Gerard Connolly 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Connolly Jr. of Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles Kelly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Wren Chapel at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Va.
Ms.
Nguyen, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a men's-wear buyer for Barneys New York.
She and her husband graduated from William and Mary.
Her father, a former colonel in the South Vietnamese Army, and her mother, Nguyen Tam, own La Caravelle restaurant in Virginia Beach.


Television Set Shape up for the Movies
VIDEO HARDWARE IS hardly the stuff of glamour, but occasionally a new device arrives with undeniable eclat.
This is clearly the case with wide-screen video, which will make its appearance this fall on the first television screens designed with the same ratio of width to height as the screens in movie theaters.
This year, too, viewers with older sets will benefit from new quality standards in prerecorded videotapes.
Standards are also the issue in the increasing use of the Extended Play mode, a recording process that lowers price but compromises quality.


Diana M. Ralston and Curt M. Horvath
Dr.
Diana Meredith Ralston, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce L. Ralston of Tuxedo Park, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Curt Michael Horvath, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen J. Horvath Jr. of Palos Heights, Ill.
Gerald A. Fix, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Tuxedo Club.
Dr.
Ralston Horvath, 29 years old, graduated from Tufts University.
She received a Ph.D. in molecular biology from Northwestern University, as did her husband, and is a post-doctoral fellow in plant molecular biology at Rockefeller University.
Her father, who is retired, was a neurosurgeon in private practice in Middletown, N.Y.


Woman, 38, Is Slain at Home; Police Seek Killer
A 38-year-old mother of two was found stabbed to death early Thursday in her home in this affluent community on the North Shore, and today the police sought a suspect while neighbors expressed fear and confusion.
Residents of Connelly Road, lined with expensive homes half-hidden behind tall trees and well-trimmed shrubbery, expressed shock at the slaying of Patricia Van Nostrand.
Neighbors said she loved being a homemaker, sewed quilts as a hobby and was in the midst of redecorating her house.


Hits Will Be Hits. But What About the Rest?
Every new season is a challenge for the video store owner choosing which movies to stock.
Incoming titles fall into one of two camps: the hits and the rest.
Movies that made at least $50 million at the box office -- a "Patriot Games," say, which is due in November -- are shoo-ins for best-renter lists and are stocked in large numbers.
As for the rest, the trick is to pick winners from scores of films that may not have filled theaters but could prove popular on tape.
One practiced handicapper of movies is Rich Thorward, owner of four Home Video Plus stores in Bergen County, N.J.
Mr.
Thorward also publishes The Movie Monitor, a weekly tip sheet that evaluates films for many video stores across the country.


Kathleen Deveny, Dennis R. Kneale
Kathleen Deveny, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, was married yesterday in East Hampton, L.I., to Dennis Randall Kneale, the news editor for the marketing and media reporting group at The Journal.
James R. Ketcham, town justice of East Hampton, officiated at the Hedges Inn.
Ms.
Deveny, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
The daughter of Thomas and Cynthia Deveny of Minneapolis, she is a graduate of the University of Minnesota.
Her father is a publishers' representative in Minneapolis, where her mother, a registered nurse, is an analyst for the Medica health-maintenance organization.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Hungary, Mobile Bears Are Visiting Suburbs
When a hungry young black bear scrambled up a frontyard holly tree in this affluent community recently, the tree's horrified owner wasted no time calling for help.
It was one of many bear alerts that the State Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife has fielded this year.
The calls came in at a rate of several each week through May and June and tapered off to about one a week by the Labor Day weekend.


Brooke J. Zykan, T. W. Bernstein
Brooke Joanne Zykan, a daughter of Anthony and Jacqueline Zykan of Lancaster, Pa., was married there last evening to Theodore William Bernstein, the son of Jean B. Clayton of Ripley, Miss., and the late Dr.
Leo H. T. Bernstein.
Rabbi Irwin H. Fishbein performed the ceremony at the Hamilton Club.
Mrs.
Bernstein, 30 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel.
She graduated from St.
John's College in Annapolis, Md.
She and her husband received law degrees from the University of Chicago, from which he also received an M.B.A.
Her father is a supervisor at the R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons printing plant in Lancaster.
Her mother and father own a children's store there.


Japan Payoffs Seen as Part of Business
For weeks news organizations here have pursued the trail of cash from a mob-linked trucking company to some of Japan's leading politicians, but one of the most revealing aspects of this growing scandal has been the least discussed: Although the company went to extremes, it was regarded as simply doing what most big companies must to survive in an economy where even many routine business decisions require regulatory approval.
The trucking concern, Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, was part of an ambitious corporate group that surpassed many of its rivals, in part by evading a number of regulations in its effort to dominate its industry.
The one way to get around the powerful bureaucrats who administer the country's impenetrable tangle of regulations is to cultivate politicians, who often act as fixers in obtaining the permits, licenses and informal approvals required.


'Shiloh' and the Newbery Medal
To the Editor:
I must take issue with Jane Langton's review of "Shiloh," by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor (Children's Books, May 10), especially the remarks as to whether the book should have won the coveted Newbery Medal.


Elisabeth Heller, Stephane Lievain
Elisabeth Ann Heller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter E. Heller of Purchase, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Stephane Jerome Lievain, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Oscar Lievain of Paris.
The Rev.
Walter Wagoner, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Lievain, 26 years old, is a painter and sculptor in Paris.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the president of Accuscan Inc., a patent licensing company in Purchase.


Cricket's Hot Summer: Where Are the Gentlemen?
From the start, it just didn't seem cricket: rowdy fans invading the pitch and battling with security guards, and later, hat-throwing temper tantrums by Pakistani players convinced that the local umpires were favoring the English side.
But the summerlong series of matches here between England and Pakistan did not really reach critical mass until two weeks ago, when the final meeting of the summer exploded in a burst of sensational newspaper headlines.
"How Pakistan Cheat at Cricket," read The Daily Mirror.
"Cheat!" declared its tabloid rival The Sun.


Too Elegant For Words
"LINDA EVANGELISTA swept into the Metropolitan Club on Tuesday night in a black fringe dress and dangling costume jewelry by Anna Sui with a touch of Chanel. Her dark hair was slicked back. Her cigarette was already burning. Her made-up face was ready for a night of signaling people to come closer, or to go away.
The entire room went quiet and realigned itself for a fraction of a second, as Ms.
Evangelista -- whose face and hand adorn the cover of the September issue of Harper's Bazaar, entreating readers to "Enter the Era of Elegance" -- sat down behind a well-groomed miniature myrtle topiary at a corner table with Lauren Hutton, who also held a cigarette.
Wearing faded blue jeans, white Keds and no socks, Ms.
Hutton seemed a bit underdressed for a fashion magazine's party to celebrate the Era of Elegance at a marble Renaissance-style palazzo on Fifth Avenue, which was designed by Stanford White for J. P. Morgan at the end of the 19th century.


The Man Had His Flaws, but . . .
To the Editor:
Allow me to offer a perspective on Jackie Gleason other than that rendered by David Margolick in his article "For Fans, the Honeymoon Is Really Over"  [ Aug. 23 ] .


How to Get Dressed Better
*
Your socks should never be funnier than you are. *
Unless you have virtually nothing to draw in, avoid drawstring pants. *
A belt fits correctly when the buckle's prong goes through the strap's third hole. *
If you're high-waisted, avoid high-waisted pants, unless you have an Eddie Haskell fixation. *
Maybe you wouldn't be so uncomfortable in the afternoon if you bought your own underwear and knew your own size. *
Never wear a plaid jacket to a job interview. *
If your teeth don't look healthy, it doesn't matter what you have on. *
There is no regulation width or length for ties, so knot one before you buy it. *
Don't iron the stuff you buy from L. L. Bean. *
The best shoes to dance in are sneakers with no tread left. *
Clothes don't make you look fat.
Fat does. *
If you are tired of apologizing for the I-had-to-work-late-no-time-to-change corporate look, leave one black- and one cream-colored turtleneck or crew-neck sweater in a desk or file-cabinet drawer. *
Do you always have to carry every key you own? *
Better you should carry a
usable
handkerchief. * When you need them, keep business cards in your
outside
breast pocket. *
Does Mom come in to clean five times a week?
Then hang up your clothes. *
Your underwear shouldn't be briefer than your favorite bathing suit.
Sooner or later, you're bound to be seen in both. *
Love the scent of your deodorant more than life itself?
Then don't buy polyester workout clothes. *
You needn't smell your own cologne once it's on. *
Don't wear an ascot unless you've been there. *
Solid white collars atop contrasting shirts belong with a straw boater and an apron someplace where there's sawdust on the floor. *
There's no such thing as classy luggage as long as you have to carry it. *
Learn to iron. *
But never press jeans (if yours have creases, wear them in private, among friends, until they fade). *
When wearing suede, eat nothing. *
Old favorites saved for "knocking around in" are never knocked around in.
Many charities would be glad to put them into action. *
Old ski-lift tickets are not a fashion accessory. *
Don't have muscles?
Don't wear muscle T's. *
Clothing makes an excellent sunscreen. *
When it's below freezing, close your coat.
We're not impressed. *
Silk shirts are warmer than they look.
If you sweat like a showerhead, steer clear of them on big presentation days, when out dancing or on a first date. *
Use shoe trees. *
Paisley goes with nothing. *
If you're over 5 feet 5 inches tall and remember how it felt when Marilyn Monroe died, don't ever wear overalls again. *
Unless the corona from a total eclipse is coming through the skylight, take the sunglasses off indoors. *
Get your hair cut a week before the big day. *
Literally tuck yourself into a bathing suit.
These things don't take care of themselves. *
Brush your teeth before putting on anything more than underwear -- ever try to get toothpaste off a tie? *
If you're going to sit for a long time on a trip, take your wallet out of your back pocket, even if you know a good chiropractor at your destination. *
If you wear boots often, try a boot wallet. *
Think a blue blazer goes everywhere?
Think twice before you go anywhere. *
If you must have a blue blazer, and you must, buy the best one you can afford. *
Though you're disappointed you weren't born with a family crest, pray for one in your next life and live without one in this. *
Thin, wiry shoelaces need to be double-knotted. *
To remove the old hem mark from a let-down pair of pants, soak the line in white vinegar and then press with a warm iron. *
For those who insist on going sockless in even the steamiest of climates, remember you can always throw sweaty socks into the wash, but loafers tend to give it up in the spin cycle. *
Pinky rings look so cool -- in a Scorsese film. *
Beware of showroom sales-fever reasoning: i.e., "for $20 . . ." Once you're home, how little you paid is forgotten; how good you look in it is all that matters. *
If you must have your clothes monogrammed, do it where it can't be seen. *
Tweeze your nose hairs: both the ones inside and the ones on top. *
If you're over 40, your ears need a haircut, too. *
The invitation says "black tie." How come she opts for a dress kept lovingly wrapped in tissue paper, while you rent a been-to-the-dry-cleaners-more-times-than-Vicki-Carr's-sung-"It Must Be Him" dinner jacket?
Be a grown-up and buy your own tuxedo. *
Massages relax you, and the more relaxed you are, the better you look in your clothes. *
White jeans are not out of season in winter.
White leather shoes are not in season ever. *
A wide tie looks good hanging just below the belt; a regular-width tie looks good just above the belt, and a thin tie can be tucked into the shirt between the third and fourth buttons. *
The only time you're not better off shopping alone is when buying eyeglass frames. *
A little flannel goes a long way. *
Despite their prevalence, button-down oxfords worn under double-breasted jackets are more the Fred and Ethel than the Lucy and Ricky of fashion. *
More people look better in solid navy than in solid black. *
Don't pull loose threads.
Cut them. *
Jewelry on the beach is arriving by the pailful.
Just remember before diving into the surf that sharks love shiny things. *
Don't waste money on cologne if you smoke. *
Buy shoes in the late afternoon. *
"You have to break them in" is an old wives' tale.
Shoes should feel good before you hand over the charge card. *
If you're not active, don't buy activewear. *
Use a moisturizer as often as a woman -- every time you wash your face. *
Loosening or taking off your tie does not make you look sporty.
It makes you look drunk. *
When confronted by a person with reflective aviator glasses, look him square in the eye and then start fixing your hair. *
If you like something that much, buy two of them.
You may not see it again. *
Don't wear a belt
and
suspenders. *
Safari jackets look pretentious when you're on one, and too far out of Africa when you're not. *
There's nothing wrong with buying a fur coat, as long as you're giving it to someone who goes to a gynecologist. *
Don't hang up sweaters, not even cardigans, or the woman in your life will soon belt one and wear it with leggings. *
There's a time and a place for everything, except dickies. *
Don't organize your clothes closet by outfit. *
In a random survey, not one tailor knew what "single-needle tailoring" was. (One asked, "How many needles do you need to tailor a suit?") If they don't know, why should you? *
Names of fabric colors have gotten bizarre, less to confuse you than to maintain clear communication between designer and mill.
However, at the retail level, they read like code.
You don't always have to match. *
Getting dressed is supposed to be fun.
Try to have some. *
No wire hangers, ever.


In French Town, Unity Is Secondary
While colorful campaign posters urging yes or no to a treaty on European union have cheered up the drab streets of Mantes-la-Jolie in advance of the referendum next Sunday, the issues that really interest the population -- unemployment, immigration, insecurity -- have not changed.
The reasons are apparent.
Youth unemployment now stands at 40 percent, 35 percent of the town's 45,000 inhabitants are immigrants and crime is rampant.
This helps to explain why the extreme rightist National Front won 34.9 percent of votes here in regional elections last March.


HITTING THE WALL
The destructive behavior Sebastian Junger describes is more of a testament to his childishness than to his manliness (About Men: "Hitting the Wall," Aug. 16).
The technical name for such an outburst is "tantrum." Both males and females indulge in it, but most outgrow it by the age of 3.
If he wants to avoid serious injury and property damage, perhaps he could get his girlfriend's attention by threatening to hold his breath until he turns blue.
SARAH A. DYER
Stow, Mass.


Fires Are Suspicious But Not Tied to Case
Suspicious fires in two abandoned buildings in Washington Heights late Friday and early yesterday were probably not related to the announcement last week that a grand jury had cleared a police officer in the July shooting death of a Dominican immigrant, a police spokesman said.
A vacant five-story brick building on West 163d Street went up in flames about 10 P.M., and firefighters were called to an empty four-story brick building on West 161st street at 12:30 A.M.
Both buildings in the upper Manhattan neighborhood are near the scene of the shooting, on West 162d Street, where Jose (Kiko) Garcia died.


Ugly Echoes in Slovakia
Defenders of Slovak separatist Vladimir Meciar claim that the foreign media are unfair to him, fastening on his being an ex-Communist and an ex-prize fighter.
That misses the point.
Alexander Dubcek, who led Czechoslovakia during the Prague Spring of 1968, is also a Slovak and an ex-Communist, yet he is uniformly praised by the foreign press.
No one would ever confuse him with the Meciar known to the world as slavish supporter of the old hard-line Communist regime.
Mr.
Meciar wants to end the 70-year-old Czechoslovak federation in a fast, painless divorce.
If that doesn't happen, the Slokak Prime Minister adds ominously, "spontaneous developments may set in and we wouldn't be able to keep them under control." Human rights monitors in Bratislava are already getting a taste of those "spontaneous" acts in the form of blunt warnings, even death threats.


Rooting Should Be A Personal Matter
To the Sports Editor:
As a ballboy at the United States Open this year, I must take issue with George Vecsey's comments, especially the one in which he called the off-duty ballboys and girls cheering for Connors during the Lendl-Connors match an "indignity against Lendl" ("Citizen Ivan Gets No Respect," The Times, Sept. 6).
I assure you that my colleagues and I are all tennis enthusiasts who are undoubtedly aware of Lendl's record in the last decade.
Still, whom I choose to root for (or against) is my business no matter whose sensibilities I may offend.
George Vecsey is certainly entitled to his opinions.
Apparently, the same isn't true for us.
ADAM R. FRAN New York


The Bicycle Computer
WHAT IT IS: A handlebar-mounted, hi-tech device that, at the very least, measures a cyclist's speed and distance traveled.
But cycle computers -- rapidly proliferating since the late 1980's -- have about as much in common with the old-fashioned bicycle speedometers as Dick Tracy's two-way television wristwatch has with a drugstore Timex.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
Only connect.
To grab my interest, buildings and designs will have to show that they can pull together people, things and ideas that have become fragmented.
I want to see new links between housing, transportation and public space; between government and the intellect; between the natural environment and the cultural imagination.
The city's waterfront is an ideal zone to experiment with such links, and in the coming season a large array of important waterfront projects will be going into the pipeline, or just coming out of it.
They include Chelsea Piers on the Hudson River, Hunters Point in Queens, and the South Garden at Battery Park City, overlooking New York Harbor.


Wall Street; Watch Out for the Big Guys
In the conventional wisdom of Wall Street, nothing should warm an investor's heart more than shareholders who own large chunks of a company's stock.
Such big time investors are the little guy's friends, Wall Streeters purr, because the big guys keep a close eye on management and insure that the company does all it can to keep its stock trading at a lofty price.
So, should investors run out and buy up shares of any company that has large blocks in few hands?
Well, not really.
It's like much of Wall Street's conventional wisdom.
True wisdom only comes in knowing when the conventions don't apply.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
In Melville's Footsteps
WHEN the postcards of naked women started arriving, colleagues knew it had been no ordinary summer for Dr.
John Bryant of Hofstra University.
Then came the pictures of Dr.
Bryant with a hibiscus behind his ear.
It was obvious that Dr.
Bryant, a professor of English, had a tale to tell about his summer vacation.
The professor had gone on a Melville mission, a trip to French Polynesia to retrace the fleeing steps of the great American author, Herman Melville.
"In 1842, Melville jumped ship," Dr.
Bryant said.
"He had been on a whaling ship for 18 months and he wanted off." Melville selected a tropical island called Nuku Hiva, which is a long canoe ride from Tahiti.
Nuku Hiva offered it all, including cannibals.
"There was one tribe that didn't eat people and one that did," Dr.
Bryant said.
Melville was hoping to reach the vegetarians.
But as he raced up the cliffs with everyone chasing behind, he took a wrong turn.
"Melville wound up with the cannibals, on a remote section of the island,"Dr.
Bryant said.
Years later Melville would write of his experience on Nuku Hiva, in "Typee." A century later, Dr.
Bryant would study it and other Melville novels, including "Moby Dick."
The professor has become a prominent Melville scholar, or Melvillian, as he calls himself.
As a member of the Melville Society -- "the largest single-author society in the world," Dr.
Bryant said -- he edits the society's journals.
For a Melville scholar an anniversary as important as the 150th of jumping ship could not go unchronicled.
So when a Melville fan, Andre Revel of Paris, put together a trip to Nuku Hiva, he invited Dr.
Bryant.
All expenses paid to Tahiti was not something a professor could pass up.
Only Tahiti was just a brief stopover.
"Tahiti seemed overdeveloped compared to Nuku Hiva," Dr.
Bryant said.
This was quite a tropical trip for Dr.
Bryant, who may be the only New Yorker who has never been to Florida.
"I've never been on any island, either," he said, "except Long and Manhattan."
His Polynesian was a bit primitive, too.
"I learned some words," he said "like kai kai. That means food." And bathroom?
"You don't really need to learn the word bathroom in Polynesia," he said.
Accompanied by his wife, Virginia Blanford; Mr.
Revel, and Mr.
Revel's fiancee, Dr.
Bryant retraced Melville's steps.
But not all his steps.
"I'm not crazy," Dr.
Bryant said.
"He raced up and down sheer cliffs at 22 years of age with his adrenalin pumping. I'm 42." So the professor took a four-wheel-drive vehicle and retraced just the beginning and end of Melville's trip.
"We did it in between meals," he said.
They did visit the cannibal village.
"But they are no longer cannibals," he said.
"Although I did hear of someone being eaten as late as 1940."
Besides his cannibalism expertise and a videotape of Melville's route, the professor has brought back remembrances of the Nuku Hiva diet.
"It's basically pork and roots," he said, "and some really bizarre looking shellfish." His souvenirs also include a sandalwood lei and a cutting stone.
No native dress.
But the professor does have a fashion report from Polynesia.
"Tattoos are coming back," he said.
TEACHERS WHO SHOP
They were lined up the other day, waiting to buy school supplies.
Not students, but teachers.
At L. L. Weans in Farmingdale, the average age of those buying pencils and posters is 35.
"I've spent $100 already," said Adrienne Fernan of Merrick, who teaches in Port Washington.
Ms.
Fernan was making her second trip to L. L. Weans.
The store, which opened on Route 110 this year, specializes in educational supplies for elementary school children.
It was so jammed before Labor Day that passers-by thought a fire sale was going on.
"Probably 1,500 teachers shopped here in the last week," said the owner, Allan Lepler of Dix Hills.
"The schools don't give them everything they need, and teachers are conscientious. So they are willing to spend their own money."
"I like to give extra little niceties," said Mary Alice Sullivan, who was buying a weather chart for her second-grade class in Copiague.
Miss Sullivan, a teacher for two years, was shopping with her mother, Loretta, a teacher's aide for 14 years.
"Get a birthday chart," Mrs.
Sullivan advised her daughter.
"They
love
birthday charts."
Besides buying a book rack, Ms.
Fernan was looking at Halloween decorations.
"I want to make my classroom special for the children," she said.
Because she wants each class to feel special she buys new decorations and equipment every year.
With budget cutbacks, teachers are finding that their allotments for materials are not what they used to be.
But teachers, especially elementary-school teachers, have always taken money out of their own pockets to buy supplies.
Teaching does not stop when the money is not there, said Rita Friedman of Merrick who teaches in New York City.
Ms.
Friedman is one of many teachers without a contract this year.
But that has not slowed business at Weans.
"I have one teacher who spent more than $1,000 for her classroom," Mr.
Lepler added.
"Our business used to rise and fall with the school budgets," Mr.
Lepler said.
"But since we've gone retail that's changed." Mr.
Lepler was born into school supplies.
His father, Louis Lepler, was the L. L. of L. L. Weans.
His son is the "A."
Weans stands for Louis Lepler's offspring, William, Elliot, Allan and Nancy.
In 1983 Allan Lepler bought the business from his family.
He has changed its direction from dealing directly with schools to dealing with the public.
And what a choice the public has.
There are special bulletin-board paper that doesn't fade, clocks to teach time, note pads in the shape of dinosaurs, teaching games and books, special certificates and diplomas and pencils of every shape and hue.
"This is our wall of stickers," Mr.
Lepler said.
"It's probably the largest selection on Long Island."
All those creative educational tools are almost too good to be true, said Anna Tepper of Massapequa, who teaches in Queens.
"I'm a teacher and I work here for the summer," she said.
"I'm like a kid working in a candy store." ISLANDERS' BLOOD DRIVE
The New York Islanders had a blood drive the other day.
"Our fans give blood," said Pat Calabria, an official of the hockey team.
No players do.
"They have to keep their blood because they're in training," another official, Greg Bouris, said.
"It's a crucial period. They could lose a day in training if they gave blood. So we don't advise it."
Of course once the season starts, hockey players' giving blood becomes almost a nightly occurrence on the ice.
But one might wonder why the Islanders had a blood drive at a time when the players could not donate blood.
"It's a service for the Long Island Blood Services," Mr.
Bouris said.
"We offer the venue, the Coliseum. We do publicity. We encourage our fans to come. Our major blood drive is in December, during the holiday time." Oh, then the Islanders give blood?
"No," Mr.
Bouris said, "they're in the middle of their season. They couldn't give blood then."
A total of 450 pints was drawn from fans at the drive, he said.
In return fans received two tickets to a preseason game and a chance to meet the newest team member, Vladimir Malakhov from Russia.
Mr.
Malakhov was the lone Islander at the blood drive.
"He's only been in the states two weeks," Mr.
Bouris said.
"He doesn't speak English. We introduced him to the New York media at a luncheon one day and brought him to the blood drive the next. He was all excited with all the people asking for his autograph." Even if they did seem a bit pale.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Newington, Conn. 131,000
191 Camp Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old cape cod; kitchen with pantry, updated bathrooms, 50- by 176-foot lot; taxes $1,920.
Wallingford, Conn. 122,000
338 Ward Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 72-year-old colonial; vinyl siding, walk to town, 38- by 89-foot lot; taxes $1,349.
West Hartford, Conn. 220,000
14 Oak Ridge Lane  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 36-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, oversized rooms, wooded setting, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,535.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 287,000
55 Campfire Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old unique; 2 fireplaces, 2 family rooms, private entrance, French doors; taxes $6,713.
New Castle, N.Y. 370,000
2 Briarcliff Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, new kitchen, rec room, darkroom; taxes $6,967.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 280,000
122 Delhi Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, dining room, cul-de-sac, new driveway; taxes $6,123.
OTHER AREAS East Meadow, L.I. 170,000
587 Benton Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement; taxes $5,100.
Long Valley, N.J. 310,000
5 Lois Court
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; master-bedroom with whirlpool, fireplace in living room; taxes $7,400.
Millburn, N.J. 200,000
18 Mountainview Road
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace; taxes $3,362.


New Nations Search for Offices in Washington
The new nations born since Communism began to disintegrate faced many choices once they became independent.
They had to decide on currencies.
They had to choose languages.
They had to find places in Washington to establish their less-than-fancy new embassies.
Given their tight budgets and fledgling status, some have been unable to land the kind of places found on Massachusetts Avenue, known here as Embassy Row.
Instead, they find themselves sandwiched between lawyers and obstetricians in ordinary office buildings downtown.


Will Players Look for a Union Label?
In the aftermath of a confusing trial that ended with both sides claiming something of a victory, National Football League players remain without a true union.
Gene Upshaw, head of the National Football League Players Association, the former union, said he wanted to keep it that way.


First Show For Architect-Turned-Artist
Thierry W. Despont, the French-born architect who has designed homes for Calvin and Kelly Klein and Leslie Wexner, is now hoping for some recognition as an artist.
Next week, Mr.
Despont's drawings inspired by Rimbaud can be seen at the French Cultural Center, 972 Fifth Avenue (79th Street).


Corrections
The Wall Street column last Sunday misstated the cumulative value of seats on the New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
The New York seats are worth $628.4 million and the Chicago seats, $365.6 million.


Brooks Returns From Cold Storage
After a season of riding buses in obscure and frigid minor league cities, the man with one of the most inventive mind in hockey for the last two decades has been put back where he belongs: coaching in the National Hockey League.
Herb Brooks has been given a three-year contract by the New Jersey Devils and entrusted with making the franchise into one of the league's elite teams.
It's not an easy task but the 54-year-old coach has undertaken it with the enthusiasm of a teen-ager.


Elyse Garmise and Kenneth Kirschner
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Garmise of East Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elyse Jill Garmise, to Kenneth Allen Kirschner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kirschner of Livingston, N.J.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Garmise, 23 years old, is a third-year law student at New York University and executive editor of the Law Review.
She graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University.
Her father is president of Tavern on the Green in New York.
Her mother, Rochelle Garmise, is the office manager of the Professional Typing Service in Great Neck, L.I.


Middle Class Squeezed Out of Private Schools
To the Editor:
I applaud "Dirty Tricks for Scholarships" (Op-Ed., Aug. 26), Claire L. Gaudiani's criticism of unethical schemes by well-off parents of college-bound students.
It might carry more weight if she were not president of such an expensive school, Connecticut College.


In Germany the Raw Material of Violence, Too, Is Bountiful
SHAKEN by a new outbreak of xenophobic riots in eastern Germany in the last three weeks, the country's leaders are urgently seeking ways to prevent the violence from spreading and intensifying.
The opposition Social Democratic Party has agreed to consider dropping its long-standing opposition to tighter immigration policies.
Police in several eastern towns have prohibited neo-Nazi marches, and officials of one eastern state, Brandenburg, said they would seek to ban racist groups like German Alternative, whose leaders were said to have been involved in organizing assaults on hostels for foreigners in Cottbus and Eisenhuttenstadt.
In addition, Parliament is discussing a series of new programs aimed at cutting unemployment and improving social services.
None of these steps, however, can take the place of courageous political leadership.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl has been widely blamed for failing to address Germans directly and set out policies for healing the country's pressing ills.
He rarely travels to eastern Germany, and did not respond last week when members of his own party urged him to visit a hostel to show his support for victims of violence.
His condemnation of the recent riots in Rostock as "shameful for Germany," like his insistence that Germany remains "a country friendly to foreigners," were verbatim repetitions of what he said after rioting last year.


Orangemen's Graves Hooks the Horns
If in January, Syracuse should fulfill the enormous championship potential of September, Coach Paul Pasqualoni may well look back on his team's effort against Texas this afternoon as the catalyst for great things.
In a heroic turn of events, Syracuse, which may be one of the best teams in college football this season, recovered from a 21-13 third-quarter deficit to tie Texas and finally surge ahead for a 31-21 victory at the Carrier Dome.


Jennifer Contas, Mark C. Monaco
Jennifer Thompson Contas, the daughter of Mrs.
A.
Alan Friedberg of Boston and the late Arthur P. Contas, was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Mark Churchill Monaco, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony P. Monaco of Newton, Mass.
The Rev.
Nicholas J. Magoulias performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Memorial Church at Harvard University.
Mrs.
Monaco, 27 years old, graduated from Lake Forest College.
She is the client promotions manager for USA Networks in New York.
Her father was a founding partner and a vice president of the Boston Consulting Group in Boston.
Her stepfather is the chairman of Loews Theaters in Secaucus, N.J.


Niche Newsletters and What They Offer
TRAVEL newsletters come and go, but like most things these days, they do more going.
"Gardens &amp; Countrysides," a nice looking paper on a good topic, begun in May 1990, folded despite good support from the Travellers Bookstore in New York, and it is not the only one.
Here is information about four specialized travel newsletters that have been in existence long enough to make them good bets for survival, plus some new information on two reviewed earlier.


Christina Engstrom and John Martin
Christina Diane Engstrom, the daughter of Robert C. and Dr.
Fayette M. Engstrom of Easton, Md., was married there yesterday to John Conroy Martin, the son of Judge John S. Martin Jr. and Margaret Martin of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark Sullivan, an Episcopal dean, performed the ceremony at Trinity Cathedral.
The Rev.
Paul F. Jennings Jr., a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the service.
Ms.
Martin, 22 years old, will be a law student at the University of Chicago beginning next month.
She and her husband graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a senior financial consultant in Easton for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Her mother is a pediatrician there.


Nobody Ever Zigzagged More
ROSE MACAULAY
A Writer's Life.
By Jane Emery.
Illustrated. 381 pp.
North Pomfret, Vt.: John Murray/Trafalgar Square. $34.95.


Data Bank/September 13, 1992


BEST SELLERS: September 13, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
2
2
27
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
3
16
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
4
4
3
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A romantic novel about Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton, her husband and Neapolitan society in the 18th century.
5
5
3
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
6
6
3
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
7
8
3
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $22.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
8
7
3
NIGHT OF THE HAWK, by Dale Brown. (Fine/ Putnam, $22.95.) American airmen and marines undertake to rescue a serviceman in Lithuania.
9
9
9
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A woman's life at a Maine summer retreat.
10
11
10
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
11
10
13
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
12 *
12
5
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
13
14
125
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
14
1
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Visiting her native Napa Valley, a television star encounters shades of her unhappy childhood and romance with the heir to a winery.
15
15
15
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) The second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
16 *
13
3
RUM PUNCH, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $21.) A crime thriller involving the Feds, a ruthless gun dealer and a bail bondsman. (LP)
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
6
2
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
2
1
16
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
2
13
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
3
6
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918; based in part on newly available material.
5
4
14
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
6
5
11
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
7
8
5
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
8
9
2
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
9
7
4
MARILYN: THE LAST TAKE, by Peter Harry Brown and Patte B. Barham. (Dutton, $23.) Did intrigues in Hollywood boardrooms and in the Kennedys' circle lead to Marilyn Monroe's death?
10
10
12
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
11
13
18
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
12
11
9
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
13
15
33
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
14 *
12
19
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
15
10
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress talks about living with manic-depressive illness.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
40
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
2
1
30
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
2
6
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
4
3
9
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
5
4
41
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
KISSINGER: A Biography, by Walter Isaacson. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The 893-page chronicle of a poor and persecuted Bavarian immigrant boy who climbed to the top of the only-in-America greasy pole; based on documentary sources and extensive interviews with almost everybody, including the subject himself.
OTA BENGA: The Pygmy in the Zoo, by Phillips Verner Bradford and Harvey Blume. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Why
was
a 4-foot-11 Congolese in a cage in the Bronx in 1906?
This engrossing account reflects an America we can now (let's hope) only imagine.
BOOK: A Novel, by Robert Grudin. (Random House, $19.) A light comic tale about a disappearing professor, prankishly rendered as a satire on post-modern, post-structuralist literary theories.
YOU CAN'T SAY YOU CAN'T PLAY, by Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University, $15.95.) A master teacher relates what ensued when she told kindergartners they could not exclude classmates from their games.
It seems to have made them nicer.
THE VAST MEMORY OF LOVE, by Malcolm Bosse. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $22.95.) Mr.
Bosse's rumpusy 18th-century historical novel exposes a Fielding-type bumpkin to the wicked Earl of Sandwich and to Fielding himself, who sniffs a sequel to "Tom Jones."
WHERE DO YOU STOP?
The Personal History, Adventures, Experiences &amp; Observations of Peter Leroy (Continued), by Eric Kraft. (Crown, $15.) An extremely funny novel in which the adult Peter recollects and revises his life in the seventh grade.
BAND OF BROTHERS: E Company, 506th Regiment, 101st Airborne From Normandy to Hitler's Eagle's Nest, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The history of an elite rifle company whose experiences yielded a profound comradeship.


In Domestic Violence, These Charges Stick
Albert D. rolled his eyes and grimaced when he was told he had to spend Labor Day weekend in the Sussex County jail.
"If a married couple wants to patch things up between themselves," he moaned, "why get the law involved?"


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Men's Fashions/Magazine Part 2 Special: The New Season Arts and Leisure/Section 2


Yet Another 'Phantom' in Elmsford
NO, it is not the Andrew Lloyd Webber version.
That's the English one -- "The Phantom of the Opera" -- playing on Broadway and in Los Angeles, Boston, Toronto, London and four other cities in Europe.
Call the Westchester Broadway Theater box office (592-2222) and you will be told how its production of "Phantom" -- note the abbreviated title -- is a new American musical in the tradition of "My Fair Lady" and "The Most Happy Fella."
After a series of mishaps of the sort that have traditionally beset Phantoms by any name or nationality, the musical (score by Maury Yeston; book by Arthur Kopit) had its press opening on Thursday, following more than a month's postponement because Robert Cuccioli, the star, fell four feet from a rope in mid-performance, said Allan Gruet, the theater's director of public relations.
Mr.
Cuccioli, who suffered three broken bones in his left foot, and Glory Crampton (Christine, the ingenue), who was indisposed for 20 preview performances, have resumed their roles, while Meg Bussert has stepped in for an ailing actress as Carlotta, who is described by Mr.
Yeston as "the evil diva you love to hate." The "Phantom" in Elmsford is scheduled to run through Feb. 14.


Economic Mismanagement, German Style
Misery on behalf of principle is justified, especially if someone else is doing the suffering.
That would seem to be the operating policy for government leaders in almost all of Western Europe this year.
Having adopted a policy of European integration and monetary convergence, they will stick to it no matter what pain is inflicted on their populations by high interest rates and rising unemployment.


Stubborn Taurus Tramples on the Heels of the Accord
They're calling it "Showdown in Motown," a title bout between the Honda Accord, champion for three consecutive years, and the Ford Taurus, the leading contender for best-selling car in America.
When a slightly restyled Taurus was introduced a year ago, some reviewers criticized the Ford Motor Company for not undertaking a more far-reaching overhaul.
But the model has sold far better than the critics expected, and the Taurus has continued to close in on the Accord, whose sales peaked at 417,000 in 1990, a year when Ford sold 313,000 Tauruses.


Don't Drink The Monkey
THE paper parasol has folded.
Exotic drinks have gone on to greater garnishes now that Chop Suey Looey's Litchi Lounge has opened its doors.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
Every art season has a veritable Alps of high points, a cluster of important yet slightly intimidating exhibitions to scale.
This year we've got Matisse at the Modern, Magritte at the Metropolitan, the Russians at the Guggenheim -- shows of such size that they almost seem like too much of a good thing.
As a result, the mind often eases into the new season on the lower slopes.
And a double show at two SoHo galleries, starting Saturday, will afford the first chance to size up the new British art wave, a batch of young artists known in particular for their sometimes sensational use of organic materials, from flowers to blood.


Playing the Field
PLACE: Hackers, Hitters and Hoops, 123 West 18th Street in Manhattan.
IDENTITY: Indoor sports complex, with batting cages, electronic games and an 18-hole miniature golf course.
A bar is being added this week.


Update; Ex-Students Plead Guilty In Computer Virus Case
Three former Cornell University students have pleaded guilty to charges they created and unleashed a computer virus last February that disabled computers worldwide.
In plea bargains announced earlier this month, multiple felony charges against all three were dropped.
George M. Dentes, the Tompkins County District Attorney, also promised to recommend against fines or jail sentences.
Two of the three, David S. Blumenthal and Mark A. Pilgrim were employees of Cornell's computer division, and were charged with using personal and university-owned equipment to create and launch the virus.
They pleaded guilty to misdemeanor computer tampering, while Randall A. Swanson pled guilty to a non-criminal disorderly conduct violation for helping to spread the virus.


Making a Difference; The Men Behind the Superheroes
As a child, Derek T. Dingle, president of Milestone Media Inc., loved comic books.
But when he and a friend, Denys Cowan, read about the superheroes and their mythical powers, they sensed that something seemed wrong besides just creepy villains and criminals.
"We didn't see any heroes in the comic books that looked like ourselves," said Mr.
Dingle.
"None of the characters were African-Americans."


Fresh Apples Warm Hearts of Bakers
FALL is the one time of year you can bite with confidence into a fresh apple.
At farmers' markets and roadside stands, the apples arrive just as the leaves begin to turn and the evenings start to get shorter.
Now is the time for apple pies, charlottes, puddings and tarts -- straightforward, comforting desserts that get you ready for winter.
One of my favorites is the French upside down apple pie known as tarte Tatin, served warm with creme fraiche or vanilla ice cream.
The apples are baked under a pastry shell in a cast-iron pan and when they are turned out, they are coated with a caramel glaze. (The glaze is the secret to a good tarte Tatin. It must be cooked to a deep caramel color before the apples are added.)


Jennifer Wu, Dickerson Miles
Jennifer Wu, the daughter of George Wu of Seattle and Diana Chiang of Hong Kong, was married yesterday to Dickerson Patrick Miles, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael D. Miles of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Paul Sackevich performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis de Sales Church in Bennington, Vt.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
Some of the richest jazz experiences of the last five years or so have come from concerts by repertory orchestras.
The Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra is the best one put together so far, and its interpretations of Ellington have been yearly highlights.
Ellington's music is much more sumptuous in concert than on record.
The programming usually brings out Ellington obscurities along with hits, and the performances are often filled with pungent -- and new -- improvisations.
The orchestra will present "Swinging the Blues: Coming Home to Ellington" at Avery Fisher Hall on Oct. 14.
It is American music at its best.


THE REPUBLICANS
It is easy to feel frustration for the present ineffectiveness of the Bush Administration.
But I would rather sit waiting in the gridlock than go hurtling down the road and straight over the cliff.
Do people really have such short memories that they cannot remember the shambles created by the last Democratic Administration?
How about 21 percent interest rates, 13 percent inflation, 8 percent unemployment, gas lines and an all-time low in respect internationally?


Claudia Mesch, Damon H. Smith
Claudia Anne Maidment Mesch, a daughter of Dr.
John G. Mesch and Carol Maidment Mesch, both of Albany, was married there yesterday to Damon Hollinrake Smith, a son of Damon and Patricia Smith of New York.
Bishop David S. Ball of the Episcopal Diocese of Albany performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Smith, 23 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the chief of the department of pulmonary medicine at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany and is also an internist there.
Her mother is a real-estate broker at Robert's Real Estate in Albany.


Anne Eldridge and Colm Connolly
Anne Elizabeth Eldridge, the daughter of Mrs.
Carleton G. Eldridge Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Eldridge, was married there yesterday to Colm Felix Connolly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Felix P. Connolly of Wilmington, Del.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert W. Bedingfield officiated at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
The Rev.
Joseph McLaughlin, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Connolly, 26 years old, was until recently a clerk for Judge Jay C. Waldman of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.
She is to join the Philadelphia law firm of Dechert, Price &amp; Rhoads as an associate next month.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Duke University, as did her husband.
Her father was a partner in the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers.


A Meal With a View in Rome
RETURNING to Rome as a tourist after living there for more than a decade, I find the thing I miss most is my own terrace.
In theory I agree with Eleanor Clark, who wrote in "Rome and a Villa" that the streets belong to everybody and "in Rome to go out is to go home." But to see the city from above is to take possession of it in a way that's impossible when you're scuttling over the cobblestones, dodging cars and other pedestrians, like a frantic marionette in a Punch-and-Judy show.
I much prefer quiet and privacy, and a commanding view of red tile roofs, crumbling ruins, church domes and campaniles, and neighboring terraces banked with flowers.
Better yet, I delight in having Rome spread out in front of me like one vast lesson from an architect's notebook while I enjoy a bowl of pasta and a good bottle of wine.
For a visitor, the best way to replicate this experience is to check into a luxury hotel and order room service.


SEPT. 6-12: Senate Accepts Carnes; A Judicial Confirmation Continues Tilt to the Right
When Edward E. Carnes is sworn in as a Federal appellate judge, he will become the latest symbol of how President Bush and President Reagan have profoundly affected the character of the Federal courts.
Mr.
Carnes was confirmed in the Senate last week, over strong opposition led by civil-rights groups, to a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, based in Atlanta.
An assistant attorney general in Alabama, Mr.
Carnes is known as one of the nation's most skilled appellate attorneys arguing in favor of the death penalty.


Plastic May Have Some Advantages Over Metal Plumbing Pipe
PLASTIC plumbing pipe is a boon for amateurs.
It is easier to install than metal pipe, not as heavy and cheaper.
Corrosion is never a problem, and burst pipes caused by freezing are rare.
Plastic pipes also have insulating properties that prevent condensation on pipes carrying cold water and reduce heat loss through pipes carrying hot water.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
The next time Campbell and her friends see a white woman hanging from some bro's ego, they might try cooling their anger with the knowledge that any man -- black, white or other -- who treats a woman as a trophy isn't much of a prize to have lost in the first place.
MARY ANNE RAMER
New York, N.Y.


La Mama at 30
An anniversary benefit sponsored by Bloomingdale's at the International Plaza, Sept. 9.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Rep.
Matthew J. Rinaldo, Republican of New Jersey, described his departure from Congress incorrectly in some copies.
He announced that he would not seek re-election; he did not resign.


Social Security Isn't Unequal, Breaking the Bank or Going Broke
To the Editor:
In "Payments to the Retired Loom Ever Larger" (The Week in Review, Aug. 30), you contradict yourself, then absent-mindedly change subjects.
You first assert that Social Security and Medicare must be tamed to tackle national budget deficits.
But after more than a dozen paragraphs, you observe that Social Security is
not
causing deficits.
On the contrary, it "is for now filling rather than draining Federal coffers" and will do so for "the next two decades."
Correct. The Social Security annual surplus amounts to about $60 billion.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'ASSASSINS,' THE PLAY
Nine of the 13 people who have tried to kill a President of the United States, four of them successfully, are portrayed in the Stephen Sondheim-John Weidman musical "Assassins," to run at Theater Works in New Milford on Fridays and Saturdays at 8 P.M. through Oct. 17.
The show was originally produced at Playwrights Horizons Off Broadway, from December 1990 to February 1991, and received wildly mixed reviews.
And although it played to sold-out audiences during its two-month run, the show never achieved a Broadway run.


Floyd Is Up to Old Tricks In 2d Day of Senior Debut
Raymond Floyd got back on his formidable game this afternoon and gave himself a good opportunity to win his Senior PGA Tour debut at the Bank One Senior Golf Classic.
Firing a five-under-par 67, Floyd, who had his 50th birthday earlier this month, got himself to six-under-par 138.
But even though Floyd was pleased with his round, it still left him five shots behind the 36-hole leader, Terry Dill, who blistered the Kearney Hills Links with a 66 for a total of 11-under-par 133.
In second place at 137 is Mike Hill.


The Real New York, Sort Of
Chicagoans, like residents of any self-respecting New York-bashing city, always seem to crave a piece of Manhattan they can call their very own.
To the cheery mob that attended Tuesday's opening of the first Barneys New York store here, it didn't seem to matter that the city was already teeming with East Coast stores.
At last, the real New York had come to town.
"This is just the ultimate," said Web Tysver, a blond 22-year-old student decked out in jeans, a tan Armani jacket and a Yankees cap.
"I've been here two hours, and I feel like I'm in a daze."


BE A HEROINE
Not every woman can carry off the big fall trends: the graphic arch of a plucked and penciled brow; the dark red stain of a strong, vampy mouth; the smoky play of light and shadow on a Theda Bara eye.
But in this season of glamorous choices and sophisticated natural looks, makeup lets a woman play -- or underplay -- whatever role she chooses.
"Fashion is one thing," says the makeup artist Heidi Morawetz, "but personality is quite another. A woman must always adapt makeup and trends to her own personality and use them to be more herself." Be a heroine, if you feel like one.
Didn't someone once say that all the world's a stage?


Take My Hand, I'm a Stranger in Pandemonium
Even though Ulrike Gerling had heard tales of urban pandemonium, she was not quite prepared for her first sight of midtown Manhattan.
Mrs.
Gerling, a 28-year-old secretary from a tiny village in Germany, watched for a few seconds as traffic hurtled down Fifth Avenue and pedestrians clawed their way along the crowded sidewalks.
Then she nearly fainted.
There she was, a tourist in terror, a bewildered stranger in a strange (not to mention loud, frenzied and intimidating) land.
How on earth would she survive?


Where Friends of Money Are the Best of Enemies
The truck driver fired up his rumbly diesel engine and headed out to break a little international law in Iraq.
His truck, designed to cart things like vegetables, had been modified, like many others in this remote and grimy border town in southeastern Turkey.
Its flatbed had been raised on jacks to the level of its cab and propped up by wooden supports so that two gigantic extra fuel tanks could be slung below, one on each side, almost touching the ground, capable of carrying seven tons of fuel between them.


Maximum Use, Minimal Site
To the Editor:
In his critique of the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center's architecture, Herbert Muschamp steps out of bounds when he maligns the institution generally  [ "Once and Future Audubon," Aug. 23 ] .
Is he aware that without the hospital's presence, the residents of upper Manhattan would have no source of primary care at all?
To say nothing of the thousands of local jobs it provides.


The Rangers Are Preparing to Re-prove Their Point
It is the start Sunday of a new training camp, as inviting and slippery as a resurfaced ice rink.
The Rangers respectably request fans to watch the Zamboni trace its fresh ovals, and to ignore the ruts that ruined the last few months.
General Manager Neil Smith would like you to forget about Eric Lindros, the Philadelphia Flyers rookie, who is nowhere near Glens Falls or a Ranger uniform.


Strictly Independent?
To the Editor:
Phillip Lopate's comment describing "Patty Hearst" as "a pure, intransigent American art film made with studio money"  [ "With Pen in Hand, They Direct Movies," Aug. 16 ]  would require a pretty broad definition of the term.
The picture was a co-production of Atlantic Entertainment Group, an independent American company whose other pictures included "A World Apart" and "Extremities," and Zenith Productions, the British independent responsible for "Wish You Were Here" and "Sid and Nancy."  JONATHAN DANA Los Angeles
The writer, who is president of Triton Pictures, supervised production of "Patty Hearst" while at Atlantic Entertainment.


The Hispanic Role In Politics
"Hispanic Role in Politics: Slow Progress" (Aug. 30) is accurate in its description of the very limited political power Hispanic Americans have in the state of New Jersey.
Needless to say, this is the situation in most other parts of the country as well.


Whodunit?
THE SMALL BANG
By Jack Fenno. 265 pp. New York: Random House. $20.


Focus: St. Augustine, Fla.; A Golf Community, Plus P.G.A. Complex
AT a 6,300-acre site eight miles north of downtown, yet another scenario is about to be enacted on how to market a residential community based on golf.
But the developer of Saint Johns, as the community will be known, says he is offering more than usual -- a different layout plus a 450-acre business-entertainment complex that will be built on the site by the P.G.A. (Professional Golf Association) Tour Inc.


Co-op Elections
To the Editor:
As counsel for over 30 co-ops and condominiums, we suggest caution in conducting co-op elections  [ "Retaining a Firm for Elections," July 12 ] .
The procedure for calling a shareholders' meeting at which elections are held must comply with law, the corporation's certificate of incorporation and any amendments, and its bylaws, with amendments.
In addition, proxies and the notice of shareholders' meeting must be in proper form.


Cuomo Creates Commission to Study Judges' Pay
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has been tangling with New York State's Chief Judge for a year over financing for the judiciary, has announced the creation of a commission to examine how much state judges should be paid.
But the Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, pointing out that a commission had recommended raises for judges five years ago, called Mr.
Cuomo's move "just a bureaucratic way of avoiding what must be confronted."


Easy, Now
Don't panic. Just proceed at an orderly pace of doing nothing.


Talking: Time Shares; When It's Time To Sell
IT'S getting harder and harder to sell a timeshare unit.
Unlike the owners of other real estate -- which can usually be unloaded at any time if the seller is willing to take a loss -- many timeshare owners are finding it tough even to give away their units.
"The whole thing is terrible," said Marilyn Ildefonso, a social worker at Elmhurst Hospital in Queens who bought a time share in Atlantic City in 1990.


Conversations/The Rev. Cecil Murray; Walking a Narrow Line and Praying For Calm in a Riot-Torn City
ON the night the riots began, the Rev.
Cecil Murray and his parishioners stood on the street outside the First A. M. E. Church, forming a buffer between about 150 rock-throwing residents and a line of 25 police officers.
"The mob surges, throwing, and then the police surge, and we are in the middle trying to hold both off," Mr.
Murray recalled.
"We say to the police: 'Please let us handle it. We can take care of them' -- Naw, get out of the way -- and then to the rioters: 'Please, brother, let us handle it.' We were looking for some degree of balance, trying to bring some order back to law and order."


Francine Friedman, Arun Alagappan
THEY didn't choose their wedding date in the usual Western way, which sometimes boils down to picking a weekend, any weekend.
Following Indian tradition, the bridegroom's father, Dr.
Alagappa Alagappan, the founder of New York City's first major Hindu temple, consulted religious elders before arriving at an "auspicious" date for the wedding.
For Arun Alagappan, 33 years old, and Francine Friedman, 30, the favorable time was 9 A.M. on Wednesday, Sept. 2.
At that hour, about 200 guests had gathered in the auditorium of the temple, the Hindu Temple Society of North America, in Flushing, Queens.
Tinsel streamers, crepe wedding bells and silver stars decorated the room, and many guests wore shocking pink or turquoise-and-gold saris.
"Some saris are made of silk and pure silver threads," said Victoria Ambrose, an Indian guest.
"If you melt them, you'll end up with a ball of silver. I melted my mother's wedding sari into a silver dish."


The Senate Primary
An unusually varied field of Democrats does battle today in a TV debate that will climax the contest for the right to run against Republican Senator Alfonse D'Amato in November.
Which of the four should Democratic voters prefer in Tuesday's primary election?
The New York Times refrains from making recommendations in primaries unless there is some unusual circumstance or unless the outcome effectively determines the November result.
The purpose is to further the appearance as well as the reality of neutrality in The Times's political reporting.
We hold to that policy this year and make no recommendation.


Lilly Bursztajn, Michael H. Scher
Lilly Paula Bursztajn, a daughter of Abraham Bursztajn of Paterson, N.J., and the late Miriam Bursztajn, was married last evening to Michael Henry Scher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Scher of New York.
Rabbi David Wolfman officiated at the Harvard Faculty Club in Cambridge, Mass.


Why Russia Can't Easily Give Islands to Japan; A Plan That Works
To the Editor:
As your Aug. 28 editorial assumes, the dispute over the four islands that needlessly threaten Japanese-Russian relations, is very solvable.
Last year, the former Soviet Government was seriously considering a proposal developed by my company, EcoLink (a not-for-profit corporation that has worked since 1989 to develop a public finance system in the Russian Federation), to obtain foreign investment for Russia and the return of the Kuriles for Japan.


Carin Boyer, Lawrence Kenny
Carin Louise Boyer, the daughter of R. James Boyer of West Lawn, Pa., and the late Shirley A. Boyer, was married on Friday to Lawrence Patrick Kenny, the son of the late Lawrence V. and Ellen V. Kenny.
The Rev.
Harris Riordan-Hendlin performed the ceremony at the First Unitarian Church in Brooklyn.


Whistling While It Works
The tea kettle wars continue.
For Alessi, the Italian manufacturer, the architect Frank Gehry has designed the Pito ($495), with a hand-carved mahogany handle in the shape of a fish, one of the architect's favorite shapes, and a whistle to match.
When the water boils, the whistle sounds like a whale's mating call.
(If you boil tea by the seashore who knows what might happen?)


Big Blue Meets Big D: Are the 2 Ships Passing?
Last Sunday, the San Francisco 49ers brought their imaginative offense to Giants Stadium and confused a Giants defense still trying to learn a new system.
Today, the Dallas Cowboys bring an explosive offense here and hope for the same success.
The Cowboys, despite having played last Monday night and despite a long flight here, are three-point favorites.
They have never won here in Jimmy Johnson's three years as coach.
But they are a young team on the rise while the Giants are an aging team trying to regain the respectability of their Super Bowl season two years ago.
The 1 P.M. game will be carried by CBS television (Channel 2 in New York) and WNEW radio (1130 AM).


Balancing the Demands Of Risks and Security
IT is no easy matter to balance the demands of adventure and security at the same time, especially with Black.
Nevertheless, you must accept the task.
If the desire for security becomes uppermost, it can have a deadening effect on your game and blunt your perception for bright combinational possibilities when these opportunities arise.
However, if all your thought is on adventure, you may be lured into playing defenses that are unstable and good only for giving your opponent the attack on a platter.


Transit Plan: To De-Garble Speakers In Stations
Denis R. Milsom and Peter D. Berry have spent their careers improving the acoustics of auditoriums, office towers and international airports around the world.
But the two consultants have never tackled a project as daunting, a challenge as formidable, as the plan to modernize the screeching, sputtering, all-but-incomprehensible public-address system of the New York City subways.
Long an annoying indignity of city life, the garbled announcements on subway platforms may soon receive a dose of clarity.
The Transit Authority is hoping to spend more than $75 million from its next five-year capital budget on speakers, wiring and other equipment for 313 of the system's 469 stations.
And it has hired as its advisers Shen, Milsom &amp; Wilke, a well-known acoustics consulting firm.


Mutual Funds; Japan, for Daring Investors Only
Despite last month's rally in Japan's stock market, the bottom has dropped out of mutual funds that invest exclusively in Japanese equities.
The five funds have lost an average of 19.9 percent in 1992 through Aug. 27, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc. in Summit, N.J.
Many managers of these five funds and some Pacific Basin funds -- which invest in Hong Kong, Thailand and other markets in the region besides Japan -- are glum about Japan's prospects and urge investors to buy shares only on weakness in the market.


To Teachers' Head, Ally Named Dinkins Is Just Other Side at Contract Table
Of all New York City's political high-wire acts, Sandra Feldman performs one of the most daring.
She was possibly Mayor David N. Dinkins's most crucial supporter in the 1989 election.
Forsaking Edward I. Koch, she put the power of the teachers' union she leads, with its 110,000 hard-campaigning members, at Mr.
Dinkins's service and demonstrated his appeal to predominantly white and heavily Jewish voters.


A Couple of Swells


Romania's Opposition Finds Hero a Liability
The Rev.
Laszlo Tokes, the Protestant pastor who inspired thousands of Romanians to rise against the Communist dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu in December 1989, has been a thorn in the side of President Ion Iliescu ever since.
Paradoxically, the clergyman, who has since been made a Bishop in his Hungarian Reformed Church, also poses problems for the political opposition with which he is allied.
An ethnic Hungarian, he is a favorite target of Romanian nationalist attacks, and these attacks often include the opposition as a whole.


When the Umpire Is Out of Line
To the Sports Editor:
I have been a loyal baseball fan for 48 years, but now I perceive a dispiriting trend by the umpires to make an impact, and even decide, the outcome of games.
And there seems to be a certain lethargy, or inattentiveness, on the part of management that this trend may be upsetting fans.


Anne E. de Papp, Daniel Dadourian
Dr.
Anne E. de Papp, a daughter of Dr.
Zsolt de Papp and Dr.
Elise W. de Papp of Rochester, was married yesterday in Harwich, Mass., to Dr.
Daniel Gregory Dadourian, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haig Dadourian of New York.
The Rev.
Bertrand Strand, assisted by the Rev.
Untzag Nalbandian, performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church.
Dr. de Papp, 30 years old, is a post-doctoral fellow in endocrinology at Yale University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Smith College and received an M.D. from Dartmouth College.
Her parents are physicians in Rochester.


At the Other End of the 800 Toll-Free Line
HONOLULU was calling Tisha Hermansen of Lindenhurst.
Amid an array of Elvis Presley memorabilia and a picture of her boyfriend, Michael Trezza, atop her Avis computer screen, Miss Hermansen holds court to the car-rental questioners of the world.
Off the telephone she has a strong Long Island accent.
But when she first pushes down one of the blinking red lights, it is elocution time.
"Avis customer servissssss, Tissshaaa spayking," she says, smiling into her headset.
A sentence later it is back to "core" instead of "car" and a Buick "scoylawk."


Donna Denfeld, Stephen Wemple
Donna Marie Denfeld, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norbert P. Denfeld of Brentwood, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen Barr Wemple, a son of Mrs.
Gordon Kinder of Naples, Fla., and the late George B. Wemple.
The Rev.
Daniel Morrissey, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Dairy in Central Park.
Mrs.
Wemple, 29 years old, is the marketing manager for the Scientific American Library at W. H. Freeman &amp; Company, publishers in New York.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is a senior planner at the Consolidated Edison Company in New York.
Her mother, Theresa Evans Denfeld, is an adjunct member of the faculty at Suffolk County Community College in Brentwood.


Motormen's Motor Mouth
The Transit Authority thinks it may have found a way of insuring that announcements on subway cars are always clear: muzzle the conductors.
Inside the trains, the main obstacle to clear sound is diction, not acoustics.
So in an experiment, the agency recently installed a digital recorder on a single Q train.
The system, called the Chatterbox, is operated by the conductor and makes prerecorded announcements as the train enters and leaves each station.


Susan M. Cayer, Robert G. Stout
Susan Miranda Cayer, the daughter of David and Elizabeth Cayer of Plainfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Gregory Stout, a son of Robert and Joan Stout of Plainfield.
The Rev.
Alexander McDougall, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Cayer, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received her law degree from Harvard University.
She was until recently the director of government and community relations for the Music Center of Los Angeles.
Her father, now retired, was the associate vice president for academic affairs at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother is an assistant director in the New Jersey Department of Higher Education in Trenton.


A Who's Who of the Men Advising Clinton
Robert Reich
Professor
Mr.
Reich, 45, is, a professor at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government and the author of a number of books on economic subjects, including "The Work of Nations" (1991).
For years he has been a major proponent of a national industrial policy that would use Government subsidies and tax policies to support key businesses, and would expand Government influence over how businesses conduct their affairs in areas like health care and labor management.
The idea of industrial policy is central to Mr.
Clinton's economic proposals.
Ira Magaziner
Consultant
Mr.
Magaziner, 45, is the president of SJS Inc., a company in Providence, R.I., that offers advice on business strategy to corporate clients who pay and consulting on public policy to civic clients who don't pay, the revenue from one supporting the other.
In 1990 Mr.
Magaziner joined William E. Brock 3d and F. Ray Marshall, both former Labor Secretaries, to head a bipartisan commission that studied the skills of the American work force, a theme that Mr.
Clinton frequently touches on.
Like Mr.
Reich, Mr.
Magaziner is a Rhodes Scholar who met Mr.
Clinton while at Oxford.
Robert J. Shapiro
Policy Maker
Mr.
Shapiro, 42, is vice president of the Progressive Policy Institute, the policy-making arm of the Democratic Leadership Council, the organization of moderate Democrats that Mr.
Clinton helped found.
Mr.
Shapiro, who holds a doctorate from Harvard and additional degrees from the London School of Economics and the University of Chicago, was the deputy national issues director of the 1988 Presidential campaign of Michael S. Dukakis.
He has also served as a chief economic and legislative adviser to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York.
Roger Altman
Investment Banker
Mr.
Altman, 46, is vice chairman of the Blackstone Group, one of the more successful of the investment banking concerns that prospered in the 1980's, a period Mr.
Clinton often characterizes as one of irresponsible short-term profiteering.
Mr.
Altman was Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance in the Carter Administration and played an important role in the rescues of the Chrysler Corporation and New York City.
Mr.
Altman met Mr.
Clinton while both attended Georgetown University in the mid-1960's.
W.
Anthony Lake
Professor
Mr.
Lake, 52, a professor of international relations at Mount Holyoke College, worked for the State Department in the 1960's and served on the staff of the National Security Council under Henry Kissinger until 1970. when he resigned in protest over the invasion of Cambodia.
He became chief foreign policy adviser to Senator Edmund S. Muskie in his Presidential effort.
He was President Carter's international relations adviser during the transition and later was director of policy planning in the Carter Administration's State Department.
Samuel R. Berger
Lawyer
Mr.
Berger, 46, was deputy director of the State Department policy planning staff under Mr.
Lake.
The Harvard-educated lawyer is a partner at the Washington law firm of Hogan &amp; Harston.
He has known Mr.
Clinton since they worked together in 1972 on the Presidential campaign of George McGovern.
He is also a member of the Renaissance Group, an organization composed largely of Southerners that meets each New Year's at Hilton Head, S.C., for a weekend of tennis, golf and public policy talk.
Michael Mandelbaum
Professor
Mr.
Mandelbaum, 45, is a professor and the director of American foreign policy studies at the Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University.
The director of the project on East-West relations for the Council on Foreign Relations, he is an expert on relations between the United States and the former Soviet Union.
He is the author or co-author of six books on foreign policy.
Mr.
Mandelbaum received his doctorate in political science from Harvard University.
He met Mr.
Clinton while attending Cambridge University at the same time Mr.
Clinton was attending Oxford.


'Always Be Truthful'
To the Editor:
In connection with your article about the humiliation and rejection of the audition process  [ "Hollywood Audition Rites . . . And Wrongs," Aug. 23 ] , I'd like to offer a personal perspective.


Fresh Apples Warm Hearts of Bakers
FALL is the one time of year you can bite with confidence into a fresh apple.
At farmers' markets and roadside stands, the apples arrive just as the leaves begin to turn and the evenings start to get shorter.
Now is the time for apple pies, charlottes, puddings and tarts -- straightforward, comforting desserts that get you ready for winter.
One of my favorites is the French upside down apple pie known as tarte Tatin, served warm with creme fraiche or vanilla ice cream.
The apples are baked under a pastry shell in a cast-iron pan and when they are turned out, they are coated with a caramel glaze. (The glaze is the secret to a good tarte Tatin. It must be cooked to a deep caramel color before the apples are added.)


'Phantom': Old Story in New Form
NO, it is not the Andrew Lloyd Webber version.
That's the English one -- "The Phantom of the Opera" -- playing on Broadway and in Los Angeles, Boston, Toronto, London and four other cities in Europe.
Call the Westchester Broadway Theater box office (914-592-2222) in Elmsford, N.Y., and you will be told how its production of "Phantom" -- note the abbreviated title -- is a new American musical in the tradition of "My Fair Lady" and "The Most Happy Fella."
After a series of mishaps of the sort that have traditionally beset Phantoms by any name or nationality, the musical (score by Maury Yeston, book by Arthur Kopit) had its press opening on Thursday, following more than a month's postponement because Robert Cuccioli, the star, fell four feet from a rope in mid-performance, said Allan Gruet, the theater's director of public relations.
Mr.
Cuccioli, who suffered three broken bones in his left foot, and Glory Crampton (Christine, the ingenue), who was indisposed for 20 preview performances, have resumed their roles, while Meg Bussert has stepped in for an ailing actress as Carlotta, who is described by Mr.
Yeston as "the evil diva you love to hate." The "Phantom" in Elmsford is scheduled to run through Feb. 14.


The Executive Computer; Compaq's Bold Plunge Into the Laser Printer Market
The Compaq Computer Corporation, seeking new sources of revenue in a computer market that is largely flat, has staked a claim on the network laser printer market.
Compaq introduced its first laser printers last month, the Pagemarq 15 (list price $3,999) and the Pagemarq 20 ($5,499).
Although either could be used as a high-speed desktop printer attached to a single office computer, their real strength is as a printing hub for office work groups and local area networks.


Monique Arrouet, Frederic Nangle
Monique Denise Arrouet, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Arrouet of Greenwich, Conn., and Denver, was married there yesterday to Frederic Rockwell Nangle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Nangle of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Susan Craig, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Greenwich home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Arrouet, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is an administrative assistant at the Aldus Corporation, a computer software manufacturer in Uniondale, L.I.
Her father is the vice president of finance and chief financial officer of Minorco USA, a mining concern in Denver.
Her mother, Cindy Arrouet, is a curriculum coordinator at the Mead School for Human Development in Greenwich.


In Days of Coin Shortages, Ingenuity Was King
NOWADAYS, there are so many coins that they can become a nuisance and wind up in jelly jars or dishes on a dresser.
But coins have not always been so abundant.
Colonial coinage was rare, and coins were so scarce during the Civil War that merchants made their own tokens and soldiers often used postage stamps to buy necessities.
This shortage affected other areas of the Americas, and these colonies used various measures to solve the problem.
In Nova Scotia, the government cut holes in British coins and used the resulting ring for one denomination and the punched-out part for another.


Lois A. Ebin, Thomas Pepper
Lois Ann Ebin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Rosenberg of East Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Thomas Mark Pepper, a son of the late Maurice Pepper and the late Ethel Riesner.
Rabbi Dr.
Martin Zion performed the ceremony at the bride's home in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Ms.
Ebin, who is keeping the name of her first husband, is a vice president and leveraged-buyout specialist in New York for the corporate-finance division of the Prudential Insurance Company of America.
She graduated from Smith College and received a Ph.D. degree in medieval literature and an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was a professor of surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and the chief of vascular surgery at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, both in New Brunswick, N.J.
Ms.
Ebin's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did Mr.
Pepper's.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
In response to "Brothers and Sisters," by Bebe Moore Campbell (Aug. 23), are there really black women who take every interracial relationship as a personal insult and rejection?
How full of self-pity and devoid of self-respect can a person be?
I happen to be a person who doesn't believe that there are places where people do or do not belong because of the color of their skin.
I also happen to be a black woman who is tired of hearing other black people's complaints about things like "racial mixing," which would be construed as racist and offensive if uttered by white people.


Why Russia Can't Easily Give Islands to Japan; World Marine Park
To the Editor:
"Between Four Rocks and a Hard Place" (editorial, Aug. 28), points out that compromise is possible in the Kurile Islands, with a role for the United States in reaching it.
But the Kuriles are more than four rocks.
They are home to aboriginal, Japanese and Russian inhabitants.
These wild and beautiful islands contain a rich diversity of rare, endangered and commercially valuable species.
Political "resolution" of the control of the Kuriles has always favored the stronger nation, to the detriment of the weaker.
Japan and Russia, rather than competing for control over natural resources, must negotiate shared responsibility of a sustainable, mutually beneficial ecosystem.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; At Jackson's Behest, Clinton Kicks Off Voter Drive
Continuing an awkward pas de deux as they edge toward an alliance, Gov.
Bill Clinton and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson today began a joint voter registration drive.
In an appearance on the Washington Monument grounds this afternoon, Mr.
Clinton delivered the campaign speech that is the standard of his Presidential campaign, repeating many of the elements of the talk on family values he used at the University of Notre Dame on Friday.
But as he turned to leave the stage, Mr.
Jackson handed him a Rainbow Coalition T-shirt and apparently urged him to announce the registration effort.


Plastic May Have Some Advantages Over Metal Plumbing Pipe
PLASTIC plumbing pipe is a boon for amateurs.
It is easier to install than metal pipe, not as heavy and cheaper.
Corrosion is never a problem, and burst pipes caused by freezing are rare.
Plastic pipes also have insulating properties that prevent condensation on pipes carrying cold water and reduce heat loss through pipes carrying hot water.


THE PARTY CRASHER
Theodore Lowi's breathless article ("The Party Crasher," Aug. 23) on 1992 "as the beginning of the end of America's two-party system" seems a bit premature.
John Anderson, Lowi's old flame, won 7 percent of the popular vote in 1980 but not a single vote in the Electoral College where it counts.
It has been a quarter of a century since a third-party candidate received votes in the college: George Wallace in 1968 won 46 Southern votes.


A Game Just 2,971 Short of 3,000 Hits
By the end of the fourth inning, Buck Showalter knew exactly what to do.
Sit back, relax and stop worrying about the lead.
This was going to be a slugfest.
May the most prolific team win.
The Yankees led; the Royals recovered.
The Yankees led again; the Royals recovered.
The Royals led; the Yankees recovered.
Hits went to left and to right and to center -- 29 in all -- as the pitchers got shelled.
The bullpen doors had hinges, 12 men taking trips to the mound.


Jacqueline Reses, Matthew Apfel
Jacqueline Dawn Reses, the daughter of Ronnie Reses and Stephen W. Reses, both of Margate, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew Benjamin Apfel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome B. Apfel of Gladwyne, Pa.
Rabbi Henry Cohen officiated at Beth David Reform Congregation in Gladwyne.
Ms.
Reses, who is 22 years old and is keeping her name, is a financial analyst at Goldman, Sachs, the investment bank, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where her husband received a law degree.
Her father heads Reses Pharmacy Inc. in Pomona, N.J., an operator of pharmacies in southern New Jersey.
Her mother is a pharmacist at Reses Pharmacy in Cape May, N.J.


POSTINGS: Monarch Investment; Italians Buy 53 Condos
Apparently, foreign investors still have a healthy appetite for Manhattan residential real estate.
Over the last five months investors from Hong Kong and Taiwan have paid $400 to $800 a square foot, depending on the floor, for 55 apartments at Trump Palace, the luxury condominium at 200 East 69th Street.
And now Trade 45th, a subsidiary of the Italian investment group Beni International USA, has outbid Haseko, a Japanese investment firm, to buy 53 sponsor-owned apartments at the Monarch, the five-year-old, 45-story condominium at 200 East 86th Street.


THAILAND PARTIES BUYING UP VOTES
Pongse Kaiklang freely admits that he has already made arrangements to sell his vote in Thailand's general election on Sunday.
He also admits that he sold his vote in 1988 and that he sold his vote last March.
The cost of his support is about $2.
As memories slowly begin to fade of how soldiers gunned down scores of demonstrators seeking democracy last May in Bangkok, voters like Mr.
Pongse, a cattle farmer in this eastern Thai province, have become the worst nightmare of Thailand's newly resurgent democracy movement.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
All other things being equal, this critic prefers to have a good time, especially one created by visionary music.
The esthetic peak of the campaign season will occur when a different Clinton bandwagon rolls into town.
On Saturday, George Clinton and the P-Funk All-Stars will return to the Ritz.
While George Clinton may not have a typically Presidential demeanor -- lately he has been appearing in a long blond wig, leading a motley band that wears everything from leather to diapers -- he has amply demonstrated his gifts for innovation.
During the 1970's, Mr.
Clinton was the mastermind of Parliament and Funkadelic, two largely overlapping groups (on two different labels) that reinvented funk to encompass everything from jazzy horns to futuristic synthesizers to hard-rock guitar, not to mention lyrics with double- and triple-entendres.


LEARNING TO TALK OF RACE
I am neither a bleeding heart liberal nor a heartless conservative.
I am a white, middle-class, female Angelino who agrees in most part with Cornel West. ("Learning to Talk of Race," Aug. 2).
I have come to realize that the common good is defined not by the people but by the leadership, which is white, male and elitist.
It is their common good, not ours.
I watched as my city burned.
I watched it on television, 24 hours a day, then would fall asleep exhausted with the unnatural smell of burning buildings hanging in the air.
I would wake in the dead silence of a city under curfew.


Martinez Handles the Mets
The atmosphere, with a half-populated Olympic Stadium and a clubhouse full of modesty, can't yet quite be called electric.
But the Expos, with the season reduced to three weeks of baseball and the gap in the National League East race shrunk significantly, are for real.
Tonight, the Expos, disposing of the Mets with casual ease, got more leadership and nine more innings of excellence from Dennis Martinez.
The right-hander's 4-1 dismissal of the Mets tonight -- Martinez allowed only five hits all night and no runs through eight innings -- kept the Expos within striking distance of the Pirates.


A New Kid on the Block in the Hamptons
THE most anticipated restaurant on the East End has opened.
Della Femina in East Hampton, a brainchild of Jerry Della Femina, the advertising executive, and Drew Nieporent of Montrachet and the TriBeCa Grill in Manhattan, is a reality.
It is also an instant hit.
Della Femina is filled with the famous and near-famous, the summer people and Hamptons perennials.
The scene is one of nonstop table hopping, hugs, waves and kisses.
Diners unimpressed by celebrity spotting will find even more substantial rewards in the splendid food, speedy service and handsome surroundings.
Della Femina is a beauty.
The pale carpeting, pastel-sponged walls and light wood create a subtle backdrop.
Giant sunflowers fill a huge fireplace, mirroring the black-eyed Susans of the outdoor window boxes.
Pottery, along with wall sconces that resemble bundles of reeds, are the focal point.
The bar boasts terra cotta floors, a skylight ceiling and walls covered with caricatures of notable Hamptonites.
On a slow night for celebrity watching, diners can try their hand at identifying the drawings.
Billy Joel, Pierre Franey, Martha Stewart and, of course, Mr.
Della Femina and his wife, Judy Licht, are among them.
Assembling a service staff in late August, when most of the summer help heads back to college, was probably no easy task.
But the crew, while not perfect, is above average.
The delivery of dishes is prompt, and everything from replacing silver to pouring wine is done with style.
There is, however, one service shortfall.
Diners are never offered a second roll.
It is a shame, because the sturdy beauties taste like more.
They were accompanied by a garlicky white-bean spread on one evening, pesto on another.
Four salads grace the menu.
The well-dressed arugula is encircled with balls of nicely seasoned mozzarella and topped with an intensely flavored home-dried tomato.
The field-greens salad is everything it should be.
The Caesar has a plate of whole romaine leaves, slices of Parmesan and large, crunchy croutons.
Tastiest is an endive-and-watercress salad sparked with bacon and Roquefort cheese, but red oak leaf lettuce and radicchio outnumbered the advertised greens.
A grilled portobello mushroom atop a bed of frisee is another salad-style starter.
The size of the mushroom varies.
We received a midget, but saw giants going to other tables.
A cooling gazpacho with deep tomato flavor, garnished with a confetti of chopped vegetables and a swirl of flavored oil was another fine opener.
Pastas are available as appetizers in half portions.
An earthy penne puttanesca and rigatoni tossed with olive oil, crushed sausage and shards of Savoy cabbage are among the tantalizing possibilities.
There were two strikeouts, though, among the winning lineup of entrees.
Barbecued duck was tough with flabby skin, and the vegetable platter was uninspired.
Its centerpiece, a red pepper filled with a too-sweet caponata, was surrounded by overly dry grilled vegetables in need of a splash of oil.
In the winning column were soft-shell crabs enlivened with pancetta and capers, perched on a tasty salad; a succulent fork-tender veal chop; flaky grilled swordfish over succotash, a roasted chicken breast zingy with lemon and mated with yummy polenta and rare grilled tuna served warm atop sliced local tomatoes.
Most of the desserts are right on target.
A melange of summer fruits under a browned zabaglione led the hits.
Other stellar performers were a burnt-sugar almond cake studded with berries and a cold berry soup teamed with a deep-fried ravioli oozing melted chocolate.
But the warm chocolate cake paired with ice cream was served steaming hot, resulting in an instant ice-cream meltdown.
A blood-orange-and-blackberry puff-pastry tart sounded appealing, but was slightly burned and nothing special.
About half the 35 table wines at Della Femina are French.
Most of the rest are from Italy and the West Coast.
There are two Long Island selections.
Four bottles are priced less than $20.
Della Femina
Very Good
99 North Main Street, half-mile north of Route 27, East Hampton. 329-6666.
Atmosphere: The latest Hamptons hot spot.
Service: Speedy, competent, minor slip-ups.
Recommended dishes: Gazpacho, all salads, portobello mushrooms, rigatoni with cabbage and sausage, penne puttanesca, grilled tuna, roast lemon chicken, veal chop, soft-shell crabs, grilled swordfish, gratin of summer fruits, almond cake with berries, berry soup.
Price range: Appetizers, $6 to $9; entrees, $14 to $25.
Credit cards: All major cards.
Hours: 6 to 11 P.M. daily. Lunch planned for the fall.
Reservations: A must.
Wheelchair accessibility: Three steps from bar to the dining room.
Ratings: Poor Satisfactory Good Very Good Excellent Extraordinary
Ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to comparable establishments.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months.
Touch-line telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
There's no knowing in advance.
What looks good on paper turns out to be dreary on stage.
Theoretically, what shouldn't work does.
And the blockbuster comes out of nowhere and catches everyone unawares.
That said, it's hard not to have high expectations for "The Goodbye Girl," the musical version of Neil Simon's 1977 movie that arrives on Broadway in February.
It's about a dumped-upon divorcee (Bernadette Peters) and a struggling actor (Martin Short), who find themselves reluctantly inhabiting the same New York apartment.
Marvin Hamlisch is composing the score, David Zippel's writing the lyrics, and the book is by Mr.
Simon, who goes for laughter
and
tears these days.


Haughty Owners Are Not a Measure of Vincent
One week after major league owners charged Commissioner Fay Vincent with, and ultimately convicted him for, doing his job, they reconvened in another city and, to them, another era.
Never mentioned in the second meeting in St.
Louis last Thursday was the name of the target of their scorn.
Like a released player, Vincent had become a nonperson.


Miss Blewett, Sean Collins
Mary Josephine Blewett, a daughter of Patrick and Marcella Blewett of Sea Girt, N.J., was married yesterday to Sean Timothy Collins, a son of Frank and Jeannette Collins of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert Robbins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Holy Family in New York.
Mrs.
Collins, 36 years old, is a vice president of Merrill Lynch in New York; she is also a securities trader at the company.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father is a project supervisor for the Conduit Foundation Corporation, a construction company in Cliffside Park, N.J.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at Livingston College of Rutgers University, in Piscataway.


Victims' Protection In Auto Insurance
Re: Letter to the New Jersey editor from Paul Blume replying to my letter about the article "No-Frills Insurance Proposed for Cars":


Corrections
An article on Aug. 30 about Japan's automobile industry misstated the name by which the Nissan Sunny is known in the United States.
It is the Sentra.


Court Orders New Trial for Convicted Murderer
A New York State appeals court ordered a new trial on Friday for a convicted murderer because the judge at the first trial had a prior romantic relationship with the defendant's lawyer.
In a split decision, the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court said it found nothing wrong in the trial rulings made by Justice Richard B. Lowe 3d that led to the murder conviction of Leopoldo Gonzalez.
But the court said that because of Justice Lowe's prior relationship with the defense lawyer, Jean Oliver, he should have stepped aside for another judge to try the case.


New York's Budget Chief Asks Reduced Requests
New York City's Budget Director said yesterday that he would ask city agency heads this week for detailed plans on how they would help cut expenses by $500 million next year to meet a projected $1.6 billion budget gap for fiscal 1994, which starts next July.
The Budget Director, Philip R. Michael, said the anticipated cuts to balance a 1994 budget of $29.5 billion would not affect all agencies in proportion to the size of their budgets, but would probably reflect the priorities of Mayor David N. Dinkins in promoting education, social services and the police.


Hofstra Plagued by Turnovers in Loss
Lafayette converted three of Hofstra's five turnovers into touchdowns, two by Chris Flood, to register a 21-14 victory over the Flying Dutchmen yesterday at Fisher Field in Easton, Pa.
Flood scored each of his touchdowns from a yard out as the Leopards avenged last season's 60-17 trouncing in Hempstead, L.I.


Barbara Blank, Barry Shapiro
Barbara Anne Blank, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Blank of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening to Barry Elliot Shapiro, a son of Henry S. Shapiro of Miami and the late Evelyn Shapiro.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Blank, who is keeping her name, is the vice president of J. S. Blank &amp; Company, a men's neckwear maker in New York of which her father is the president.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree in community psychology from Harvard University.
Her mother, Dr.
Blanche D. Blank, is a professor of political science at Yeshiva University in New York.


The Wind And The Line


Laura C. Ronan, Dana B. Sattin
Laura Clare Ronan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Ronan of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Dana B. Sattin, a son of Francis Sattin of Atlanta and the late Irene Sattin.
The Revs.
Raymond and Catherine Anderson, Methodist ministers, officiated at the Harpswell Inn in South Harpswell, Me.
Ms.
Ronan, who is 39 years old and is keeping her name, is a division director of Medical Care Development Inc., a nonprofit public health research organization in Augusta, Me.
She graduated from Beloit College and received her master's degree in public health administration from Tulane University.
Her father, now retired, was a foreign correspondent for The New York Times.
Her mother, now retired, was a manager for the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y.


3 to Read While the Car's in the Shop
THERE are automobile books and then there are automobile books.
I have even written some of them.
They vary widely, of course, ranging from manuals to coffee table extravaganzas, but most have one thing in common.
Laid end to end, they would scarcely be read less than they are now.
That is probably understandable.
It is a given that America loves cars, but it likes them
hands-on
.
It likes them in the driveway and on the highway, not on paper, except in the most ephemeral (and magazine) sense.
And that is a shame, particularly if it leads people to give a pass to the latest in this summer's crop of mobilia.


Grambling Rewrites the Record Book in Rout
Grambling routed Virginia Union in record-setting style tonight, 54-6, capturing the Whitney Young Classic before a crowd of 40,848 at Giants Stadium.
With their victory, the Tigers (1-1) set records for most points by a single team and largest margin of victory in the annual contest that usually matches Grambling against other historically black colleges.


Souvenirs
To the Editor: Reading "The Mementos That Got Away" (Aug. 2), I remembered many years ago when I was in London.
On Portobello Road, I saw the most exquisite tea set.
I, too, didn't buy it because it was quite expensive, I had no place to store it and at that time, the thought of serving teas seemed a tad pretentious.
Also, the thought of lugging that around with a 12-month-old baby was not my idea of fun.
Needless to say, I regretted the decision every time I had guests and wanted to serve Earl Grey.
I couldn't and didn't forgive myself until I returned several years later to the same shop to find the same set!
I purchased it with great joy and disbelief.


A Bloody Ambush Jolts South Africa Toward New Talks
THE contest for the future of South Africa seems, even on good days, like a duel of schizophrenics.
Both the white Government and the African National Congress are torn by conflicting impulses of civility and confrontation.
Last week, on a very bad day at a razor-wire checkpoint near the town of Bisho, each side put forward its belligerent half.
The outcome was grimly predictable, and sufficiently chilling that now, mercifully, the conciliatory halves may have their turn.
Within the African National Congress, the divide is between the romantic militancy born of the liberation movement that the congress was during its 30 years of banishment, and the prudent pragmatism of the governing party that the congress hopes to become.
These are not simply rival factions but rival instincts that coexist to some degree in many congress leaders.
The 'Leipzig Option'
Last week the Bastille-stormers were personified by Ronnie Kasrils, a thickset, kinetic white Communist who fought in the congress's armed underground in the days when ordinary political avenues were foreclosed.
The occasion was the sort of "Leipzig option" mobilization that Mr.
Kasrils had long promoted, only to be overruled by the pragmatists.
But as frustration mounted in the black townships, the congress's mood had swung toward militancy.
Top leaders of the congress endorsed a march aimed at occupying Bisho, the campus-sized capital of the ostensibly independent black homeland called Ciskei, and toppling its military dictator.
As the main column of marchers marked time at the border, Mr.
Kasrils was assigned to lead a breakaway group in a flanking maneuver.
The group sprinted toward the city center through a gap left -- temptingly, and no doubt deliberately -- in the fence, and straight into an ambush by several hundred machine guns of the Ciskei army.
The white Government of President F. W. de Klerk has its own split personality.
There is the Rubicon-crossing, apartheid-disavowing, make-nice Government that craves the world's respect, and that promises majority rule.
And there is the Red-baiting, divide-and-rule, make-war Government that shudders at the prospect of rule by the black majority; this is the Government that tolerates (if it does not actually orchestrate) the police torture, vigilante murder and homeland despotism that keep that majority from coalescing.
On Monday, while the make-nice Mr. de Klerk was occupied at a conference on the fine points of federalism in the forthcoming nonracial South Africa, his make-war surrogate at the Bisho border was Brigadier Oupa J. Gqozo, master of Ciskei.
Mr. de Klerk supplies the brigadier with guns and comforts and advisers; the brigadier, in turn, does all he can to rattle the African National Congress in a region that has traditionally been its stronghold.
When Mr.
Kasril's young following charged through that inviting gap in the fence, Brigadier Gqozo's soldiers opened fire with abandon.
In simpler times, the consequences of such a massacre would have been clear-cut: worldwide opprobrium heaped upon Mr. de Klerk, calls from South African white liberals for sanctions against the regime, perhaps a surge of fresh martyrs to the barricades.
But these are more ambiguous times.
Although, in fact, little has changed on the ground -- the black majority is still impoverished, separate and disenfranchised -- perceptions have changed profoundly.
By disowning the ideology of racial oppression, Mr. de Klerk has persuaded much of the world to judge him in ordinary political terms rather than moral absolutes.
By entering the political realm, the African National Congress has conceded that it will no longer be judged solely on the justice of its grand cause; it will be judged on its fitness to govern.
Mr. de Klerk nowadays scores points with many whites -- not just his own party, but moderates and liberals who acknowledge the legitimacy of the A.N.C.'s claims to power -- when he hammers at the continuing influence of Communists in the congress leadership and chides the organization for descending from purity of principle into political expediency.
A case in point is the question of homeland dictators.
Brigadier Gqozo, the target of last week's fatal march, is the unelected ruler of a purportedly independent Xhosa tribal homeland, carved out of South Africa as an apartheid dumping ground for unwanted blacks.
He lives on subsidies from the South African Government and is accused by his political rivals of suppressing political freedoms.
Exactly the same can be said of Maj.
Gen.
Bantu Holomisa, leader of the neighboring homeland of Transkei.
But General Holomisa, a more adroit politician, has thrown his allegiance to the African National Congress and allows it to operate freely on his territory.
The congress is in no hurry to force him out; on the contrary, he is sometimes touted as a future head of the South African Army under an A.N.C. government.
The attitude toward General Holomisa is roughly: He may be a despot but he's our despot.
Mr. de Klerk huffs that this is hypocrisy.
More accurately, it is realpolitik, and there is plenty of it here to obscure the clear-cut moral distinctions of the past as South Africa makes its way to the new order.
By the current standards, neither side emerged a winner from last week's encounter.
The Government, which tried mightily to shift the blame to Mr.
Kasrils and, failing that, to the brigadier, was almost universally condemned as ruthless and cynical.
But the congress did not get off lightly either.
Many normally sympathetic white liberals saw the charge on Bisho as a reversion to the tactics of revolution.
The Electoral Tactic
"The A.N.C. doesn't need to storm the Bastille in Ciskei," wrote Allister Sparks, a journalist with strong pro-congress sympathies, in The Star.
"It needs only to wait for an election and Gqozo will go the way of all corrupt political flesh."
Indeed, said Phillip van Niekerk of The Weekly Mail, if the congress leaders were to start thinking like politicians rather than revolutionaries, they might prefer to keep the unpopular brigadier around, to help galvanize their voters.
The congress responds that Government-backed surrogates like Mr.
Gqozo impede their ability to compete fairly in future elections.
This is surely true.
But as Mr.
Sparks points out, the A.N.C. cannot get on an electoral footing while it is playing liberation movement, and as an organization out of power it can probably never hope to out-electioneer Mr. de Klerk, whose advantages include not only the police and the Gqozos but the state broadcasting network.
Mr.
Sparks argues that it is in the congress's interest to set aside dreams of Leipzig and press for elections as quickly as possible.
"The playing field is far from level, but it will only grow more so with delay," Mr.
Sparks said in a conversation last week.
"They've got to get a handle on power before anything can happen. Once the elections are out of the way, and the surrogates are gone or cut down to size, then they can get down to negotiating a new constitution, knowing clearly who speaks for whom."
Neither side admits to being even marginally in the wrong at Bisho.
Mr. de Klerk, at a press conference Wednesday, never even suggested that firing thousands of rounds without warning into a crowd that is fleeing in panic might constitute excessive force.
But by the end of the week, Mr. de Klerk, conceding a point the congress had pressed for months, said that something must be done about the violence before the transition can resume.
The A.N.C. said that if Mr. de Klerk means it, the congress is prepared to resume negotiations broken off in June -- first on violence, but ultimately on the formation of an interim government.
Both sides, it seemed, had been sobered by their glimpse of where their bellicose halves could lead them.


What A Waist!


Leslie R. Cashen, R. C. Clevenger
Leslie Renchard Cashen, a freelance photographer in Washington, was married there yesterday to Judge Raymond Charles Clevenger 3d of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Washington.
The Rev. Stephen Davenport performed the ceremony at St. Patrick's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Cashen Clevenger, 46 years old, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is the daughter of Mary M. Walker and John Renchard and the stepdaughter of Franklin Walker, all of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.


Fresh Apples Warm Hearts of Bakers
FALL is the one time of year you can bite with confidence into a fresh apple.
At farmers' markets and roadside stands, the apples arrive just as the leaves begin to turn and the evenings start to get shorter.
Now is the time for apple pies, charlottes, puddings and tarts -- straightforward, comforting desserts that get you ready for winter.
One of my favorites is the French upside down apple pie known as tarte Tatin, served warm with creme fraiche or vanilla ice cream.
The apples are baked under a pastry shell in a cast-iron pan and when they are turned out, they are coated with a caramel glaze. (The glaze is the secret to a good tarte Tatin. It must be cooked to a deep caramel color before the apples are added.)


POSTINGS: Morris Township Seminar; Saving Land and Resources
The New Jersey Conservation Foundation will hold a meeting in Morris Township Thursday for those interested in learning about preserving open land and indentifying and protecting natural resources.
The meeting will include a video, "Land Trusts in America: Guardians of the Future," produced by the Land Trust Alliance, a land conservation group based in Washington.


China to Build Nuclear Plant for Iran


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
July 92
June 92
July 91
New York
2,879
3,403
3,029
New Jersey
1,646
1,263
1,310
Connecticut
834
838
779
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.08
8.18
9.37
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.38
5.44
7.01
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.97
8.03
9.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.22
5.21
6.87
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.01
8.07
9.23
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.11
5.12
6.96
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.15
8.24
9.47
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.95
5.96
7.47
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.39
3.52
5.70
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.78
7.78
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Anne N. Lively, Richard S. Nixon
Anne North Lively, the daughter of Lucinda Waterson of Meredith, N.H., and the late William H. Lively, was married yesterday to Richard Scott Nixon, a son of James and Elizabeth Nixon of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
James M. Donald performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Charleston, W.Va.
Mrs.
Nixon, 28 years old, is an assistant manager in the Biotherm skin-care division of Cosmair Inc., a cosmetics company in New York, where her father-in-law is an executive vice president.
She graduated from West Virginia University.
Her father was the assistant city manager of Charleston, W.Va.
Her stepfather, Dr.
Karl W. Waterson of Meredith, is a dermatologist in Gilford, N.H.


Pictures At an Exhibition
A cosmetics executive sells her photos to help cancer research.
Holly Solomon Gallery, Sept. 10.


Video Dial Offers Opportunities for All; Decade After the 90's
To the Editor:
In "The Video Dial Tone, Strangled" (editorial, Aug. 31), you refer, I think, to the first 10 years of the next century as the "00's."


Chris Creatura and Peter H. Moulton
Dr.
Chris Creatura, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Creatura of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Humphrey Moulton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Moulton of Cambridge, Mass.
Judge Charles E. Stewart of Federal District Court in New York officiated at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
Dr.
Creatura, who is keeping her name, is an obstetrician and gynecologist in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College and received her M.D. from Harvard University.
Her father is the chief of nuclear medicine at Bridgeport Hospital in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her mother, Sheila Creatura, is a career counselor in Connecticut.


Corrections
A picture caption last sunday about the Alaska Highway Misstated the location of Dawson Creek, where the highway starts.
It is in British Columbia.


Something to Crow About


And Now, Is It Politically Esthetic?
AFTER hiring an architect, submitting plans to the Board of Architectural Review and spending $20,000 last year to tile the facade of his four-story building on Main Street here, Angelo Lopriore now has to deal with the criticism of residents who don't like his building's appearance.
"What am I going to do, tear the whole thing down now?" Mr.
Lopriore said.
"I did the best I could, but I'm not Oleg Cassini, you know."


Iran Is Riling Its Gulf Neighbors, Pressing Claim to 3 Disputed Isles
Iran, which is emerging as the region's dominant power after the defeat of Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, has heightened a confrontation with Arab neighbors over three disputed islands in the gulf.
Iran on Friday denounced a statement by eight Arab countries, including its ally Syria, that criticized Teheran's attempts to annex the islands, which are jointly controlled by Iran and the United Arab Emirates.


When Fall Is No Foe
PEOPLE who don't garden think gardening is over after Labor Day, but nothing could be further from the truth.
It's easy to get desperate in the garden this time of year, looking at all the things that absolutely have to be done, and all the things that should be done, and all the things you told yourself it would be nice to do when September rolled around and you could finally become the perfect gardener.
There's that mulberry seedling that I neglected to cut out of the mock orange bushes in the spring, and now it's a little tree.
Not to mention the mock orange bushes I never got around to pruning, and now it's too late, of course.
Same story for the lilacs.


Sponsor Defaults
To the Editor:
Rita Clardige may be right in her letter on Aug. 9 saying that the collapsed real estate market, not rent control, is responsible for co-op sponsor defaults.
But her conclusion that ending controls wouldn't help cure the problem is wrong.


Lisa B. Noveck, David C. Buseck
Lisa Blyn Noveck, a daughter of Madeline I. Noveck and Ralph H. Noveck, both of New York, was married yesterday to David Carl Buseck, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald C. Buseck of Erie, Pa.
The Rev.
Nicholas Rouch, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Tarrytown (N.Y.) House.
Cantor Bernard Fitch took part in the ceremony.
Mr. and Mrs.
Buseck, both 31 years old, are senior managers in the management-consulting division of Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting firm, in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the vice president of sales and marketing for Avne Systems Ltd., a New York packaging company.
Her mother is the president of Novos Planning Associates Inc., a financial-planning firm in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Judith Noveck of New York.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
Forget about happy Victorian families and Sugarplum Fairies.
"The Hard Nut," Mark Morris's new version of "The Nutcracker," follows the Hoffmann story and Tchaikovsky score but departs in significant details from the traditional holiday classic.
In "The Hard Nut," which will be presented by the Mark Morris Dance Group starting Dec. 11 as part of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the Stahlbaums are a blithely dysfunctional middle-class American family of the 1960's.
The dark yet funny black-and-white world of the first act is succeeded in the second by a world of color and fantasy, most of it unfamiliar.
But, according to hard-core traditionalists who saw the work in Brussels, Mr.
Morris has not done violence to the original.
Oddly enough, they say, his nutty treatment has the tenderness and purity of vision of the ballet's central character, little Marie Stahlbaum, and the voyage into womanhood that is the true theme of "The Nutcracker."


Reform Managers, Not the Bouts
To the Sports Editor:
I agree with Ira Berkow on the need for boxing reforms ("That 'Sinful Business' Remains in Business," The Times, Aug. 17).
But adding some missing background to the Benny Paret tragedy may indicate where the reforms should start.
The death of Benny Paret did not happen in the 12th round of his fight with Emile Griffith but several weeks before.


Mara J. Lozier, Chris Shore
Mara Jessica Lozier, a daughter of Peter and Gail Lozier of New York and Little Compton, R.I., was married yesterday to John Christopher Shore, a son of Thomas and Margaret Shore of Cincinnati and Kennebunk Beach, Me.
The Rev.
Lynn Carman-Bodden performed the ceremony at the United Congregational Church in Little Compton.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Bush Fund-Raising Off
The President's campaign aides say they have fallen dramatically behind both their own projected targets and the pace of the Democratic money machine.
Page 38.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  TO FRANCE, EUROPE COMES 2d


Laura P. Neely and Mark W. Ross
Mr. and Mrs.
Mason D. Neely of Ridgefield, Conn., and Tokyo have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Patricia Neely, to Mark William Ross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Ross of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Neely, 25 years old, is a promotion-evaluation manager for Bristol-Myers Squibb in New York.
She graduated from Manhattanville College.
Her father is the director of sales for Philip Morris K.K. in Tokyo.


A Meal With a View in Rome
RETURNING to Rome as a tourist after living there for more than a decade, I find the thing I miss most is my own terrace.
In theory I agree with Eleanor Clark, who wrote in "Rome and a Villa" that the streets belong to everybody and "in Rome to go out is to go home." But to see the city from above is to take possession of it in a way that's impossible when you're scuttling over the cobblestones, dodging cars and other pedestrians, like a frantic marionette in a Punch-and-Judy show.
I much prefer quiet and privacy, and a commanding view of red tile roofs, crumbling ruins, church domes and campaniles, and neighboring terraces banked with flowers.
Better yet, I delight in having Rome spread out in front of me like one vast lesson from an architect's notebook while I enjoy a bowl of pasta and a good bottle of wine.
For a visitor, the best way to replicate this experience is to check into a luxury hotel and order room service.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Brooklyn Heights
HART CRANE turned harbor views from Brooklyn Heights into poetry long before Robert Moses built the promenade, officially the Esplanade, over the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.
The view in 1924, Crane wrote, "at twilight on a foggy evening . . . is beyond description. Gradually the lights in the enormously tall buildings begin to flicker in the mist."
And of the Brooklyn Bridge, in 1929: "Again the traffic lights that skim thy swift unfractioned idiom . . . condense eternity: And we have seen night lifted in thine arms."


Ellen B. Hughes, John M. Webster
Ellen Berry Hughes, a daughter of Nancy R. Hughes of Princeton, N.J., and James E. Hughes Jr., of New York, was married yesterday to John McDonald Webster, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Webster of Berkeley Heights, N.J.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Rechter performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Princeton.
Mrs.
Webster, 25 years old, was until recently a teacher at the Nova Child Development Center, a day-care center in Arlington, Va.
She and her husband graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue.
Her mother is a teacher at Stuart Country Day School in Princeton.


For Florida, a 6,300-Acre Golf Community
At a 6,300-acre site eight miles north of downtown, yet another scenario is about to be enacted on how to market a residential community based on golf.
But the developer of Saint Johns, as the community will be known, says he is offering more than usual -- a different layout plus a 450-acre business-entertainment complex that will be built on the site by the P.G.A. (Professional Golf Association) Tour Inc.


Hope for a Rescued Child
For all the human misery in this famine-stricken town, there are some glimmers of hope: some of the children who arrived a month ago near death now look better and show high spirits.
And one case, 14-year-old Mohammed Osman, an orphan rescued from a row of bodies who had been pronounced dead, is now off the danger list.


God, I Hope I Get It!
No deodorant ad can approximate the stress, the agonized wishin'-'n'-hopin', the psyching for "final Jeopardy" that accompany the job interview.
So it's imperative not to forget that your best shot does not start with a firm handshake, a winning smile or the first question fired by the affable Lord High Executioner behind the desk.
The interview begins the moment you open the door.
So stand out but don't stick out.
Two weeks from your meeting, if your interviewer says, "Remember the guy, the one with the great vest . . . ," your clothes have done a good job.
If you've been equally memorable, you may get to do one, too.


Miss Westerfield, Mr. Bingham
Pamela Bradford Westerfield, the daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
H.
Bradford Westerfield of Hamden, Conn., was married yesterday in Watch Hill, R.I., to Arthur Walker Bingham 4th, the son of Mr.
Bingham 3d of New York and Judith H. Bingham of Paris.
He is the stepson of Nicolette P. Bingham of New York.
The Rev.
Seymour St.
John performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Watch Hill Chapel.
Mrs.
Bingham is the assistant vice president for 19th-century paintings at Christie's, the auction house, in New York.
She graduated from Yale University, where her father is a professor of international studies and political science.
Her mother, Carolyn E. H. Westerfield, is a city planning consultant in New Haven.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The C.I.A. Briefing; At Clinton's Security Briefing, More Than Policy Was on Table
When Robert M. Gates gave Gov.
Bill Clinton a national security briefing recently, a lot more than current events were swirling in the air.
It was the first occasion for the nation's top spymaster and the Democratic Presidential nominee to size up each other, and the two men spent more time preparing for their political joust than they do for some of their major public appearances, officials on both sides said.


Asbestos Answers? Look to Philadelphia
To the Editor:
To suggest, as Roy Furchgott did in "A Verdict on Asbestos" (Making a Difference, Aug. 16), that the nation's largest asbestos trial should serve as a "model for handling a major chunk of the tens of thousands of asbestos cases still clogging the nation's courts," is a gross distortion of the truth.


Julia A. Ruddick, Charles P. Meade
Julia Addison Ruddick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Perry Ruddick of Cedar Grove, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Patrick Meade, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Meade of Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
Stanley E. Johnson, an Episcopal minister who is the chaplain of the University of Pennsylvania, officiated at the Siasconset (Mass.) Union Chapel on Nantucket Island.
Msgr.
Joseph P. Nagle took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Meade, 29 years old, is a senior associate in the project-finance group of Barclays Bank in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the chairman of First Century Partners, a venture-capital company in New York.


The Lesson of Washington Heights
A grand jury's refusal to indict New York City police officer Michael O'Keefe -- and an extraordinary report assessing the case -- carries a simple, sobering message: Don't jump to conclusions about police brutality.
Officer O'Keefe shot Jose Garcia during a struggle in the entryway of an apartment building in Washington Heights last July.
The officer said he fired in self-defense after trying to arrest Mr.
Garcia for carrying a gun.
But the community exploded; the incident, coming soon after the riots in Los Angeles, generated citywide anxiety.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a Northeast Notebook article and a picture caption on page 15 of the Real Estate section today, about Alpha-Beta Technology's decision to build a plant in Rhode Island, describes the company's move incorrectly.
It is not leaving its headquarters in Worcester, Mass.


Networking; Andy Flattened Miami, but Tacoma Was in the Wings
HURRICANE ANDREW's 164-mile-an-hour winds wreaked havoc with the Miami computer center that contained company records for Grand Metropolitan's Heublein Inc. and Burger King distribution division.
But Grand Met's information systems division had already been doing some heavy-duty disaster planning, thanks to which the computerized records emerged unscathed and the network was up and running within two days.


Anthony Perkins, Who Mastered a Frightening Role, Is Dead at 60
Anthony Perkins, the actor who starred in dozens of films and plays but was best known for his role as Norman Bates, the eerily soft-spoken psychopath in Alfred Hitchcock's classic thriller "Pyscho," died yesterday at his home in Hollywood.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Perkins died of complications from AIDS, Leslee Dart, a publicist who said she was speaking for the family, reported last night.


Ann Burros and Gary Silverstein
Ann Frances Burros, the daughter of Marian Burros of New York and Bethesda, Md., and the late Donald Burros, was married last evening to Gary William Silverstein, a son of Barbara Schwarzchild of Kings Point, L.I., and Donald Silverstein of Key Biscayne, Fla.
Rabbi Reeve Brenner officiated at the home of the bride's mother in Bethesda.
Ms.
Burros-Silverstein, 31 years old, graduated from Empire State College and is studying for a master's degree in social work at Fordham University.
Her father was the president of White Conveyors Inc., a maker of conveyor-belt systems in Kenilworth, N.J.
Her mother is a reporter and food columnist for The New York Times.


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
Concert halls and opera houses generally fill up for two reasons.
First, the repertory doesn't often come around and thus excites our interest.
Second, splendid performers, handling things we know well, may produce some revelation or brilliance of execution.
A little of both is in prospect this season, especially in opera.
Marc Blitzstein's 1949 "Regina" is more talked about than performed, but the New York City Opera will present it next month.
And on Columbus Day, the Metropolitan Opera offers "The Voyage" by Philip Glass, new and enticing.
Noting the splendid Met orchestra and its conductor, James Levine, I look forward to a new production of an old standby, "Die Meistersinger," in January.
Verdi's Requiem is also familiar, but next month at Carnegie Hall, La Scala forces under Riccardo Muti provide a glimpse of a performing tradition that dates back to the composer himself.
I also welcome a revival of the Robert Wilson-Philip Glass "Einstein on the Beach" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in November.
This piece has forever altered our ideas of stage activity and its relation to time.


Sampras and Edberg to Play; Courier and Chang to Watch
Pete Sampras rushed away from his semifinal match without comment, doubled up from the pain of dehydration-induced stomach cramps, but he didn't exit the night-chilled Stadium Court until he had deposed the world's No. 1 player, Jim Courier, 6-1, 3-6, 6-2, 6-2, in the contest to decide defending champion Stefan Edberg's opponent in the final of the United States Open last night.
This 1992 Open finale won't only decide the owner of the year's fourth and Grand Slam title, but will anoint a new No. 1 player in the world.
Both Edberg, who hasn't been shy about his desire to reclaim the top spot he first lost to Courier in February, and Sampras, who has maintained an "if Jim can do it, I can do it" attitude toward the computer ranking, are candidates.


Roll Over, Bob Marley
YANNICK NOAH is through being "le coq sportif." Now he wants to be -- how do you say? -- "le coq-and-roll." And he doesn't even have to switch sponsors.
France's only international tennis celebrity has been called many things in his 32 years: "The Black Panther," "The Indomitable Lion," "Le Sex Bombe Extraordinaire." Since he stopped playing last year, and quit as coach of the French Davis Cup team in April, the dreadlocked showman has been plotting a new photo caption for himself: "The Next Bob Marley."


Relatively Plastic
To the Editor:
I appreciated Philip Kitcher's useful and generally positive review of my book "Final Solutions: Biology, Prejudice, and Genocide" (Aug. 2).
However, one of his points requires some clarification.
It is indeed the case that the contemporary sociobiologists whom I criticize (E. O. Wilson and Richard Dawkins, for example) often use the same terms that I do to describe human behavior and development.
Nevertheless, the meanings we attach to these terms are quite different.


Making a Difference; The Fruit of Collaboration: A New Hepatitis Vaccine
GENELABS TECHNOLOGIES INC. is a small biotechnology company based in Redwood City, Calif., known primarily for diagnostic kits.
SmithKline Beecham, of Philadelphia, is a worldwide leader in vaccines.
Yet, earlier this month, SmithKline joined Genelabs in the development of a new vaccine for the prevention of hepatitis E.
After creating a diagnostic product, "you immediately have a vaccine opportunity," said Frank F. C. Kung, Genelabs's chairman, president and chief executive.
"But the simple fact of identifying a viral sequence does not automatically lead to development of a vaccine." Mr.
Kung founded Genelabs in 1984 after holding several positions in research planning and business development with the Cetus Corporation.


Science Fiction
Literal-minded critics have sometimes derided science fiction as subliterary "escapism," because it does not deal, in so many words, with the here-and-now.
J.
R.
R.
Tolkien, who wrote "The Hobbit" and "The Lord of the Rings," defended all imaginative literature from such charges by drawing a distinction between escape and desertion: while few applaud desertion, our reaction to a prison escape depends on whether we identify with the prisoner or the jailer.
In a savvy introduction to his fine collection of stories, MEETING IN INFINITY (Arkham House, $20.95), John Kessel confesses that when he was 12 years old, reading science fiction was his sole means of escape from "the feeling of being trapped that, sadly, so many children feel." The 14 stories in this collection confirm that while the mature Mr.
Kessel still identifies with prisoners, he uses science fiction not to avoid or deny life's encumbrances but to confront and comprehend them.
In the story "Hearts Do Not in Eyes Shine," Connie and Harry confront the old, old question of whether love can survive a betrayal of trust.
To save their marriage, they turn to a new technological fix: selective memory erasure.
Freed from the burden of past hurts, they make a fresh start -- with consequences that appear inevitable only in retrospect.
Kessel's tendency to spell out conclusions that inhibit rather than empower the reader's imagination.
But at their best, these are stories that liberate the mind, which of course is what escapism is all about.


Melissa Lazarov, Douglas Warshaw
Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Lazarov of Memphis have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Melissa Ann Lazarov, and Douglas Alden Warshaw, the son of Sandy Warshaw and Milton Warshaw, both of New York.
Ms.
Lazarov, 32 years old, graduated from Boston University.
She is the director of the Gagosian Gallery in New York.
Her father is the president of Lazarov Realty and Construction in Memphis.


Susan Morrison, David Handelman
Susan Morrison, a daughter of Charles Morrison of Montville, N.J., and the late Nancy Morrison, was married yesterday to David Handelman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter J. Handelman of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated at the home of Senator and Mrs.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan in Pindars Corners, N.Y.
Ms.
Morrison, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the editor of The New York Observer.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in English from the University of Manchester in England.
Her father is an agent in Livingston, N.J., for the New York Life Insurance Company.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
A MOTHER'S TOUCH  The Tiffany Callo Story. By Jay Mathews. Holt, $21.95.


Will Owners Rue Commissioner's Fall?
To the Sports Editor:
The shortsightedness of baseball barons in forcing Fay Vincent's resignation is one they may soon regret.
The owners seem to be a group going in dozens of different directions with greed seeming to be their sole motivation.


Christopher Klein, 33, Computer Consultant
Christopher H. Klein, a computer consultant, died in a hang-gliding accident in San Jose, Calif., on Monday.
He was 33 years old and lived in Palo Alto, Calif.
He died instantly of multiple head and internal injuries, his family said.


LITHUANIA
John Budris describes a heart-wrenching incident when the Russian Army cut up a Lithuanian farmer's house for firewood ("Is This What the 15 People at the TV Tower Died For?" Aug. 2).
As painful as this story is, it is a microcosm of what the military has done and continues to do, not only in the former Soviet Union but also in the United States.
Our military has burned up our infrastructure and economic health by exorbitant spending and neglecting to invest in avenues of achieving peace.
Simultaneous with the infusion of Western support for President Yeltsin and the Baltic states, an innovative new look at the role of the military in both the United States and the former Soviet Union must take place.
It is only when military strength is dramatically diminished on both sides, without the recycling of weapons to other countries, that real economic and political progress can be achieved.


First Trying Days in the First Grade
For New Teacher, First Week Is a Real Learning Experience
At 3 P.M. on Tuesday, the day before school started, Patricia Cullen was darting around her first-grade classroom at Public School 116 in Manhattan, excitedly preparing for her first teaching job.
Twenty-four hours later, she stood like a wilting flower as her new students -- 6-year-olds who had spent the day crawling over desks, poking each other and talking nonstop -- bounded past her into the schoolyard.
Seventy-seven times she had told them to be quiet.
Almost as many times, she had to fight for their attention as a stream of visitors interrupted her class.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Noncandidate Still, Perot Could Still Be a Spoiler
Ross Perot is tantalizing his remaining supporters with suggestions that he might resuscitate his Presidential campaign, but experts think his most significant role in the race may be the threat he poses of taking a few percentage points away from President Bush in their home state of Texas.
Mr.
Perot's name seems certain to be on the ballot in all 50 states, according to Richard Winger, editor of Ballot Access News, a San Francisco newsletter.
Petitions have been filed in 49 states and are due to be handed over in Arizona on Friday.
Mr.
Perot is spending about $500,000 a month to maintain offices in every state for petition drives and to support local candidates who share his views.


Enjoy Your Bagel: The Antiques Will Wait
A GOOD outdoor flea market knows no season.
It's as reliable at 30 degrees as it is at 85.
But last Sunday afternoon, with the sun dancing in and out of the clouds, vendors and customers at the 11-month-old antiques market at Grand Street and Broadway couldn't even agree on what season it was.
"It's the death of summer," said Bob Cohen, a dealer from Yonkers, watching perhaps 300 people move among tables and tents.
"The quietest it's been in weeks."


Tone Shrill, Barbs Sharp, Senate Race Nears End
The campaign for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York plunged into its final weekend in a bitter round of recriminations, street campaigning and staged media events yesterday, as Geraldine A. Ferraro and her rivals wrangled over questions of credibility and integrity, and appealed to their partisans to turn out and vote.
With polls showing a tight race between Ms.
Ferraro and State Attorney General Robert Abrams, she hustled through the streets of Brooklyn and Queens, pumping every hand she could find and urging her listeners to enlist their friends: "When you go home, just sit down by the phone and call five -- five for Ferraro -- and say 'Election Day is Tuesday. Don't stay home!' "


ONE CRITIC'S CHOICES
As far as I'm concerned, television's bedrock remains the weekly series, an odd, inevitably uneven format that can take a season or two to hit its stride but, at its best, can reduce politicians to unseemly public sputtering.
Enter Diane English, creator of "Murphy Brown," with a new sitcom on CBS called "Love and War" (Monday nights at 9:30), whose regular-guy columnist hero, played by Jay Thomas, insists that he has adjusted to the 90's, "though I still don't feel comfortable crying in a movie theater, unless, of course, I've been stabbed." Ms.
English is always welcome.


Update; Man Admits Dumping A Trailer Filled With Garbage
The owner of a truck repair shop has admitted to dumping a trailer filled with 23.7 tons of garbage earlier this summer in Liberty State Park in Jersey City, resolving a case that has ignited a debate over whether New York City adequately monitors its trash once it leaves the city bound for landfills outside the city.
John Picinic, the owner of P &amp; B Truck and Trailer Repair Inc. in Hoboken, has been charged with illegal disposal of waste, the Jersey City Police said on Friday.
He faces a fine of up to $5,000 and a 90-day probation sentence.
He has already agreed to pay the $2,295 needed to dispose of the garbage.


Dohn Sewatarmra, Peter T. du Pont
Bongkot Sewatarmra, a daughter of Boonma and Chumsai Sewatarmra of Nonthaburi, Thailand, was married yesterday to Peter Townsend du Pont, a son of Peter Rhett du Pont of New York and Mrs.
Thomas Martin Green 3d of Savannah, Ga.
The Rev.
John Jenkins performed the ceremony at the Bethesda Episcopal Chapel in Savannah.
Ms.
Sewatarmra, 28 years old, is called Dohn and is keeping her name.
She graduated from Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok, Thailand, where she also received a master's degree in communication arts.
She is a program officer in Bangkok for Private Agencies Collaborating Together (Thailand), an international consortium that provides assistance to local nonprofit groups in developing countries.
Her father is the chief administrator of vocational education for the Thai Ministry of Education in Bangkok.
Her mother is an administrator at the Dusit Vocational Technology School there.


Plastic May Have Some Advantages Over Metal Plumbing Pipe
PLASTIC plumbing pipe is a boon for amateurs.
It is easier to install than metal pipe, not as heavy and cheaper.
Corrosion is never a problem, and burst pipes caused by freezing are rare.
Plastic pipes also have insulating properties that prevent condensation on pipes carrying cold water and reduce heat loss through pipes carrying hot water.


THE PARTY CRASHER
Lowi is mistaken when he claims that "the two-party system has long been brain dead." In fact, the two-party system is in the process of rejuvenation.
For over two decades, scholars of American politics have claimed that realigning elections -- America's surrogate for revolution -- have become extinct.
Historically, such elections have served as a pressure valve for our political system, and at various crises in our history, roughly every 30 years, they ushered in new eras of social and political change.
The election of 1800 marked the beginning of our two-party system; in 1828, white male suffrage was achieved; the election of 1860 insured the maintenance of the union; 1896 ushered in the Industrial Age; active government in the form of the New Deal emerged in 1932, and the struggle for civil rights was settled with the election of 1964 -- the last critical realignment.


Revisionist Chowder
Chowder is a state of heart and mind more than a specific culinary technique.
It's a brace against the whistling winds and quiet nights of the soul, a balm to the free-floating desire for cuddle and comfort.
The intimate appetite beneath a simple desire for chowder may be why the French are so often credited with its invention.
The word
chaudiere
refers to the heavy pots Breton fishermen traditionally used to simmer their soup, yet "The Escoffier Cookbook" doesn't recognize chowder.
Even the recently updated "Larousse Gastronomique" offers no definition of the dish, though it does note that
chaudree
is a fish soup made of small fish, muscadet and garlic.


A la Carte; A Startling Switch From Bayville to Garden City
WHEN Richard Allen, one of the most gifted chefs to arrive on Long Island in some time, recently left the Crescent Restaurant in Bayville and moved to the Garden City Hotel, it was something like David Cone's leaving the Mets and going to Toronto.
Star performers, be they baseball pitchers or chefs, are rarely available.
Most organizations make sure that they do not get away.


Elvis Museum In Hometown
A museum of Elvis Presley memorabilia opened last month in Tupelo, Miss. (55 miles northwest of Columbus).
The collection on display is that of Janelle McComb, a friend of the Presley family who knew the singer from early childhood.
The memorabilia includes private McComb family photographs, clothing belonging to Presley and poems written by Mrs.
McComb and signed by Presley, who died in 1977.
The museum along with a gift shop occupies a single-story brick building and both are run by the Tupelo Elvis Presley Commission, a city group that also maintains the public Elvis Presley Park nearby.
The museum's two small rooms display photographs and captions tracing the singer's early years in Tupelo and his career.
A costume in which Elvis performed in Las Vegas as well as casual clothes and shoes are also part of the collection.


The Captain of the 'Hoffa' Team
"That's life, my friends," the title character of the forthcoming film "Hoffa" declaims at one point.
"It's give and take and mix it up, and
that's
what I'm good at." And at sundry moments, he wields fist, belt and shotgun for, one might say, punctuation.
Yet the man most responsible for assembling the screen epic about the charismatic and controversial leader of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters could hardly appear more his opposite.
Edward R. Pressman, the producer, operates with delicate voice and meek mien.
His office switchboard plays National Public Radio for callers on hold, and his chief associate bears the refined name of Caldecot.


Antonella Caruso, John S. Rossant
Antonella Caruso, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Luigi Caruso of Cosenza, Italy, was married yesterday to John Sinclair Rossant, the son of the late Murray J. Rossant and the late Naima Rossant.
Franco Carraro, the Mayor of Rome, officiated at the Campidoglio, Rome's city hall.
Mrs.
Rossant, 30 years old, was until recently the political adviser on North Africa and the Middle East to Italy's Foreign Minister.
She now is the assistant to the director of the foreign department of ENI, the state-owned petrochemical company in Rome.
She graduated from the University of Rome, where she also received a master's degree in Islamic studies.
Her father retired as a portfolio manager in Cosenza for the Banca Nazionale di Lavoro.
Her mother, Rosetta Caruso, retired as a teacher for the Vadue di Carolei elementary school there.


Biomet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Opera; The Mystical Faust Born of an Obsession
On Friday night, behind scrims lighted with filmed images of pentagrams and burning candles, behind projected slides of Latin inscriptions and ancient tomes of secret lore, the New York City Opera managed to work its own variety of magic, bringing to life Ferruccio Busoni's opera "Doktor Faust" at the State Theater.
This was not quite like reviving a corpse: the opera has had passionate advocates since it was first seen in 1925 and the work was convincingly served in a 1970 Deutsche Grammophon recording.
But it had never been staged in New York, and, despite some problems with this production, Christopher Keene's conducting and William Stone's performance as Faust have shown that this work deserves a place much closer to the heart of the operatic repertory.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Post Owner Still Hopes to Buy Daily News
PETER S. KALIKOW, the owner of The New York Post, still considers himself a very serious prospective buyer for the bankrupt Daily News, even though he is in bankruptcy himself.
Mr.
Kalikow, a New York real estate developer, said late last week that he fully expected the paper's unions and creditors to come to him eventually.
"They know I'm ready to buy it," he said.


Books of The Times; Pursuing Ends by Any, Or Even Every, Means
Kissinger  A Biography  By Walter Isaacson  Illustrated. 893 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.
If any generalization can be made about the former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, it must surely be that he inspired remarkable extremes of admiration and contempt, often enough in the same individual.
As Walter Isaacson, an editor of Time magazine, puts it in this endlessly fascinating biography of Mr.
Kissinger, "Years after he left office, Kissinger still aroused controversy of a distinctly personal sort -- hatred and veneration, animosity and awe, all battling it out with little neutral territory in between."


Market Place; Builders of Houses Fall From Favor
MORTGAGE rates are plummeting, which ought to be good news for home builders.
But Wall Street is again turning a cold shoulder to the industry, fearing that consumers' lack of confidence will stem the tide of buying.
An index of home-builder stocks has fallen 15 percent since its recent high in early August, and the spurt in prices that followed the last cut in the discount rate by the Federal Reserve Board has evaporated.


Holtz Admits Error Stalled Drive
The breakdown that caused Notre Dame to waste much of the final minute of its 17-17 tie with Michigan on Saturday became a costly one this afternoon.
Lou Holtz, the Notre Dame football coach, defended his conservative play-calling in the last 65 seconds of the game, but again accepted blame for the lost time that caused his team's final opportunity to slip away.


The Talk of Hollywood; Anti-Semitism Film Strikes a Chord With Its Producers
Studio executives and producers often talk about the importance and relevance of their movies, but don't really believe it.
What counts is whether a movie makes money, even if it is splattered with violence or panders to audiences' worst impulses.
"School Ties" is an exception.
Whether the film is dramatically effective, whether it's accepted by critics and audiences remains uncertain.
But what gives the modest film resonance is that it has struck a highly personal nerve for its producers, Sherry Lansing and Stanley R. Jaffe, as well as the chairman of Paramount, Brandon Tartikoff.


CBS's Ruptured Ties to Affiliates
CBS is encountering more and more problems in getting its affiliated stations to carry its programs.
Starting this morning, for instance, WJBK of Detroit is dropping the "CBS This Morning" news program.
The network also faces increasing problems with its late-night shows and could also be threatened in parts of prime time.


E&amp;B Marine Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Anxious in His Lead, Clinton Fights to Run Race His Way
Part of the ritual of Presidential campaigns is the ceremonial boarding and unboarding of the plane, with the candidate walking past a gantlet of reporters shouting questions on the issues of the day.
A relaxed candidate will stop and take a few.
Gov.
Bill Clinton strides right on by these days.
One week after Labor Day, with only seven weeks to go until the election, this is a tense and careful campaign.
Mr.
Clinton has retained his lead in the polls, even enlarged it in the Newsweek survey released Saturday.
But every day is a struggle to keep the election focused where he wants it focused: on the ailing economy and on President Bush's shortcomings, rather than on the character issues that the Bush campaign wants front and center, notably Mr.
Clinton's shifting accounts of his draft record.
Formidable Hurdles Remain


Behind the Allegations In the Senate Campaign
In the televised debate yesterday and in recent commercials, candidates for the Democratic nomination for United States Senate have hurled several allegations at one another, and Geraldine A. Ferraro and Robert Abrams have accused each other of lying.
Here is a look at some major points of controversy: Ferraro's Finances
Ms.
Ferraro accused Mr.
Abrams of misstating the findings of a House ethics committee's 1984 examination of her finances when he said she was found guilty of 10 violations of House rules.
"I went back and read the report and I was found guilty of nothing," said Ms.
Ferraro.


Economy and the Family Are the Same Subject
To the Editor:
It is a mistake to treat "family values" and the economy as different issues, as you do in, for instance, "Women Get Into Political Football -- as the Ball" (The Week in Review, Aug. 23).
The Republican and Democratic parties are both playing the old domestic ideology card, a game that goes back at least to Aristotle in creating a pretense of a separate public realm for men and a private one for women.
The realms are integrated.
Public policies controlled by elite men establish the conditions of our private lives.


4 Are Killed and 15 Hurt in Shootings and Stabbings
Violence in 12 hours over the weekend claimed the lives of four people and left 15 others wounded, 10 of them bystanders, including a 12-year-old boy and a 75-year-old security guard, the police said yesterday.
From about 11 P.M.
Saturday to nearly 11 A.M.
Sunday, two people were fatally shot and 15 wounded in eight shooting incidents throughout the city.
Two others were found stabbed to death.


Toro Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Cable Car Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rebuilding of South Florida Aids Mobile-Home Orders
As residents of southern Florida look to replace, quickly and relatively inexpensively, homes destroyed by Hurricane Andrew, a boom appears to be beginning in the mobile-home industry.
Makers of mobile homes -- including larger ones that are not truly mobile, since they are fabricated in two or three pieces and assembled on the site -- say their plants are running at capacity.
They are working to fill orders not only from mobile-home parks that have been devastated by the disaster, but also from distributors that want to keep their supply intact in anticipation of shortages.
One Maker's Orders Rise 75%
At Fleetwood Enterprises, the nation's largest maker of mobile homes, orders in the last few weeks have risen nearly 75 percent, compared with the period in 1991.


What Retired Can Do In Disaster Relief
To the Editor:
"Mr. Bush Inherits the Wind" (editorial, Sept. 2) scores the Federal Emergency Management Agency for its abysmally slow response to the disaster of Hurricane Andrew.
I question, though, if your recommendation of "stronger staffing" would be the best answer for the next crisis.


Worthington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Seniors Await a Big Breakaway
While Edberg and MICHAEL CHANG were playing their semifinal match in a packed stadium Saturday afternoon, there were roughly 100 fans in the grandstand politely applauding the efforts of HANK PFISTER and PETER FLEMING in the men's seniors final.
Pfister, who won the match, 6-3, 6-4, and the $30,600 champion's purse, thinks bigger crowds and better paydays are ahead for the over-35 set.


Economic Calendar
Below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Retail Sales . . .
Aug.
Consumer Prices . . .
Aug  Wednesday  Industrial Production . . .
Aug.
Business Inventories . . .
July  Thursday  Merchandise Trade . . .
July Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Fairchild Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Park Workers Crack Down On Violations
A year after it was virtually wiped out by budget cuts, New York City's Parks Enforcement Patrol is pursuing a broad new mission to contain the dumping, vandalism and petty crimes that too often spill over from the city's streets into what are meant to be urban oases.
The patrol -- whose 250 members wield nearly all the power of the police -- is for the first time equipped with mace and will soon have nightsticks and bulletproof vests.
The patrol has created special teams of officers and is also working more closely with the city's Police Department.


Linda L. Jacobs, J. B. Kalstrom
Linda Lee Jacobs, the daughter of Janet Jacobs of New York and T. Sinclair Jacobs of Miami, was married yesterday to Jonathan Brett Kalstrom, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Kenneth Kalstrom of Willmar, Minn.
Allen Oleisky, the District Court Judge of Hennepin County in Minneapolis, performed the ceremony at the Summit Manor in St.
Paul.
Ms.
Jacobs, who is 43 years old and is keeping her name, is the communications director for the Dudley Riggs theaters in Minneapolis.
Her father owns Bankers Financial Corporation, a financial consulting company in Miami.
Her mother is a writer and photographer in New York.
The bride is also a stepdaughter of Ted Fine of New York.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Rampaging Crowd Hurts 2 in Bias Attack
In what the authorities are calling a bias attack motivated by hostility toward homosexuals, as many as 35 men attacked and injured two men near a park in Manhattan early yesterday morning, the police said.
The attack occurred just after 1 A.M. in Chelsea at 10th Avenue and West 22d Street near the entrance to Clement Clarke Moore Park, where, neighbors said, homosexuals frequently gather.


Homer Is Disputed, but the Phillies Will Take It
NATIONAL LEAGUE EAST
PHILLIES 6, PIRATES 3 : A home run that didn't look quite right helped Philadelphia beat Pittsburgh yesterday at Veterans Stadium.
With two runners on base and the score tied at 3-3 in the eighth inning, rookie Todd Pratt hit a 2-2 pitch from Bob Patterson (6-3) that appeared to hit the yellow line just below the left-field foul pole.
The ball bounced back onto the field but was ruled a home run.
Left fielder Barry Bonds and Manager Jim Leyland argued for a few minutes that the ball was in play.
The Pirates' loss and the Expos' victory over the Mets last night cut Pittsburgh's lead over Montreal to three games.


Lisa Koppelman, Jason H. Tames
Lisa Koppelman, a daughter of Murray Koppelman of New York and Sarah L. Koppelman of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Jason Harold Tames, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Tames of Huntington, Conn.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein performed the ceremony at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Tames, 33 years old, is a vice president of Eastlake Securities, a New York investment bank founded and headed by her father.
She graduated from Boston University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her mother is a nurse at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.


Taylor Devices Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Southern Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
In a move that should bolster the beleaguered dollar and ease worldwide market tensions, Germany agreed to reduce its high interest rates after Italy decided to devalue the ailing lira by 7 percent against other European currencies.  [ Page A1. ]  The fiercely independent German central bank gave in to pressure to lower rates because of the serious chaos in world currency markets and the threat that its hard-line position posed to European unity.  [ D2. ]
The U.S. and China are scheduled to begin trade talks this week in Beijing amid an escalating war of words that has been aggravated by Washington's decision to sell jet fighters to Taiwan.  [ D1. ]


Helmstar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Wallace Computer Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


No Headline
"My turn to lose." -- ABIMAEL GUZMAN REYNOSO, captured Peruvian guerrilla leader.  [ A1:4. ]


East Side Couple Robbed
A husband and wife returning to their apartment on the East Side of Manhattan early yesterday were confronted by a masked gunman who forced them to open their safe and then fled with an estimated $400,000 in cash and jewelry, the police said.
The couple were not injured.
The robber, wearing a mask and tinted sunglasses, dismantled an alarm and forced his way into the apartment on 58th Street between First Avenue and Sutton Place, the police said.


Culp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


Wagner Trounces Brockton High
Wagner High School of Staten Island, the pre-eminent team in the Public School Athletic League in recent years, scored three times on long passes in the second half to break open the game and defeat New England power Brockton High School, 34-6, this afternoon.
In the first half, Brockton halted the Falcons three times inside the 10 but Wagner led by 6-0 at halftime after quarterback Tom Reali scored from 5 yards out with 5 minutes 25 seconds remaining in the period.


Japan's Slump Imperils Lifetime Employment
As its economic slump continues, Japan's employment situation is worsening, making it more difficult for companies to fulfill their promises of lifetime employment and no layoffs.
The latest sign of this came on Friday when the Japan Iron and Steel Federation, an industry organization, acknowledged that it was preparing to ask the Government to subsidize steelmakers' expenses for idling and retraining workers.


Coach's Timely Present
Tony Pickard didn't know if it was the highlight of Stefan Edberg's career, but he was certain that no coach has ever had a prouder moment.
"It's a nice birthday present for me," said Pickard, after his man outlasted Pete Sampras, 3-6, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2, yesterday to win the United States Open.


Chronicle
The New York book party, given to celebrate the publication of a book and honor its author, has acquired all the trappings of a tribal rite, albeit a sophisticated one.
To be seen rubbing elbows with authors, particularly certain authors, publishers, editors, agents, public relations specialists, is de rigueur; to be recognized as the friend of a best-selling writer bestows literary gilt by association.
What then were people to make of an invitation arriving in the post-Labor Day mail that deliberately concealed the name of the guest of honor at a party tomorrow at the Algonquin Hotel?


Corrections
An obituary headline in some copies yesterday about Frank McKinney, a former Olympic swimmer, misstated his age.
He was 53 years old.
The obituary is reprinted today on page D10 for readers of editions that did not carry it.


World Economies


In a Heated Senate Campaign, More Questions Than Answers
NEW YORK may still be the only state where being branded a moderate is a political smear.
That was merely one of the negatives hurled in this year's Democratic campaign for the United States Senate.
But didn't Bill Clinton's victory herald an ideological shift?


Calgene Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Look, Over There, It's, It's, . . .
There were several sightings of MATS WILANDER at this year's Open.
"I haven't seen him, but I heard he was here for the Becker-Lendl match," said STEFAN EDBERG of his mysterious fellow Swede, who in four years has gone from the world's top-ranked player to just another opponent to a poorly received rock guitarist to semirecluse.


Sketches of the 7 Astronauts Aboard Shuttle Endeavour
Robert L. Gibson  Mission Commander
Captain Gibson, a 45-year-old former Navy fighter pilot, is making his fourth space flight.
He became an astronaut in 1979.


Dance in Review
The Yard  Marymount Manhattan Theater
The Yard, a summer arts colony on Martha's Vineyard, presented its second program of New York premieres on Friday night.
It suggested that the choreographers in residence at the Yard this summer liked to fill dances with mysterious conflicts.
The excitement of the best pieces came from watching how their hidden dramas were eventually brought to light.
But other works were murky from start to finish.
"Night Thoughts" was a deliberately wispy fantasy choreographed by Linda Tarnay in collaboration with her cast: Lisa Bononimi, Ian Butler, Laurie Fields, Virginie Mecene, Paul Mosley, Amanda Thomas and Thomas Warfield.
Events passed across the stage the way thoughts pass through the mind.
Most of these choreographic musings to a taped score by Sergio Cervetti could have been memories of summer.
Dancers played with a toy boat, lifted up a crescent moon, gazed out of a window frame and rolled across the floor like waves.
The images in "Night Thoughts" were as evanescent as those in dreams.


Computer Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Miniature Cars Whir By at the Speed of a Bicycle
Normally desolate on Sundays, this city's downtown streets were humming this afternoon with what sounded like a large chorus of lawnmowers, as dozens of brightly painted, pint-sized cars whooshed along at the speed of -- well, a bicycle.
"I drive a Ferrari, but with these cars, you feel every bump in the road, so it's a lot of thrills," said Nick Wolff, a Century 21 Realtor, explaining his decision to spend the day with more than 140 other mostly amateur drivers in the Mini Grand Prix, a benefit for the Arthritis Foundation and the first such race in the New York area.
"Anyway, I'm a kid at heart."


Ms. Sommers, Ronald Naiditch
Kathleen Moylan Sommers, the daughter of Mary Anne Sommers Reilly of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Edward J. Moylan of Massapequa, L.I., was married yesterday to Ronald Jay Naiditch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred C. Naiditch of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Ira S. Youdovin performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Naiditch, a mezzo-soprano, graduated from the Manhattan School of Music and received a master's degree in vocal performance from the New England Conservatory of Music.
Her mother is a vice president in the women's magazine division of The New York Times Company's Magazine Group.
Her father retired as a New York City police officer.
Her stepfather, Robert F. Reilly, is an investor in New York.


Dividend Meetings


Gottschalks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Hip-Hop Dances to the Newsstands
Convinced that hip-hop music is giving rise to the same kind of pervasive culture that rock-and-roll did a generation ago, Time Warner Inc. and the musician Quincy Jones are starting a funky new magazine called Vibe.
The test issue goes on sale today.
"All of a sudden, you look up and you see a whole new culture that has become the culture," said Mr.
Jones, who has produced concerts, record albums, videos, films and television programs but has never before published a magazine.


E&amp;B Marine Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


In Britain, Debate on European Unity Gets Louder
With French voters a week away from a crucial referendum on the treaty on European union, the debate in Britain over closer economic and political cooperation in Europe is sharpening as well.
In recent days, a growing number of members of both the Conservative and Labor Parties have said British voters should have the right to decide for themselves -- in a nationwide vote like France's -- whether Britain endorses the treaty.
The treaty was agreed to by European leaders last December in Maastricht, the Netherlands.


We Need Weighted Voting System in Primaries
To the Editor:
The "agonizing choice" for New York State women between Geraldine A. Ferraro and Elizabeth Holtzman in the Democratic Party primary race for Senator that you describe in an Aug. 30 article is not limited to feminists.
The two men in the race, Robert Abrams and Al Sharpton, are no less affected by the restriction of a voting system that prevents voting for both of them -- or any combination of men and women.


Economy and the Family Are the Same Subject; Mrs. Quayle as Feminist
To the Editor:
As a pro-choice, feminist libertarian-conservative, I was disturbed by the extent to which the Republican National Convention in Houston was dominated by the religious far right.
But I was also shocked by the distortions in the news coverage of the convention.
While some of the attacks on Hillary Clinton exploited invidious stereotypes of career women, to charge that the convention's message to women was that they belong at home is blatantly untrue.


Debate and a Last-Minute Flurry Enliven New York's Senate Race
The race for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York edged toward a close yesterday in a flurry of street stumping, television commercials and newspaper endorsements, and a final debate among the four candidates, whose often rancorous exchanges summed up the themes of a bitter campaign.
Polls have shown a tight contest between former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro and State Attorney General Robert Abrams, but politicians warned that the vagaries of voter turnout had left the race extremely volatile, in a primary that may well draw less than one-quarter of the state's registered Democrats to the polls tomorrow.


Free Trade Batters Mexico's Stocks
After months in which investors in Mexican equities waited hopefully for a North American Free Trade Agreement, the announcement of an accord has brought only tougher times to the beleaguered Mexico City stock market.
With Mexican domestic interest rates rising and expectations for the economy's growth falling, the exchange fell 7.1 percent, or nearly 100 points, last week to its lowest level since September of last year.
It was the second-worst week of the year for the market -- the Bolsa de Valores -- and the fifth straight to register a decline.
Since June, values on the Bolsa have fallen 32 percent.


34-0 Dallas, but Then Came the Wild Rest
They trooped into separate locker rooms at halftime today, old rivals knowing that this game wouldn't be, couldn't be, as simple as the scoreboard suggested: Dallas 27, Giants 0.
Cowboys Coach Jimmy Johnson, a man with a perpetual worried look, called over his offensive coordinator, Norv Turner, and told him, "Let's not go conservative."


It Seems Like Old Times as Kelly and Young Take to the Air
When they were younger and there used to be something called the United States Football League, Jim Kelly and Steve Young had these kinds of days almost routinely.
But this was a long way from the Houston Gamblers and the Los Angeles Express.
Kelly and Young passed and passed into the fading afternoon sun today.
Kelly threw for 403 yards and three touchdowns.
Young had 449 yards and three more touchdowns.
But at the end of the day, a missed field goal by the 49ers' Mike Cofer prevented overtime and allowed the Buffalo Bills to hold on to a 34-31 victory over San Francisco at Candlestick Park.


Jets Battered and Bruised, With Nothing to Show for It
The Jets' defense was gutted by a running back named Barry -- no, not that Barry -- who gave the unit, No. 1 against the run in the American Football Conference last season, its own identity crisis.
The Jets' offense, slammed by a Steeler defense fueled by pure adrenaline, committed six turnovers and never left the chute.
And the Jets' players and coaches, dazed by a numbing 27-10 loss to Pittsburgh at Three Rivers Stadium this afternoon, stood amidst the rubble wondering what had happened to a season that two weeks ago held so much promise.


'New' Clios Face a Test Of Credibility
THERE was New Coke. But consumers preferred the classic Coke.
There was "The New Odd Couple." But viewers preferred the original "Odd Couple."


Abroad at Home; The Two Americas
For 200 years America has been a country extraordinarily tolerant of diversity, one where people can think and speak and worship as they wish.
But it has also been a country gripped periodically by hatred of religious, racial and political groups.
Religious intolerance flared in the Know Nothings, the anti-Catholic movement of the mid-19th century.
The Ku Klux Klan roused mobs against Catholics as well as blacks, with murderous effect well into this century.


Bradford Bachrach, 81, Head of Portrait Studios
Bradford K. Bachrach, the retired president of Bachrach Photographers, the portrait studio chain, died on Thursday at his home in Wellesley, Mass.
He was 81 years old.
He died in his sleep, apparently of natural causes, his family said.


MILITARY FLIES AID TO RAVAGED ISLAND
Skimming low over the calm blue Pacific and over acres of roofless houses and broken palm trees, military C-130 relief flights landed in a daylong stream today on the lush tropical island of Kauai, forming the only link to the outside world for residents devastated by Hurricane Iniki on Friday.
Loaded with generators and communications equipment as well as military rations and bottled water, the relief flights brought the essentials of daily life to 55,000 residents and thousands of stranded tourists.
And today commercial airlines began ferrying tourists off the island.


Dill, Not Floyd, Tops Seniors
Playing in part for the honor of the Senior PGA Tour, but mostly to fulfill a careerlong dream, Terry Dill outplayed the rookie senior Raymond Floyd and several other established stars to win the Bank One Senior Golf Classic today in wire-to-wire fashion.
It was the 53-year-old Dill's first official victory in a professional career that began in 1962 on the regular PGA Tour, was interrupted by an 11-year stint as a lawyer and was restarted three years ago on the Senior Tour.


Bridge
If two suits are equally strong, one would assume that an eight-card fit would be a more successful choice than a seven-card.
By a quirk of the fates, the converse was true on the diagramed deal from the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Pasadena, Calif., in March.
North and South were David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., who were on their way to the quarterfinal as members of the Cliff Russell team.
They reached four hearts, with a 6-2 fit, only to discover that this contract was in jeopardy while four spades, with a 6-1 fit, would have been easy.


Fischer Wins Game 8 After Both He and Spassky Miss a Subtlety
Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky both misanalyzed a tortuous position yesterday before Fischer powerfully fought his way through to victory in Game 8 of their exhibition match in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
Fischer now leads with three victories to Spassky's two.
In leaping into what he thought was the decisive sortie of the game, Fischer had overlooked a fiendish resource that would have yielded all the winning chances to his opponent.
But in the heat of battle, Spassky missed the vital riposte that would have saved the day for him.
And then Fischer very nicely mowed down Spassky's second-rate move.


On Day of Big Names, It's Salt Lake Who Puts Deposit in Bank
On a strange and demanding day for star horses making transitions or comebacks, A.P.
Indy ran fifth at Toronto yesterday in his first race in three months and Fly So Free ran fourth at Belmont Park in his first race as a sprinter.
At both tracks, the odds and the rankings took a beating.
In Canada, 3-year-old stars like A.P.
Indy, Technology and Alydeed all ran out of the money in the Molson Million while the long shot Benburb was scoring a mighty upset.
And at Belmont, the sprinter Salt Lake, fourth in the betting, scored an upset of his own by winning the Fall Highweight Handicap.


Peter G. Treves, 77, Financier, Broker And Writer on Italy
Peter G. Treves, who fled his native Italy in the 1930's to escape Fascism and became a financier, economist, publisher and author in America, died on Friday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Phoenix, where he was attending a business conference.
He was 77 years old and lived in Palm Beach, Fla.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


One for the Family Album


Rangers Open With Peace Signs
Ranger training camp opened today with good tidings of peace and prosperity.
Mark Messier announced a truce with Coach Roger Neilson, and Brian Leetch became the richest defenseman in hockey history with a seven-year, $18 million contract.
Leetch's pact was remarkable for its length and its intricacies.
The 24-year-old left-handed Leetch, winner of last season's Norris Trophy as the National Hockey League's best defenseman, could earn even more than the $18 million total if salaries around the league escalate and if he continues to perform at the top of his game.


Review/Rock; Bit of Seriousness Creeps In, but Party Goes On
"You better get the real picture," Fred Schneider sang as the B-52's began their set here tonight at the Garden State Arts Center.
"Tell it like it T-I-S." That might promise a jarring earnestness from one of rock's great good-time bands, but the B-52's didn't preach.
Now and then, a lyric would allude to environmental or social issues, and after the show, concertgoers were handed a four-postcard packet (on recycled paper), addressed to "fellow Earth citizens" from the B-52's, with information from the Sierra Club, the AIDS Resource Center and Planned Parenthood.
But while the B-52's were onstage, the dance beat never flagged.
The B-52's got started in 1977 in Athens, Ga., tossing together danceable riffs, junk-culture allusions -- a B-52 was a bouffant hairdo -- and melodies chant-sung by Mr.
Schneider and belted back to him by Kate Pierson and Cindy Wilson.
It was a campy lounge act reimagined with rock propulsion and punk irony.
Through the early 1980's the B-52's were the party music of choice in innumerable college dorms, and by the late 1980's, it was clear that the B-52's had anticipated MTV's brightly colored, mockingly affectionate, retro-sci-fi esthetic.
In 1989 the B-52's album "Cosmic Thing" (Reprise) zoomed into the Top 10, carried by the single "Love Shack," about a hedonistic hideaway.


New York's School Board Setting Record for Feuding
After waiting almost two hours for a recent Board of Education meeting to begin, Kym Vanderbilt finally gave up and walked out.
Ms.
Vanderbilt, who heads the Public Education Association's "Eye on the Board" project, said later that her patience had long been exhausted by the disorganization and discord that many believe have paralyzed the body that sets policy for the city's one million public school students.


U.S. OPEN '92: Sports of The Times; Marathon Dancing In Flushing Meadows
OUR angst may be ill-directed, but for some bizarre reason, some of us fret about tennis players being forced to play two days in a row.
The way I see it, most of these players are human beings.
They get tired.
They get colds.
They get traveler's ailments, just like normal folks.
But unlike the rest of us, they have to jump around in their shorts and try to hit a tennis ball in front of millions of people.


Canal Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Rivals Hope Redistricting Cuts Bill Green's Edge
Four Democratic candidates are vying for the right to challenge Bill Green, the Republican Congressman who for 14 years has kept his grip on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, the area known as the Silk Stocking district.
Mr.
Green has no challengers in his party's primary this year, but the Democratic primary, and the new lines that have thrown sections of Queens and Brooklyn into what is now the 14th District, make the outcome of the general election this November less certain than in the past.


Punting Corps Fails Giants
Sean Landeta had punted 252 times since facing the Saints in 1987.
He had played in 74 games over those five years, and no one had been able to block one of his punts since New Orleans did.
But the Giants' punting operation broke down twice today.
Landeta first faced the Cowboys' charge early in the first quarter.
Ken Norton Jr., son of the former heavyweight boxing champion, blocked that punt, and Robert Williams turned it into Dallas's second touchdown.
Then, later in the same period, Kenneth Gant deflected Landeta's second punt, putting the Cowboys in position for a field goal.


Univa Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 8


Contest for Seat in House Centers on Familiar Name
Three candidates are running for the Republican nomination in the Fourth Congressional District here but much of the debate is swirling around a man whose name does not appear on the ballot: the former Nassau County Republican chairman, Joseph M. Margiotta.
At stake is not just the nomination but quite possibly the leadership of the Nassau County Republican party, which has been shaken by a string of recent Democratic victories after a long period of Republican dominance.
While two of the candidates scrape for votes amid charges of betrayal involving Mr.
Margiotta and a former protege, the third man on the ballot hopes that he will be the beneficiary of the discord.


Accounts
*
Sixth Avenue Electronics, Springfield, N.J., to Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, to create an image campaign for the electronics retailer, previously handled in-house.
Korey, Kay was awarded the account, with billings estimated to exceed $5 million, without a review. *
First Colony Coffee and Tea Co., Norfolk, Va., to Earle Palmer Brown Richmond, to handle its advertising and public relations accounts previously at Finnegan &amp; Agee, Richmond.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


It Rained Pennies For Stores
Normally in these days after the big Labor Day weekend, the back room of Melissa Serafin's gift shop here would still be half-full of seashells, mermaid thermometers and other flotsam of the seaside commercial season.
But to hear her tell it, the tourists who braved this summer's rainy days and blustery weekends spent the day combing the shops instead of the sodden beach.
"We had one of the best years ever," she said. "I'm empty."


Rightist Violence Continues in Germany


Chronicle
For SLAVA ZAITSEV, the cataclysmic changes in the political and economic structure of the former Soviet Union drastically changed the nature of his fashion business and enabled him to show his serious art work as well.
Once Mr.
Zaitsev, who is 54 years old, was the only Soviet couturier permitted by the Government to put his name on his designs, and he dressed RAISA GORBACHEV.
Now she is no longer a customer, but JANE FONDA is.


Testaverde And Bucs Ride High
Buccaneers 31, Packers 3
TAMPA, Fla., Sept. 13 (AP) -- Vinny Testaverde shrugged off the flu to play the game of his career, leading Tampa Bay over the Green Bay Packers, 31-3, today for the Buccaneers' first 2-0 start in 12 years.
The often-criticized quarterback became the Bucs' career passing leader while completing 22 of 25 attempts for 363 yards and two touchdowns.
He also scored on a 2-yard run, hitting Adrian White at the goal line and spiking the ball in the safety's face after scoring.


Huffman Koos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bias Is Investigated In Damage to House Rented to Blacks
In an incident being investigated by the police as a bias crime, a house in a predominantly white Brooklyn neighborhood that had been rented to a black couple was vandalized over the weekend, the police said last night.
The police would not identify the couple, who had not yet moved into the small two-story house at 14 Noel Avenue in the quiet residential neighborhood of Gerritsen Beach.
But the city's Human Rights Commissioner, Dennis deLeon, identified them as Mary Mathews and Dennis Wadley.


QMC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


U.S., Mindful of Setbacks in Past, Offers Guarded Praise of Capture
Long frustrated in its efforts to develop an effective policy toward Peru, the Bush Administration responded today to the capture of the rebel leader Abimael Guzman Reynoso with a mixture of satisfaction and caution.
Some officials compared the arrest of the Shining Path leader with the capture of Che Guevara, the Marxist revolutionary who was tracked down and executed in Bolivia in 1967.
They expressed hope that Mr.
Guzman's capture would turn the tide in the losing war against the Peruvian rebels and the drug traffickers who finance them.


Anneke Rifkin and Noah Perlman
Anneke Rachel Rifkin, a daughter of Dr.
Daniel B. Rifkin and Miki Reuchlin Landsberger, both of New York, was married yesterday in West Stockbridge, Mass., to Noah Benjamin Perlman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Itzhak Perlman of New York.
Rabbi Stanley M. Davids officiated at the country home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Dr.
Frank Landsberger.
Mrs.
Perlman, 22 years old, is the assistant director of the Merrin Gallery, an art gallery, and the Garden Antiquary, a garden ornament store, both in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University.
Her father is a professor of cell biology at the New York University Medical Center.
Her mother is the associate director of the Brookdale Center for Molecular Biology at Mount Sinai Hospital and an associate professor of molecular biology at the Mount Sinai Medical School in Manhattan.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Dr.
Ruth Crowe Rifkin of New York.


Stifel Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


For Once, Forget Ratings; Let's Play Ball!
Baseball has not been very good to television in the last few years, but that does not mean television executives no longer have a romance with the game.
Daniel B. Burke, the president and chief executive of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., wants to buy a baseball team.
He wants to bring minor-league baseball back to Maine, where he maintains a summer home.


Sharon Seiler, Charles Spielholz
Dr.
Sharon Rachel Seiler, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Seiler of Great Neck, L.I., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Charles Spielholz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Terry Spielholz of Medford, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.
Dr.
Seiler is 31 years old and is keeping her name.
She and her husband are research fellows in molecular biology at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and received a doctorate in biology from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is an associate professor of clinical obstetrics and gynecology at the New York University Medical School.


Treasury To Auction Only Bills
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regularly scheduled auction of new three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.91 percent, and for the six-month bill, 2.93 percent.


Camacho Takes a Pounding From Chavez's Lightning Hits
From the start of his fight Saturday night with Hector Camacho, which ended with him winning a lopsided 12-round decision, Julio Cesar Chavez displayed a left hook to the body that discouraged escapist intentions.
The bludgeoning left did not turn the dancing Camacho into a more stationary figure right away.
But as Chavez constantly walked forward to head off Camacho's circling evasions, burying that hook into Camacho's ribs and abdomen, each punch would cause the red-and-blue streamers that constituted the fringe on Camacho's gaudy trunks to ripple.


Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc.  reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 1


Frank McKinney, Former Olympian And a Banker, 53
Frank E. McKinney Jr., the former Indiana University swimming champion who won an Olympic gold medal and shared six world backstroke records in the 1950's and 60's before becoming a leading banker in Indiana, was killed Friday in the collision of two small planes near Indianapolis.
He was 53 years old and had retired in 1990 as chairman of Bank One Indiana and as president of its Ohio-based parent company, Banc One.


Value Merchants Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15


A Fine-Tuned Cable Bill
The folks who bring you cable television have launched a furious campaign to scuttle legislation that would re-regulate their industry.
The House and Senate have proposed giving authorities the right to reduce monthly cable charges.
But the cable operators say the legislation would have the opposite effect, driving prices up by perhaps $50 a year, by imposing onerous regulations.
The cable operators have exaggerated the costs and conducted a misleading advertising campaign to scare customers.
They once had a point: The House and Senate versions were heavy-handed and needlessly costly.
But then conferees pruned much of the excess.
What's emerged is a responsible bill, up for vote this week, that would rein in egregious price hikes for basic service and open up the industry to potential competitors.


Upstate Voters Wooed In Senate Campaign
With the media, the money and most Democratic voters concentrated in the New York metropolitan region, the primary campaign for the party's United States Senate nomination has been largely a downstate affair.
But with the race tightening, a crucial battleground has suddenly emerged to the north, where upstate communities are expected to account for as much as a third of the total Democratic turnout in Tuesday's vote.
A variety of Democratic leaders expect that former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, with an appeal to blue-collar, ethnic voters and to an electorate that is somewhat more conservative than its New York metropolitan counterpart, is likely to win the most votes upstate.


Redskins Overcome Tight Throats
The Redskins admitted that they were pinned against the wall by the Dallas Cowboys last Monday night and that a victory this afternoon against the Atlanta Falcons was crucial if they were to maintain respect and confidence.
So, Washington held the Falcons to seven first downs (none rushing), got 24 first downs and controlled the ball for nearly 40 minutes.
Despite that type of domination, the Redskins still needed two late goal-line stands and physical running on the inside by Ricky Ervins in the final 3:41 to preserve a 24-17 victory before 54,343 fans at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.


Game Giants Nearly Scale Mountain in Meadowlands
The bottom line is that the Giants lost this afternoon.
The astounding thing is how they lost.
They spotted the Dallas Cowboys a 34-0 lead.
Then they rebounded furiously with four touchdowns in four possessions in a little more than 17 minutes.
Then, after failing to move the ball on a fifth drive, they missed one last chance when the Cowboys completed a third-down pass with 1 minutes 40 seconds to go, allowing Dallas to run out the clock.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats
The airplane had just taken off from Raleigh-Durham airport on its way back to Washington.
As the aircraft climbed at a steep angle, Senator Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate with the reputation of a button-down stick in the mud, jumped from his seat, stood in a small rubber tub and whooshed down the middle of the plane in what is known on the campaign trail as "aisle surfing."
The night before the plane ride, Mr.
Gore was startled on the "Larry King Live" show when a woman caller from Asheville, N.C., told the Tennessee Senator, "I know I probably shouldn't say this, but I think you're a very handsome man."


Thai Anti-Military Parties Heading for Slim Majority
Leaders of four political parties opposed to military meddling in Thai politics expressed confidence today that they could form a coalition Government after reviewing returns from Sunday's voting, which was seen as a referendum on Thailand's fragile democracy.
Overshadowing all other issues in the general election was the debate over street clashes in Bangkok in May, in which soldiers gunned down scores of democracy demonstrators who were demanding the resignation of a nonelected, military-backed Prime Minister.


California's Water Wars
On the verge of a seventh consecutive year of drought, California needs a wet winter nearly as much as a lift in its economy.
It also needs to shed an archaic water policy.
California is closer to water policy reforms than ever, thanks largely to Senator Bill Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat.
He proposes creating a free market for water in which price, not policy, would determine how much would be used on farms and how much in cities.


Edberg Repeats as U.S. Open Champion


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH
In a speech to a rally at Yorba Regional Park, Anaheim, Calif., yesterday.
"My agenda keeps faith with the crusade we called the Reagan Revolution. It will decrease what Government must do, and increase what individuals may do. It shows what the differences are in the 1992 election. Two candidate. Two philosophies. Two agendas. A Grand Canyon of a divide.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Manny Alexander, shortstop, from Rochester of the International League.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Recalled Phil Plantier, outfielder; Daryl Irvine and Scott Taylor, pitchers; John Flaherty, catcher, and Steve Lyons, outfielder, from Pawtucket of the International League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Alan Embree, pitcher, from Canton-Akron of the Eastern League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Activated Erik Hanson, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Mike Jeffcoat, pitcher, from the 60-day disabled list.
Activated Terry Mathews, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Football  National Football League  HOUSTON OILERS -- Waived Richard Johnson, cornerback.
Signed William Fuller, defensive end.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Placed Kimble Anders, running back, on injured reserve.
Activated Darrell Malone, cornerback, from the practice squad.


NHD Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


German Concession; The Bundesbank Bows to Pressure In Lowering Its High Interest Rates
Germany's fiercely independent central bank is famous for staring down outsiders when they urge it to reduce its painfully high interest rates.
But with today's announcement that it would cut rates, the Bundesbank blinked.
The pressures were too great.
World currency markets were in chaos as the dollar slid to record lows against the German mark, and several European currencies withered in the face of the mark's strength.
At the same time, economic growth was evaporating in Germany and Europe in general because of the Bundesbank's stratospheric rates -- which were intended to help reduce Germany's inflation but at the same time undermined growth by discouraging companies from borrowing and investing.


JG Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Israel Criticizes, Though Mildly, U.S. Plan to Sell F-15's to Saudis
The Israeli Government today criticized the United States decision to sell 72 F-15 fighter jets to Saudi Arabia.
But its statement was apparently intended more to remind President Bush of his promise to preserve Israel's military superiority over its Arab neighbors than to prevent the transfer of the planes to the Saudis.
"The Government of Israel objects to the sale of weapons, and certainly sophisticated weaponry, to an Arab country at war with Israel," the Cabinet said in a statement.


Anthony Perkins, Star of 'Psycho' And All Its Sequels, Is Dead at 60
Anthony Perkins, the actor who starred in dozens of films and plays but was best known for his role as Norman Bates, the eerily soft-spoken psychopath in Alfred Hitchcock's classic thriller "Psycho," died on Saturday afternoon at his home in Hollywood.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Perkins died of AIDS, Leslee Dart, a press agent who said she was speaking for the family, reported on Saturday night.


Bettina Papoulas, Edward B. Bierly
Bettina Elizabeth Papoulas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Papoulas of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday on Nantucket Island, Mass., to Edward Brock Bierly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Bierly of Lorton, Va.
The Rev.
Edward B. Anderson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Wauwinet Hotel.
Mrs.
Bierly, 32 years old, designs teddy bears for the North American Bear Company in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is a professor of civil engineering at City College of New York.
Her mother, Sally Papoulas, is a senior drafter at ERM-Northeast, an environmental resources management company in Woodbury, L.I.


Jennifer Match, David Birnbaum
Jennifer Lili Match, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin J. Match of Kings Point, L.I., was married yesterday in Old Westbury, L.I., to David Birnbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules A. Birnbaum of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Laurence A. Kotok performed the ceremony at the De Seversky Conference Center.
Ms.
Match, who is keeping her name, is an assistant treasurer of the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the International Casein Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Ines L. Match, is a high-school teacher in Great Neck.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
American Business Information Inc., 2.3 million common shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
American Studios Inc., Charlotte, N.C., an initial public offering of three million common shares.
Robinson-Humphrey Co.


Alese Rubinroit, Bruce F. Garner
Alese Lori Rubinroit, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Rubinroit of North Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday in Lawrence, L.I., to Dr.
Bruce Frederick Garner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Garner of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Norman Strisower performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Sholom.
Mrs.
Garner is an associate at the New York law firm of Schiavetti, DeVito, Begos &amp; Nicholson.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a certified public accountant in New York.


Istanbul Journal; The Sephardim Give Thanks for 500 Good Years
For years it was the wisdom among Istanbul's Sephardic Jews that their status as a small minority in a largely Muslim land dictated low profiles and unobtrusive living.
This year, as the Jews here observe the 500th anniversary of their forebears' expulsion from Spain in 1492, the reticence is gone.


Fairchild Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Karen R. Loeb and John D. Lifford
Karen Ruth Loeb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter F. Loeb of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to John David Lifford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Lifford of Boston.
Rabbi Robert A. Rothman performed the ceremony at the Blantyre Estate in Lenox, Mass.
Mrs.
Lifford, 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from New York University and is a medical student at Harvard University.
Her father is the president and her mother, Phyllis Loeb, the vice president of Loeb Associates, a financial consulting firm in New York.


METRO DIGEST
A FINAL BITTER PUSH IN SENATE RACE
The campaign for the Democratic Senate nomination in New York neared its end as the four contenders worked the streets, broadcast television commercials and sparred in a last, acid debate before the primary tomorrow.
Though the race appears to be tight between former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro and State Attorney General Robert Abrams, politicians warned that the vagaries of voter turnout could leave the contest extremely volatile.
In the debate, Ms.
Ferraro, Mr.
Abrams, Elizabeth Holtzman, the City Comptroller, and the Rev.
Al Sharpton each each made pointed appeals for the right to challenge the two-term Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato, who spent the day kicking off his own general election campaign.
A1.
In a race of ethics questions, an ethics scorecard on the four candidates.
B5.
UPSTATE VOTERS PLAY A CRUCIAL ROLE


Surviving Long-Distance Affairs
MONICA SELES, the women's champion, found it difficult to believe that Edberg could have played a record 5 hours 26 minutes Saturday, the day after he concluded his quarterfinal and the day before he would play for (and win) the men's title.
Seles won her seven Open matches in a total of 7 hours 11 minutes -- 13 hours 17 minutes less than Chang took to play six matches.


Essay
On the eve of the crucial 14th Party Congress in Beijing, when Chinese reformers behind Deng Xiaoping need all the help they can to wrest control from the totalitarians, the Bush Administration's China policy has disintegrated.
I happen to think it was a bad policy, but at least it was a policy.
Throughout his term, President Bush -- claiming expertise based on his experience as our Ambassador to the People's Republic -- has refused to put pressure on China to couple economic and political freedom.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Vice President; Quayle Contends Homosexuality Is a Matter of Choice, Not Biology
Sounding the conservative themes that were paramount at the Republican National Convention, Vice President Dan Quayle said today that homosexuality was most often a personal choice and not determined by biology, and that it was "a wrong choice".
Appearing on the ABC News program "This Week," Mr.
Quayle touched on subjects that included the Republican stance on abortion and homosexual rights and aid for hurricane victims in Florida and Hawaii.
He reiterated that President Bush would veto, as promised, appropriation bills that exceed the Administration's budget requests.


Fugitive Leader of Maoist Rebels Is Captured by the Police in Peru
In a stunning blow to the guerrilla insurrection that has paralyzed much of Peru and shaken its Government, the police here have captured the movement's leader, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, after a 12-year manhunt.
The capture of Mr.
Guzman on Saturday night is seen as Peru's greatest victory in a war that has cost 25,000 lives and an estimated $22 billion in damage.


Economy and the Family Are the Same Subject; Bess Truman, 'the Boss'
To the Editor:
With the Republicans bashing Hillary Clinton because of her willingness to advise and openly stand shoulder to shoulder with Gov.
Bill Clinton, rather than stay home and bake cookies, and with President Bush ready to invoke memories of Harry S. Truman in his re-election speeches, I have to ask myself: What about Bess Wallace Truman, who was an active part of her husband's political career?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  INTEREST RATES AND LIRA DOWN
Just a week before the French referendum on the European union treaty, Germany announced it would lower interest rates and Italy devalued the lira.
The reaction was a sigh heard 'round the world.
A1  SHADOW ON THE SHINING PATH
The godhead of the Shining Path rebels, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, eluded police for 12 years.
Now, he and several of his lieutenants are in state custody, and Peru is relishing what the Government considers its greatest victory in the violent struggle with the Marxist guerrillas.
A1


Picking Names Of a Hurricane
Camille and Hugo are in the Hurricane Hall of Infamy, and perhaps Andrew and Iniki will join them, meteorologists say.
The World Meteorological Organization of the United Nations issues names every year for hurricanes -- or typhoons, for the storms that originate west of the international dateline -- listed alphabetically and alternating between male and female names.
The lists run on a six-year cycle, said Llyle Barker, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service in Miami.


Too Soon to Extol Africa for Wisdom
To the Editor:
"The Wisdom of Africa" (editorial, Sept. 3) extols African regimes as examples for the rest of us: they have kept their colonial borders intact through the more than 30 years since empire.
Eastern Europe, on the other hand, has in the less than three years since the fall of the Berlin Wall atomized, and it continues to do so.
You recommend that we should learn of the wisdom of African ways.


Out of Space, Dutch State Dumps Its Non-Masters
Considering its long love affair with painting, the Netherlands is undertaking an unusual task: It is trying to give away 215,000 works of art.
The problem is, most are not the works of Dutch masters, and not everyone wants them.


Cunningham Paces Eagles
Eagles 31, Cardinals 14
TEMPE, Ariz., Sept. 13 (AP) -- Randall Cunningham threw two touchdown passes in the first half and hit Fred Barnett with a 71-yarder to break open the game in the third quarter as the Philadelphia Eagles beat the Phoenix Cardinals, 31-14, tonight.
Barnett, whose 17-yard grab gave the Eagles a 10-0 lead early in the second quarter, had eight catches for a career-high 193 yards.
The Eagles also benefited from the rushing of Herschel Walker, who had his second straight 100-yard game for the first time since 1987.
He finished with 115 yards in 28 carries after wearing down the clock in the fourth quarter with six straight carries on his team's first possession of the period.


Becker Milk Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


New No. 12 In World's Airlines
The move toward building big global airlines continued last week with the announcement that Canadian Airlines had accepted a merger offer from Air Canada.
The merger, combining Canada's two largest carriers, will create the world's 12th-largest international airline.
Both carriers, which have had heavy losses partly because their rivalry brought deep fare cuts, have extensive international routes.
Both are already strong in European markets like London and Paris, with Canadian Airlines particularly strong in East Asia and Japan.


Barnes &amp; Noble reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Review/Television; The Adventures of Geraldo Rivera
Geraldo Provoked! Geraldo
Strikes Back!
Geraldo on Top!
Geraldo Busted!
Geraldo Booked!
Geraldo Bailed Out!
Geraldo Cleared!
Geraldo Tells All!
If you haven't heard enough of Geraldo Rivera's latest accomplishment, don't despair.
Details are available today on the premiere of another season of "Geraldo," the talk show that makes other talk shows seem sensible.
The ostensible subject is a gathering of a ragtag bunch of Nazis, Ku Kluxers and skinheads a few weeks ago in Janesville, Wis., where Mr.
Rivera was prodded in camera range by a neo-Nazi named John R. McLaughlin, and retaliated.


Brands Still Easier to Buy Than Create
Gillette. Bacardi. Nabisco. Parker Pen. Martini &amp; Rossi. Stella D'Oro.
After sputtering for almost two years, merger and acquisition activity suddenly picked up in the last two weeks, and the traffic was heavy with well-known brand names.


Primary Day: What to Do
New York and Connecticut will have primary elections tomorrow, with races for the United States Senate, House of Representatives, State Legislature and other offices.
To cast a ballot in a party primary, a voter must be registered and enrolled in that party.
Polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Orange, Ulster and Erie Counties, and from noon to 9 P.M. elsewhere in the state.


Review/Television: Hearts Afire; Of Love and Politics, Left and Right
Creator of "Designing Women" and "Evening Shade," not to mention prominent consultant to Bill Clinton, Linda Bloodworth-Thomason is sticking with CBS but shifting her formidable focus to Washington in "Hearts Afire," which is to have a special one-hour premiere at 8 o'clock tonight.
There's great potential here but, for the moment, Dan Quayle needn't fret.
This is no "Murphy Brown," at least not yet.
What's served up in "Hearts Afire," its roots in sitcom tugs of war going back to "All in the Family," is the artful mating of a sort of conservative with a sort of liberal.
On the right, there's John Hartman (John Ritter), political aide to a Southern Senator, Strobe Smithers (George Gaynes), the kind of rascal who nowadays intones that maybe it's "time for a little trickle-down humanity." Recently divorced and caring for two very precocious young sons, John tries to cope reasonably with being mugged on a street near his home and the rumor that his former wife is having an affair with another woman.


Enid L. Lotstein, Randall C. Ringer
Enid Leah Lotstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Lotstein of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in New York to Randall Clinton Ringer, the son of Richard S. Ringer of Somerset, N.J., and Mildred Walk of Florham Park, N.J.
Rabbi Edward Feld performed the ceremony at the Henry Lindenbaum Jewish Community Center.
Mrs.
Ringer, 32 years old, is a program director at Executive Enterprises, a management information company in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received master's and doctoral degrees in geography from Rutgers University.
Her father retired as a lieutenant colonel in the Air Force.
Her mother, Florence Lotstein, also retired, owned a rare-book shop in Lambertville, N.J.


Morgan Stanley Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Official of I.M.F. Urges More Loans for Russia
A senior International Monetary Fund official says Russia will need about the same amount of foreign aid next year -- $18 billion -- that it is scheduled to receive this year to assist its traumatic transition to a market economy.
In a news briefing on Friday that was embargoed for release until Monday, the official, who insisted on anonymity, said he hoped the fund would negotiate a new aid package with Russia before January under which Russia would qualify for $3 billion more in I.M.F. loans.


Lisa Bernstein and Daniel Dubno
Lisa Ann Bernstein, a daughter of Jack and Barbara Bernstein of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Daniel Noam Dubno, a son of Herbert and Phyllis Dubno of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Daniel Grossman performed the ceremony at the American BoyChoir School.
Mrs.
Dubno, 27 years old, is the associate director of publicity and promotion at the Workman Publishing Company in New York.
She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University.
Her father is of counsel to the Philadelphia law firm of Mannino, Walsh &amp; Griffith.
Her mother, Barbara Bernstein, is the branch manager of Temps America in Philadelphia.


New England Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Vestro Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Richard Steinman, 47, Magazine Executive
Richard H. Steinman, the chief financial officer of The New York Times Women's Magazines Division, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Steinman worked for the Times for more than a decade.
He started as assistant controller of parent New York Times Company and became controller of its Family Circle magazine and later treasurer and financial vice president of the magazine.
As the Times's women's magazines expanded to 18 publications, he was promoted to chief financial officer.


Trak Auto Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Crown Books reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Blow to Rebels in Peru: An Elusive Aura Is Lost
A former philosophy professor with a bad case of psoriasis, who was last seen by the public in a videotaped drunken "Zorba the Greek" dance, Abimael Guzman Reynoso does not cut the dashing revolutionary image of Che Guevara or the young Fidel Castro.
But after capturing the Shining Path leader Saturday night, the Peruvian police have in custody the most important guerrilla leader in Latin American, and perhaps the most potent of the remaining Communist revolutionary leaders of the late 20th century.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; Clinton Aides Try to Pressure Bush on Format
In a bid to increase the pressure on the Bush campaign to agree to a format for Presidential debates, the Clinton campaign today said Mickey Kantor, the campaign chairman, would attend a meeting with the debate commission staff later this week regardless of whether Robert M. Teeter, his counterpart in the Bush camp, shows up.
Yet, simultaneously, officials of the Clinton campaign, who have been vociferous in pointing out that the Bush campaign did not even try to discuss the issue, all but rejected the possibility of entering direct negotiations.


Editorial Notebook; Japan's Barren Diplomacy
Japan and Russia are letting four barren islands stand in the way of much-needed aid for Russian reform and a relaxation of tensions in Northeast Asia.
The islands in the Kurile chain, just north of Hokkaido, were snatched by Stalin after Japan's defeat in 1945.
Ever since, Japan has hungered for their return.
But last week Tokyo's unyielding insistence on the return of all four islands forced President Boris Yeltsin of Russia to cancel a planned visit.
Japanese diplomats had ineptly defined the issue in parochial, nationalistic terms.
A more moderate approach, using the islands as stepping stones to transform Russia and international relations in the region, would better serve the interests of both sides, and of the United States.


Haiti Agrees to Accept Human Rights Observers
Haiti's military Government formally agreed on Friday to the deployment of international human rights observers for the first time since the overthrow of the country's elected President nearly a year ago, officials here said.
The Organization of American States hopes to send a team of 18 monitors perhaps as early as this week to establish offices in all nine administrative regions of Haiti.
A central office with 4 or 5 officials to oversee the operation has been opened in Port-au-Prince, the capital.
At least 4 of the observers are reported to be United States citizens.
Others will come from Argentina, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala and St.
Lucia.


Yes, Close Homestead A.F.B.
It is difficult to say no to anything that could relieve the devastatation of southern Florida by Hurricane Andrew.
But the Senate Appropriations Committee has rightly rejected President Bush's transparent proposal to rebuild Homestead Air Force Base.
Embarrassed by his Administration's slow response to the catastrophe, and desperate for Florida's electoral support, Mr.
Bush put $480 million for the base's reconstruction in the aid package he submitted to Congress last week.
The base was key to the economy of southernmost Florida.
Its restoration would give the area a desperately needed lift.
But, hardhearted as it may seem, military need comes first.


U. of Wisconsin Repeals Ban on 'Hate Speech'
The University of Wisconsin Board of Regents has repealed a rule against "hate speech" that had been one of the first of its kind in the nation.
The president of the board, George Steil Sr., said the regents' 10-to-6 vote on Friday was prompted by recent court decisions that raised the question of whether the rule violated students' rights of free speech under the First Amendment.
Mr.
Steil, a lawyer, said he was also concerned about the high legal cost of defending the rule.


Review/Television; History Meets Fiction on the Musical Stage
In a rare turn of events, a contemporary opera became the Metropolitan Opera's hottest ticket last season.
Tonight you can see why.
"The Ghosts of Versailles" is being offered on Channel 13, from 8 to 11:15, as the season premiere of the series "The Metropolitan Opera Presents." With Brian Large as television director, the taped performance splendidly captures just about every facet of the production, from exquisite chamber pieces to spectacular effects that include outsize puppets and even fireworks.
With music by John Corigliano and libretto by William M. Hoffman, both of whom join the final curtain calls, "The Ghosts of Versailles" is a grand opera buffa in two acts.
The ghosts, living in a world beyond time, are mostly members of the aristocracy executed during the French Revolution.
The playwright Beaumarchais has fallen in love with the spectral Marie Antoinette and decides to save her from the guillotine by writing history as it should have been.


Rasmussen's Winding Road Ends With Victory in Bronx
Dennis Rasmussen came to Yankee Stadium yesterday via Rochester and Iowa and Chicago and Omaha.
He pitched in Class AAA and, for a brief stint with the Cubs, in the majors.
It had been a long year, a year that featured his release from two different teams and a 10.80 major league earned run average
And so no one expected much when the 33-year-old left-hander took the mound for the Royals yesterday, a late-season call-up asked to face his former team.
Rasmussen, who pitched for the Yanks from 1984-87, didn't expect to be here.
He pitched a six-hit shutout to close the season for Class AAA Omaha a week ago yesterday, then waited and waited for a summons from the big club.
It took two and a half days before he got the call.


Village Asks For Cleanup Near Bridge
A State Assemblyman and the Mayor of this village are demanding that the state clean up toxic materials that they say have been dumped into the Hudson River over the years by maintenance workers on the Tappan Zee Bridge.
Officials from the agency that operates the bridge say there is no evidence that hazardous materials have been dumped into the river.
But in a statement this week, the agency said it planned to spend $350,000 to investigate possible dumping near the bridge.


Circuit City Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Edberg Keeps The Open And Takes Back No. 1
This was a duel with dual significance and a dizzying reward for the tennis player who commanded it.
Properly animated for the occasion, Stefan Edberg shed his usual restraint, switched on the ignition and not only mounted a successful defense of his United States Open title but took control of the world's No. 1 ranking in the space of three personally glorious hours yesterday.
"The longer the match went on, the better I felt," said Edberg.
"Mentally I was feeling very strong.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues: The Environment; In Timber Country, Bush Will Join Logging War
Four years ago, George Bush used a campaign swing through the Pacific Northwest to compare himself to Theodore Roosevelt and to highlight his promise to be "the environmental President." On Monday, as the President's schedule calls for him to visit logging communities in Oregon and Washington, Mr.
Bush is expected to forget about tree-hugging and embrace the ax instead.
Bypassing the major cities, Mr.
Bush will speak to timber workers in depressed rural areas where there has been a virtual civil war over the forests.
Aides and supporters say he will speak out against "environmental extremists" and play up his plan to save timber jobs.


Don't Get Mad, Just Get Yards
In the optimistic atmosphere following a losing but inspired effort against Atlanta, Jets players inadvertently provided Pittsburgh with ammunition that the Steelers freely used this afternoon in pummeling the Jets.
Much of the talk in the Pittsburgh locker room centered on comments that certain Jet players, in particular quarterback Browning Nagle, had made about the Steelers.


Action Auto Rental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ruth Nelson, 87, Veteran Actress And Member of Influential Troupe
Ruth Nelson, an actress in the legendary Group Theater, which transformed American acting, and whose career on stage, film and television spanned nearly 70 years, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old.
She died of cancer complicated by a stroke and pneumonia, her family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Is Harsh, His Backers Harsher
President Bush opened a three-day campaign swing through the Far West today with a pungent political attack on Gov.
Bill Clinton before several thousand backers at a rally.
But here in Orange County, a land more Republican than Pat Nixon's cloth coat, Mr.
Bush's remarks were easily the day's mildest comments.
Indeed, Mr.
Bush was nearly upstaged by two earlier speakers, former President Ronald Reagan and Representative Robert K. Dornan of California.
Mr.
Reagan drew a larger crowd, and thunderous cheers, with a speech that disparaged Mr.
Clinton's efforts to avoid military service during the Vietnam War.


Capital's Votes Count
To the Editor:
"Electoral College Shuts Out 3 Million" by Norma S. Levin (letter, Sept. 2) lists the voters of the United States Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Marianas and the District of Columbia as disenfranchised.
The voters of the District have elected electors in Presidential elections since the ratification of the 23d Amendment to the Constitution on March 29, 1961.
The District has three electoral votes.
FRED R. BROWN  Washington, Sept. 2, 1992


To Fill a Shortage of Doctors, Town Nurtures 2 of Its Own
When the Pilmentel and Perez families moved here from Mexico in the 1970's, there was a shortage of manual laborers for the kind of dirty, back-breaking, low-paying field work that seemed reserved for those who spoke Spanish.
Like many rural towns, Burlington today faces a worker shortage at the opposite end of the economic and social spectrum: physicians.
In the past four years, Burlington has spent $50,000 on a campaign to recruit a doctor or two, but none would settle in this 3,000-person town, which is a flat spot near the Kansas border and not much else.


Belmac Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Review/Music; An Actor And Bach Share a Bill
Nina Beilina, a violinist who has been active in New York music circles since she emigrated from the Soviet Union in 1977, presents an annual Bachanalia -- a festival that celebrates Bach but lets other composers share the spotlight -- at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights).
For these free concerts, Miss Beilina presides over a chamber orchestra of conservatory students.
She plays concertos for multiple instruments with guest soloists, and she has actors introduce the works.
This year's edition began on Saturday evening and continues on Friday evening and Sunday afternoon.
The curiosity quotient in the opening concert was supplied by Michael Moriarty, the actor who plays Ben Stone in the NBC television series "Law and Order." Mr.
Moriarty is also an accomplished jazz pianist who makes regular club appearances, but on Saturday he was heard as a symphonist and in his debut as a conductor.


Service for Mollie Parnis
A public memorial service for Mollie Parnis Livingston, the influential fashion designer who died on July 18, will be held at 11 A.M. tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center.
The scheduled speakers include Mike Wallace, Barbara Walters, Bill Blass, Joan Ganz Cooney, Jack Valenti and Walter Cronkite.


Oregon Hatemongers Don't Stop at Gays
To the Editor:
The hatred and homophobia in the Oregon Citizens Alliance's attempt to have homosexuality constitutionally declared "abnormal, wrong, unnatural and perverse," discussed in "Behind the Hate in Oregon" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3), should be a warning call to all Americans.
It's time to look at who supports discrimination and encourages violence.
Lou Mabon, leader of the Oregon Citizens Alliance, is also a member of the Christian Action Council, and their goals are more expansive than discriminating against lesbians and gay men.


Some Cling to the Ruins in Florida
What remains of their worlds can be measured as not much more than small victories over fate and the fury of Hurricane Andrew.
But some people are not willing to let their possessions go, even under the threat of a bulldozer.
"I'm not going to go even if I got to stand in front of the bulldozer," said Heriberto Paredes, who is now living with his wife and 13-year-old son in the twisted ruin of the metal trailer he bought for $1,500 a year ago.


GERMANY PROMISES INTEREST-RATE CUT TO REVIVE GROWTH
After days of turmoil on European money markets, Germany promised tonight to lower its high interest rates, a move that is expected to strengthen the slipping dollar and take pressure off the troubled economies of Britain, France and other European countries.
Word of Bonn's decision, announced by Prime Minister Giuliano Amato of Italy in Rome and the European Community in Brussels, immediately drew sighs of relief from Paris and London.
France and the Netherlands are expected to respond by lowering their interest rates, making it easier for businesses to borrow money and thus inject some sense of movement into the European economy.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Halftime Harangue: Helpful or Hollow?
DO the Giants need a halftime harangue by their "veteran players" every week in order to wake up?
If they do, they're in even more trouble than they were at halftime yesterday.
In their glory seasons, the Giants were known for their comeback victories.
But yesterday, they produced a comeback loss: down by 27-0 at the half and by 34-0 to the Dallas Cowboys early in the third quarter before Phil Simms's three touchdown passes helped narrow the final deficit to 34-28.


Dart Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


INSIDE
Democratic Gains in Thailand
Official election results gave a slim majority for four anti-military parties, whose leaders hope to form a coalition, but military parties still hold a large bloc.
Page A3.
Sad Exodus from Vietnam
Freed after years in prison, officials of the former South Vietnam are coming to America.
Many are broken in health and spirit.
Page A10.
Trade Tensions With China


Old Soldiers: The Last Refugees Free to Leave Vietnam
The men who missed the helicopters fleeing Saigon in 1975 are finally arriving in the United States -- high-ranking South Vietnamese officers and government officials who have spent much of their lives since then in Communist prison camps.
They are the last and saddest wave in a 17-year flood of Vietnamese refugees that first included their luckier highly placed comrades, then a tide of desperate boat people, then thousands of the half-Vietnamese children of American servicemen.


U.S.-China Tensions Over Trade
The war of words between China and the United States appears likely to intensify this week as the two sides meet here for trade talks that have taken on heavy political significance after President Bush's recent decision to sell jet fighters to Taiwan.
For the last several years, the United States has insisted that China do more to open its markets to American exports and provide greater protection for foreign patents and copyrights.
Several agreements have been hammered out, generally with little fanfare.


Episodes of Life Without Father
It has not been a great year for tennis fathers.
STEFFI GRAF's father, PETER, continued to become less of a presence in his daughter's professional life.
Sixteen-year-old JENNIFER CAPRIATI rebelled against her father, STEFANO, for making all of her decisions.
Even JIM PIERCE, the ultimate meddling tennis dad who thinks there's nothing wrong with screaming at his daughter, MARY, and her opponents from the stands, took a step back when he relinquished the coaching duties for Mary to NICK BOLLETTIERI.


Senate Race: The Clash of the Cathode Rays; A Bewildering Barrage for Viewers as the New York Democrats Stump on Screen
It was possible to walk mile after mile over the weekend and find not a clue that political war was being waged with wild abandon across New York State.
Out on Manhattan streets, conversations wandered over everything from the weather, to the economy, to the proper care and feeding of tarantulas ("Two dozen crickets every six weeks or so and they'll grow as big as your hand").
There was nary a whisper about the poison-filled finale to the Senate primary campaign that ends tomorrow.
In Manhattan, along a five-mile stretch of Broadway from Harlem to midtown, the only immediate proof of Campaign Fever was a most unaggressive woman standing at the corner of 80th Street holding aloft a hand-lettered sign inviting New Yorkers to: "Have breakfast with Hillary and Tipper on Oct. 1."
Wrong race.


Et Cetera
BUD COLLINS, the television commentator and Boston Globe columnist, chose a noble crusade during the Open: belittling the United States Tennis Association at every turn for having increased its prize money over all by $1.7 million and by $100,000 for men's and women's singles winners during the country's severe recession. . . .
Top-seeded LINDSAY DAVENPORT of Palos Verdes, Calif., won the girls' junior singles title yesterday by defeating JULIE STEVEN of Wichita, 6-2, 6-2.
Davenport, 16, also won the junior doubles with NICOLE LONDON.
Davenport and CHANDA RUBIN, another 16-year-old who reached the women's round of 16, are pet projects of the U.S.T.A. . . .
Another American won the boys' title.
BRIAN DUNN of Brandon, Fla., defeated Noam Behr of Israel, 7-5, 6-2. . . .
The last time the men's top-four seeded players reached the semifinals was 1985.
They were McEnroe, Lendl, Wilander and Connors.


Another Ninth Inning, Another Mets Fiasco
Perhaps there will be no final insult for the Mets.
Maybe the embarrassments and indignities will go on and on until the season concludes on Oct. 4.
It's going to be hard, however, to top this weekend, one that came to a crashing, crushing conclusion tonight with a 7-5 ninth-inning loss to the Expos.


Rachel Bennett, Alan R. Jacobs
Dr.
Rachel Ariel Bennett, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Edwin H. Bennett of Woodside, Queens, was married yesterday in New York to Dr.
Alan Roy Jacobs, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold R. Jacobs of Wyckoff, N.J.
Rabbi Samuel Kehati performed the ceremony at the 24 Fifth Avenue Ballroom.
Dr.
Bennett, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a chief resident in obstetrics and gynecology at New York Hospital.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.D. degree from Mount Sinai Medical School.
Her father is the associate chief administrative law judge for the National Labor Relations Board in New York.


Mastercard Splits Media Account
Mastercard International has unexpectedly decided to divide the media planning and buying portion of its $60 million United States account between Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, which was awarded the creative portion of the account on Aug. 24, and DeWitt Media Inc. in New York, an independent media service.
"Why should we only go for one head?" asked James Desrosier, Mastercard's vice president of advertising in New York.
"It's a unique opportunity to build a stronger team." He said that Mastercard "came to respect" Michael Lotito, executive vice president and director of media services at Ammirati, and "didn't want to lose that resource." He added that Ammirati and DeWitt would collaborate on development and planning, while DeWitt would handle buying.


Playing in the Open Is Work, but Seles and Edberg Punch Out on Top
Although it lacked an obvious crescendo, the United States Open, always the most irritating of the Grand Slam tournaments in the eyes of its contestants, did its unlevel best to scramble the tennis landscape.
To expect anything less from that place where, according to the firsthand observation of Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, "nobody ever shuts up," where planes and trains line up for takeoff like kids at the diving board on a hot summer day, and where the side courts, according to Martina Navratilova, possess the slant of the Titanic, would be ludicrous.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  RATE CUT RALLIES STOCKS  Germany's central bank made a modest cut in its high interest rates but even the small cut was enough to provoke a strong worldwide rally in stock prices.
A1  VIOLENCE OUTLASTS REBEL LEADER  Although Shining Path has lost its top leaders, others are carrying on.
The threat to the Peruvian Government may be lessened, but the violence is continuing.
A1  THE TAKING OF PRISONER 1509  Street sweepers, telephone repairmen and ice cream vendors were among the guises adopted by police officers who engineered the capture of Abimael Guzman Reynoso.
A14  WAR RETURNS TO SARAJEVO  Artillery fire echoed in the hills surrounding Sarajevo, despite the presence of U.N. monitors supervising Serbian gun emplacements.
A3  The U.N. approved more than 5,000 peacekeepers for Bosnia.
A3  MILITARY AGREEMENT WITH ISRAEL  The U.S. and Israel said they were negotiating an accord to provide Israel with more access to high-technology military equipment, just days after the announcement of the sale of fighter jets to Saudi Arabia.
A1  SYRIANS SEE DEFICIENCIES IN PLAN  Syria was not pleased that an overture by Israel did not mention total withdrawal from the Golan Heights, but the Syrians did not reject the document completely.
A14  HELPING RUSSIA, RAISING DOUBTS  Washington offered Russia $1.15 billion in loan guarantees and food aid to help it "buy American," raising questions about politics.
A6  RUSSIA OPENS LABS TO SCRUTINY  Russia has agreed to provide access to its biological research facilities to prove its germ warfare program has been terminated.
A6  CENTRAL BANK SABOTAGE CHARGED  Russia's Central Bank has been accused of working to discredit the Government, undermine economic reform programs and send monetary policy into disarray.
A7  VESTED INTEREST RATES  France is offering voters the possibility of lower interest rates in exchange for votes in favor for a treaty on European union.
A10  ARMS SHIPMENTS INVESTIGATED  The U.S. is investigating reports that military arms have been diverted to South Africa and that shipments of civilian arms have been used on anti-apartheid groups.
A12  Armed U.N. troops arrived in Somalia to protect food shipments.
A10  A Congressional committee recommended a "Radio Free Asia." A5  Persian Gulf Journal: Aboard U.S.S.
Independence, it's too darn hot.
A4  National A16-25  MEDICAL GROUP BACKS LIMITS  The American College of Physicians unveiled a health-insurance proposal arguing for an overall national limit on health-care spending and restrictions on the amounts charged by doctors and hospitals.
The proposal could be a turning point in the debate over the future of the country's health-care system.
A1  GIRDING FOR AN ATTACK  Gov.
Bill Clinton abruptly changed his campaign schedule and prepared to defend himself from an expected attack by President Bush on his draft record.
The decision indicates the degree to which the Democratic nominee feels vulnerable on the subject.
A1  President Bush vows changes in the Endangered Species Act.
A25  Political Week: the strategy behind the debate on the debates.
A23  PLEADING FOR CLEMENCY  A group of California prisoners convicted of killing their husbands or boyfriends has sent 22 petitions for clemency to the Governor.
Each pleads the case of a woman convicted of murder before last year's passage of a state law allowing testimony about battered women's syndrome.
A16  KAUAI'S 'COCONUT WIRELESS'  Residents of Kauai, devastated by Hurricane Iniki, rely on the 'coconut wireless,' or word of mouth, in surviving without power or telephone service.
The military, meanwhile, continued to ferry in relief supplies to the Hawaiian island.
A18  SCHOOL BELLS IN FLORIDA  Outside the Coral Reef Elementary School in Miami, pupils and parents kissed one another in relief.
For many of them, still without electricity and telephones three weeks after Hurricane Andrew swept through South Florida, it was the first sign that friends and neighbors had also survived.
A19  Guilty plea by the owner of a plant where 25 people died in a fire.
A20  Metro Digest B1  WEISS DIES BEFORE ELECTION  Representative Ted Weiss, the unresconstructed liberal who represented the West Side of Manhattan for three decades, died on the eve of the primary, prompting Democratic leaders to plead with voters to support a dead man.
Under election laws, Democratic leaders can choose his successor only if Mr.
Weiss wins.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-10  GAPS IN WEATHER COVERAGE  Delays in replacing weather satellites has created a serious gap in weather forecasting in some areas, especially in tracing the short-term gyrations of big storms, Federal scientists say.
A1  Botanists seek the first flower.
C1  Question of biological roots for crime still an issue.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  BBC audience is part of show.
C11  Philharmonic's 150th year.
C11  Fashion Page B10  Sports B12-17  Basketball: Knicks obtain forward Tony Campbell.
B13  Column: Rhoden on losing.
B13  Football: Lageman is out.
B13  Obituaries D22-23  Ted Weiss, Democratic Representative from Manhattan.
D22  Leon J. Davis, labor leader.
D23  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Remember the massacre.
Shining Path: cut off at the top.
A vote for Mr.
Weiss now counts.
New York primary choices.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Dances with wolves.
Russell Baker: Two in Pangloss mode.
Mark Crispin Miller: Death of a fighter pilot.
Larry Rockefeller: Primaries are a protection racket.


Some '91 Failures Find Room at Top
Tampa Bay, Pittsburgh and Cincinnati have something in common this morning: All three were figured D.O.A. in this National Football League season, but all three are unbeaten and have a nice shot at reaching 3-0.
In a season sure to offer plenty of additional surprises, this already equates to shocking.


Patterns
Timing Is Everything
Call it the clash of the titans.
Both Gianni Versace and Giorgio Armani have scheduled their spring shows in Milan for 7:30 P.M. on Oct. 8, and as of yesterday, neither was willing to give in.
That creates a problem for retailers and fashion editors who want to see both.


New Storm Brews On Whether Crime Has Roots in Genes
THE cancellation of an academic conference on genetics and crime this month has cast into the spotlight a long-simmering scientific debate on the roots of crime and how it can best be prevented.
The conference, "Genetic Factors in Crime: Findings, Uses and Implications," was to have been held beginning Oct. 9 at the University of Maryland.
The National Institutes of Health withdrew funds, saying the conference too readily accepted the notion that violence and crime had genetic causes.


Death of a Fighter Pilot
Remember how the air war of Operation Desert Storm always looked, or sounded, as if John Ford had directed it?
Day after day, U.S. pilots seemed to pick off every enemy jet they aimed at, while the Iraqi pilots always seemed to miss.
"We've destroyed 29 Iraqi aircraft -- with not one air-to-air loss on the part of the coalition," claimed Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf at a briefing in Riyadh on Jan. 30.
"The score is totally one-sided," President Bush asserted at a press conference six days later.
"In fact  [ in ]  every engagement in the air, the Iraqi planes and pilots have gone down." Newspapers and television generally passed along this version of events, reporting that no allied planes had been shot down.


William R. Reid, 74, Former Chief Executive
William R. Reid Jr., a former chief executive of the Torrington Company, a Connecticut manufacturer, died on Sunday at his home in Litchfield, Conn.
He was 74 years old.
Mr.
Reid, who also lived in Key Largo, Fla., died of cancer, said Bradford Rowe, director of the Rowe Funeral Home, in Litchfield.


Classical Music in Review
'Rigoletto'  Amato Opera 319 Bowery (at Second Street) East Village Through Oct. 11
The Amato Opera strives to provide a sense of spontaneity and vitality that is often absent from mainstream opera stagings.
Its proximity to the underground-rock club CBGB on the Bowery serves as a reminder that opera was once a thorn in the side of tradition, rather than its embodiment.


Shining Path: Cut Off at the Top
Saturday's arrest of Abimael Guzman Reynoso, founder, leader and animating force of Peru's murderous Shining Path rebels, could prove a life-saver of staggering dimensions.
Jailing Mr.
Guzman cuts the insurgency off at the head.
President Alberto Fujimori can best build on this stunning police achievement by rapidly restoring full constitutional rule.
Fuller democracy would attack Peru's political crisis at its roots, depriving the Shining Path of any appeal.


ARMED U.N. TROOPS ARRIVE IN SOMALIA
The first armed United Nations troops, sent to Somalia to protect relief supplies from looters, arrived today in the capital, Mogadishu, on two United States military aircraft.
The 40 soldiers, all Pakistani, are the advance contingent for a battalion of 500 Pakistanis who are expected to arrive by next week, also on United States aircraft, United Nations officials said.
The Bush Administration offered transportation for the troops as part of its aid package for the victims of famine in Somalia.


Stocks Leap by 70.52, Biggest Jump of Year
Stock prices in the United States took their biggest leap of the year yesterday, following sharp rallies in Europe, after Bonn loosened its interest-rate tourniquet.
The Dow Jones industrial average, the main gauge of the market's strength, rose 70.52 points, or 2.1 percent, to 3,376.22, its biggest jump since an 88.10-point gain Dec. 23.
Trading was the heaviest in more than six weeks, with 252.8 million shares changing hands on the New York Stock Exchange, up from 180.6 million Friday.


Tears and Joy as Storm Children Return to School
Outside the classrooms at Coral Reef Elementary School, pupils and parents arriving for the first day of school this morning hugged and kissed each other in relief.
For many of them, still without electricity and telephones three weeks after Hurricane Andrew swept through here, it was the first indication that their friends and neighbors had also survived the most expensive natural disaster in the nation's history.


Knicks Fill In the Missing X By Getting Wolves' Campbell
The Knicks say it's not hard to figure out just what role they are planning for Tony Campbell, the 6-foot-7-inch swingman they acquired from Minnesota yesterday for a second-round draft pick in 1994, 1995 or 1996.
Campbell, who is 30 years old, is considered more of a shooting guard, but the Knicks were looking for a small forward after losing Xavier McDaniel to the Boston Celtics last week as a free agent.


On My Mind; Dances With Wolves
To understand Israel it is useful to understand this: It was created by and for a special breed of people -- Jewish gamblers.
Who else but a gambler would take the odds of going off to live in rock and desert, surrounded and outnumbered by neighbors trying to kill him, on the chance that someday the rock would spout water, the desert flower, the neighbors embrace him, and both peace and pride be granted to him and his children?


Shaking Up Old Ways of Benevolence
They are not Rockfellers or Mellons.
But they do have money, dividends from a family business or perhaps a modest inheritance, and they want to do good with it.
They do not see themselves as philanthropists, a description that they find pretentious or condescending.
They prefer to speak of "sharing," rather than "giving," and they often want to get actively involved with a group in addition to writing a check.
These people, many of them in their 30's and 40's and the majority of them women, are causing new ripples to spread through conventional charitable giving.
What sets them apart from past contributors is the fact that they are not going it alone, that they are seeking out other donors who share their view of society's problems -- shaped in many cases by events of the 1960's, and using this network to channel their money to groups that in many cases are too small, too radical or too inexperienced to attract help from the established philanthropies.


Abused Women Who Kill Now Seek Way Out of Cells
When Brenda Clubine arrived in prison 7 years ago to serve 15 years to life for killing a husband more than twice her size, she was beginning to ask herself questions about the violence she had suffered and in turn had meted out, about the Gordian knot that ties the abuser and the abused.
"I had two choices," said Ms.
Clubine, a tiny, 41-year-old former nurse who said she had endured years of savage beatings by her husband.
"I could commit suicide, or I could try to understand what was going on in my life."


Iraq Policy Assailed in Bank Case
An Atlanta courtroom today became the eye of the storm in the dispute over United States policy toward Iraq, as the defense lawyer in a multibillion-dollar bank fraud case accused the Bush Administration of manipulating the case to conceal "blunders" in its relationship with Iraq.
Bobby Lee Cook is the Georgia lawyer who represents Christopher P. Drogoul, the 43-year-old banker accused of illegally extending billions of dollars in loans and credits to Iraq from the Atlanta branch of a Rome-based bank.
Mr.
Cook transformed a routine sentencing hearing today into a mini-trial.
In his opening statement, Mr.
Cook sought to portray his client as the victim of a scheme orchestrated at the highest levels of the American Government, a charge strenuously denied by prosecutors.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; The Eyes of the Clinton Strategists Are on Texas
Two weeks ago, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore took their bus tour deep into the heart of Texas, spending three dusty days on the trail, from San Antonio to Tyler.
Then they sent in a poll taker to determine how their political act had played.
The big question was whether it was worthwhile for them to return and try to snatch the Lone Star State and its huge batch of 32 electoral votes away from President Bush.
He calls Texas home, and without it in November he may well lose his other home, in Washington.


Shearson Makes Deal to Sell Boston Co. to Mellon Bank
Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell the Boston Company, a provider of fee-based banking, trust and custody services, to the Mellon Bank Corporation for about $1.5 billion in cash, stock and debt.
The agreement ended a bidding process that began more than a month ago.
If approved by regulators, the sale will meet strategic objectives at Mellon and the American Express Company, Shearson Lehman's parent, analysts said.


Officer Says Iraqi Jet Downed Navy Plane During the Gulf War
An Iraqi warplane shot down a Navy fighter jet in the Persian Gulf war, a senior Navy intelligence officer says, contradicting Pentagon claims that no American aircraft were lost in aerial combat in the 43-day war.
Moreover, a Navy pilot, Comdr.
Mike Anderson, says his request to superiors to attack the Iraqi plane before it fired on the Navy plane was denied because an American airborne surveillance plane did not detect the Iraqi aircraft.


Sevareid Memorial Service
A memorial service for Eric Sevareid, the CBS News correspondent, will be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow in Washington at the National Press Club, 529 14th Street N.W.
Mr.
Sevareid, who spent 38 years with the network, died of lung cancer on July 9 at the age of 79.


The 1992 Campaign; Senate Race Ends in Whirl Of Appeals
The campaign for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York ground to a bitter end yesterday in a whirlwind round of street-corner rallies, appeals for upstate support and an emotional paid-television plea by Geraldine A. Ferraro, asking voters to reject what she called her rivals' efforts to exploit "the poisoned well of fear and stereotype."
With no reliable statewide statistical picture available from public polls, aides to both Ms.
Ferraro and State Attorney General Robert Abrams described a tight contest between them in the Senate race, in which turnout is expected to be crucial to the outcome.
Both candidates fought for the one-third of registered Democrats who live upstate, with Mr.
Abrams replacing all his existing television commercials in Buffalo with a new one stressing his warm endorsement by The Buffalo News, and with Ms.
Ferraro issuing a new position paper pledging her support for farmers.


Rowland to Leave Firm He Founded
Herbert L. Rowland, who founded a public relations firm 31 years ago that grew into the world's sixth largest, announced yesterday that he would leave Rowland Worldwide in New York effective Dec. 31.
Mr.
Rowland, 66 years old, had been chairman and chief executive at the company, which was acquired by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. in 1985.
Succeeding him as chairman is Alan Capper, 52, who had been co-chairman and regional chairman for European operations.


The 1992 Campaign: Democrats; The Primary Voters


Trenton Lawmakers Pass Bill Allowing for Night Curfews
The New Jersey Senate gave final passage today to an ordinance that would let municipalities impose nighttime curfews on juveniles and hold parents responsible for seeing that their children obey them.
The bill, which passed the Assembly last month by a vote of 67-0, passed the Senate without debate today by a 35-0 vote.
It now goes to Gov.
Jim Florio, who has expressed growing concern over the problem of juvenile crime but has not said specifically whether he would sign the bill.


By Design; High Romance
Call it the poet shirt or the buccaneer shirt.
By whatever name, it is white and ruffled and utterly romantic.
Worn by men in centuries past and by both sexes in the 1960's, it has resurfaced for women as an alternative to the shirt and tie in the current men's-wear-for-women phenomenon.
The buccaneer look made a strong impression in Anna Sui's fall show when Linda Evangelista and Naomi Campbell strode out wearing open-neck white blouses with billowing sleeves with dashing long coats and big-brimmed feathered hats.


Classical Music in Review
Stanley Hoffman  Violinist Weill Recital Hall
At a recital by Stanley Hoffman on Sunday afternoon, sonatas for solo violin by Ralph Shapey and Allan Blank were given their first performances.
Mr.
Shapey's 16-minute Sonata No. 1 had been gathering dust since 1972.
The neglect is, in one respect, understandable; this terse, astringent, somewhat relentless music, cast in an atonal-Expressionist idiom, provided few spells of comfort for either performer or audience.
A lyrical strain emerged only briefly in the third movement, "Cantabile." Even the finale, marked "Rhythmic and Brilliant," avoided the obvious thrill of headlong momentum.
The work seemed to be scarred by the extreme esthetic frustration its composer experienced in the early 1970's.


Japanese Reaction Is Slight
The Japanese financial markets had a subdued reaction to the news that Germany's central bank was planning to cut the official interest rates, and officials of the Finance Ministry and the Bank of Japan emphasized that Japan would not lower its own interest rates.
While there are constant rumors of a rate cut here, Government officials recently announced an $86 billion fiscal stimulus package to help the economy and say there is no need right now for another cut in the discount rate, which is 3.25 percent.


Lou Jacobs, 89, Master Clown of Ringling Circus
Lou Jacobs, the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus's master clown who performed before millions for six decades, died on Sunday in Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 89 years old and lived in Sarasota.
He died of heart failure, said a circus spokesman, Rodney Huey.


AROUND THE MAJORS
The San Francisco Board of Supervisors voted unanimously yesterday to provide a legal shield for investors willing to buy the San Francisco Giants and keep the team in the Bay Area.
The nine supervisors voting said that the city of San Francisco would indemnify the investment group headed by George Shinn from damages arising from its bid to purchase the Giants from Bob Lurie.
A group of Florida investors said they would sue if their $115 million agreement in principle with Lurie is interfered with.


The 1992 Campaign; Seven Priests and a Nun Back Hispanic Rivals Over Solarz
In an unusual Election Eve appeal made without the approval of the Brooklyn Diocese, seven Roman Catholic priests and a nun called on voters in the new 12th Congressional district to select any of the five Hispanic candidates for office over Representative Stephen J. Solarz.
Msgr.
John Powis, the pastor of St.
Barbara's Roman Catholic Church in Bushwick, Brooklyn, called for Hispanic voters to "vote for the candidate that they feel will best represent their concerns and secure the goals of more Latino representation."


Race for Profits Leaves a Trail of Danger
They call it "chasing."
With the sound of squealing tires and booming engines in their wake, tow truck drivers barrel down a stretch of Fourth Avenue in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, at midday or midnight.
Alerted by their own police scanners, they race one another to an accident scene, chasing a chance to hook the bumper of a damaged car needing thousands of dollars of repairs.
They're not afraid of climbing a sidewalk or running a red light at high speed, hungrily pushing past anything in their way.


Rep. Ted Weiss, 64, Dies; Liberal Stalwart in House
Representative Ted Weiss, a Manhattan Democrat who for more than 15 years was one of the most outspoken advocates of liberal policies in Congress, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan and Washington.
He died of heart failure, his office said.


Books of The Times; On Men, Women and One Maverick Thinker
Sex, Art and American Culture  Essays  By Camille Paglia  337 pages.
Vintage Books. $13.
Many readers know Camille Paglia from "Sexual Personae," her windy and wildly ambitious study of Western culture, published to controversial fanfare in 1990.
For those not already familiar with her provocative persona and opinions, Ms.
Paglia provides plenty of self-portraits in her new collection of essays, "Sex, Art and American Culture."


Delayed School Year Begins in Storm-Swept Area


First Chicago Selling Off Bad Property Loans
The First Chicago Corporation announced an ambitious plan yesterday to put the problems of bad real estate loans behind it by selling them and covering some of the resulting losses with previously unreported profits from various investments.
Although the plan will cause a large loss in the current quarter, First Chicago officials decided that was preferable to accumulating smaller losses for several years.
Investors and traders seemed to agree, sending First Chicago stock up $2.375, to $33, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Brand Names Fight Back Against the Clones
THE year is not yet over, but 1992 is likely to be remembered in the personal computer industry as the year the empires struck back against the rebel clones.
First Compaq, then Digital, and now I.B.M. and Apple have begun impressive counterattacks against the low-cost personal computers that have hectored them for the last five years.


Markets in U.S. Greet Rate Cuts
The German interest-rate cuts, however limited, were greeted by investors in the United States with the hope that an economic tide had turned.
Stock prices took their biggest leap since Dec. 23, with the Dow Jones industrial average rising 70.52 points, or 2.1 percent, to 3,376.22.
Bond prices rose more modestly.


U.S. Won't Require Infant Seats on Planes
The Federal Aviation Administration, reiterating its opposition to a proposal that has been around for years, said today it would not require babies to be strapped into safety seats in airplanes.
In a final rule, the aviation agency adopted the approach it had proposed more than two years ago, essentially codifying the status quo by calling on airlines to allow, but not require, the use of safety seats by young children.


New PC's From Apple
Apple Computer Inc. yesterday introduced a new line of Macintosh personal computers aimed at the home market and first-time buyers.
The Performa line, which has three models, will be sold through mass merchandisers like Sears and Office Depot.
They will not be available through computer dealers, which will continue selling the existing Macintosh line.
The Performa 200 is identical to the Macintosh Classic II except for packaging and distribution and is expected to sell for about $1,250.
The Performa 400 duplicates the Macintosh LC II and will sell for about $1,450, not including a monitor.
The Performa 600 is a new design using a faster processor and an optional built-in CD-ROM drive.
Including the drive but not a monitor, the model will sell for about $2,500.


Kauai Adjusts to Frontier Life Style After Hurricane
Across the hard-hit island of Kauai today, people were traveling by car and by foot to search for a bag of rice, to wash their dishes or to learn news of the aftermath of the hurricane that has devastated their lives.
As relief supplies flooded the main city of this small tropical island, residents began adjusting to a frontier life style that officials said could last well into the future.


Snaring the Top Guerrilla: 'Bingo! We Got Him!'
On a quiet suburban street here, residents might have detected unusually attentive service recently by street sweepers, telephone repairmen, water meter readers and linemen for the electric utility.
Blending into Lima's cityscape, detectives of Peru's intelligence police were preparing for what newspapers here today joyously called "the arrest of the century."


Former Mayor Of Washington Tries Comeback
City Council elections rarely stir the passions that national campaigns do, but the battle in one neighborhood here between a 15-year veteran and a former Mayor imprisoned for drug use has drawn as much attention as the Presidential race.
Marion S. Barry Jr., the flamboyant Mayor of Washington for 12 years, moved into Ward 8 after his release from prison last summer for one reason: to campaign against the Democratic incumbent, Wilhelmina Rolark, because he expects to receive widespread support in the district.
In a city where registered Republicans are scarce, the winner of Tuesday's Democratic primary is virtually assured of election.


Buddy Barnes, a Singer And Pianist, Dies at 52
Buddy Barnes, a singer and pianist who was the singer Mabel Mercer's accompanist and musical director for seven years, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 52 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


New York Primary Choices
This list summarizes our recommendations for contested races in the New York Democratic primary today.
Poll hours in New York City are 6 A.M. to 9 P.M., and noon to 9 P.M. elsewhere.
Manhattan HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Eighth District
: The late Ted Weiss (see editorial);
12th
: Elizabeth Colon. STATE SENATE
25th District
: Luis Osorio;
28th
: Richard Irizarry. ASSEMBLY
68th District
: Nelson Antonio Denis;
70th
: Peggy Shepard;
72d
: John Brian Murtaugh. CIVIL COURT
Second District
: Debra Rose Samuels. Brooklyn HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Eighth District
: The late Ted Weiss (see editorial);
10th
: Edolphus Towns;
12th
: Elizabeth Colon. STATE SENATE
12th District
: Adolphus Frazier;
25th
: Luis Osorio. ASSEMBLY
42d District
: Rhoda Jacobs;
44th
: Joni Yoswein;
51st
: John Kennedy O'Hara;
54th
: Thomas Catapano;
58th
: N. Nick Perry. CIVIL COURT
Second District
: Harold Hall. Queens HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Fifth District
: Gary Ackerman;
Sixth
: Floyd Flake;
12th
: Elizabeth Colon. STATE SENATE
12th District
: Adolphus Frazier. ASSEMBLY
31st District
: Gregory Meeks;
33d
: Anna Thompson;
34th
: Ivan Lafayette;
36th
: Denis Butler;
38th
: Frank Sansivieri Jr. Bronx HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
17th District
: Eliot Engel. STATE SENATE
28th District
: Richard Irizarry;
32d
: Lillian Fernandez;
33d
: Joseph Galiber. ASSEMBLY
76th District
: Peter Rivera. Nassau and Suffolk HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Fifth District
: Gary Ackerman. Westchester HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
17th District
: Eliot Engel. STATE SENATE
33d District
: Joseph Galiber.


U.S. OFFERS RUSSIA AID IN BUYING FOOD
The Bush Administration offered Russia $1.15 billion in loan guarantees and food aid today to help it buy American grain and livestock feed over the next six months.
Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan said 30,000 export-related jobs and $3 billion in economic activity would be created by the credits and assistance, raising immediate suggestions in Congress and among agricultural organizations that the decision was primarily motivated by politics.


A Movie Director Who Is Successful and Nice
Three years ago, Phil Alden Robinson, then an unknown film maker, leaped to prominence as director and co-author of the baseball fantasy "Field of Dreams." It was the kind of success most directors crave.
But not Mr.
Robinson.
"It just about catapulted me right out of the business," he said quietly, seated in his sparse home on a cul-de-sac in Bel Air.
"I was so disillusioned with the process that I took a year off. I wanted to have a life. I didn't like directing. I found it enormously painful and frustrating and not satisfying in the least until it was all over and you're sitting with an audience. Otherwise, it's a year and a half of swimming with doubts and fears. I don't particularly like to tell people what to do. I don't like to raise my voice. I just had a miserable time. It's a horrible way to live."


A Vote for Mr. Weiss Now Counts
With the death yesterday of Congressman Ted Weiss, New Yorkers lost a gentle, respected Representative who never strayed from his political roots as an unreconstructed liberal.
His unwillingness to compromise limited his effectiveness in an increasingly conservative capital.
But it also made him part of a valuable minority that gave voice to humanitarian concerns.
As chairman of a subcommittee that oversees major Federal health agencies, Mr.
Weiss worked to pursue food and medical safety.
His Congressional hearings were the first to question seriously the safety of breast implants.
He was an early advocate of spending more to combat AIDS.
He sought to help the mentally ill and homeless.


Paris Says Vote for Unity Treaty Will Allow It to Cut Interest Rates
Moving quickly to capitalize on a reduction in German interest rates, the French Government today offered wavering French voters a deal: it too hopes to lower domestic interest rates -- if they ratify a treaty on European union in a referendum on Sunday.
With the latest polls showing the electorate to be evenly split, opponents of the treaty have been arguing that France's need to match German interest rates is already driving this country into recession.
And under the treaty, they say, France will lose all control over its monetary policy.


Board to Press Fernandez On New CUNY Standards
Worried that the New York City school system cannot prepare its students for the new City University academic requirements, members of the Board of Education have asked Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez to report to them this week on the subject.
Some school board members are concerned that the city's school system does not have the resources -- either the money or the number of qualified teachers it will take -- to provide most of its students with the academic credits the university is asking for.


Bridge
The Summer National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League always attract a sprinkling of players from other continents.
In Toronto in July there were contestants from England, Scotland, Iceland, Sweden, Poland, Saudi Arabia, India, Brazil and Uruguay.
One of the Britons was Martin Hoffman of London, who has long had a reputation as a lightning analyst, capable of making difficult hands on which others fail.
On the diagramed deal from the Spingold Knockout Team Championship his aggressive bidding was vindicated, thanks to a combination of luck and skill.


'Hole' in Tumor Patient's Memory Reveals Brain's Odd Filing System
A SMALL discrete hole appeared in the memory of the 70-year-old librarian.
She had had a tumor, but all her faculties seemed otherwise intact.
So it was a surprise to discover that she could no longer look at a picture of an elephant and say elephant.
Instead, she drew a blank.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Readies Answer to Bush On Draft Issue
Choosing to confront an issue he had declared himself finished with three weeks ago, Bill Clinton abruptly altered his campaign schedule and flew from here today to defend himself against an anticipated attack by President Bush on the subject of Mr.
Clinton and the draft during the Vietnam War.
It was not at all clear that Mr.
Bush would attack Mr.
Clinton directly.
One Bush campaign official, Leslie Goodman, a deputy director of communications, said she firmly expected it.
But Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, obviously pleased by Mr.
Clinton's consternation, was deliberately vague.


Torrey's Still Around, but How Thin Is the Ice?
For 20 years, Bill Torrey was the chief executive of the Islanders.
This season, with the team under new management and its ownership in flux, Torrey's presence here is that of a minister without portfolio, hardly in exile but not exactly in power.
The awkward arrangement was obvious today at training camp when the former chairman and general manager arrived during a scrimmage and took a seat among coaches, executives and scouts, who greeted him warmly.


Mets Pull a Little Prank, But Kent Pulls a Big Fit
In another season, the incident might have died without a remark.
It might not have escalated to the heated moment it did in the clubhouse in Montreal on Sunday night.
On another club, the issue of clubhouse politics might not be such a volatile one.
But these are the Mets, the bad, jinxed and endlessly controversial club for whom everything goes wrong.
Always.
Thus, Jeff Kent, a player with undetermined ability and the scantiest of reputations, found himself at the center of the latest clubhouse storm.


REP. WEISS IS DEAD, LEAVING CONFUSION IN NEW YORK RACE
Representative Ted Weiss, the 64-year-old unreconstructed liberal who represented the West Side of Manhattan for three decades in the City Council and in Congress, died yesterday on the eve of today's primary -- prompting Democratic leaders to plead with voters to support a dead man rather than risk electing the fringe candidate who was Mr.
Weiss's sole rival.
Under the arcane provisions of New York State's election laws, Democratic leaders can choose his successor to run in the general election if Mr.
Weiss wins today.  [ Obituary, page D22. ]


Summerall. Speaks. Short. Sweet.
Pat Summerall has earned a living at CBS by saying very little.
One of the highlights of last year's football season was Summerall's response to John Madden's wild diagramming of blimps tethered inside the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome.
Of his hyperkinetic partner's wild design, Summerall replied: "Well, that's good for you, John."


Untangling The Tangle Of a Home Network
LAST June I wrote about adding a new computer to my home-office arsenal and setting up a tiny network: two machines, along with a printer and modem.
This is a progress, or rather lack of progress, report.
The whole point of the exercise was to gain the minimum knowledge needed to write about a home-office or small-office network for readers who might want to set one up themselves without having to take a course in computer science or hire a professional to do it for them.


PERU REBELS SAID TO REMAIN POTENT
Peruvian officials said today that with the arrest on Saturday of Abimael Guzman Reynoso and at least three other senior leaders of Shining Path, much of the rebel movement's upper echelon had been captured or killed.
But experts on the Maoist guerrilla group said that other leaders remain at large and that there could be years of continued violence before Peru can say that it has quelled the insurgency, which has so far cost more than 25,000 lives and damage to property totaling more than $22 billion.


Review/Television; Delta Burke As Delta, Fierce Singer
Nailing down any possible identity questions, Delta Burke is playing Delta Bishop in "Delta," the new ABC comedy series having a preview at 9:30 tonight before settling into its regular Thursdays-at-8 slot.
In recent years, Ms.
Burke became a fixture in tabloids with problems ranging from public spats with her co-stars and producers on CBS's "Designing Women" to weight battles second in intensity and frustration only to Oprah Winfrey's.
Now, in a brand-new blond coiffure, a blithely plump Ms.
Burke stars as an aspiring country-western singer waiting on tables in a Nashville bar.
This may not be her smartest career move.


Corrections
A front-page article on March 26 about the abandonment of sick, elderly people by their adult children referred imprecisely to results of an informal survey by the American College of Emergency Physicians.
The estimated number of elderly patients alone after emergency room care last year, 70,000, was calculated by The Times -- not the college -- using weekly numbers from the college's survey.
The college informed The Times this month that the survey included an unknown number of elderly people who were not abandoned at hospitals, but who simply had no one to care for them after treatment.


Miscellany
*
Gov.
Bill Clinton's advertising campaign to date was rated more effective than President Bush's, according to a national poll conducted by Market Facts, Arlington Heights, Ill.
Out of 1,015 adults surveyed, Mr.
Clinton's ads were preferred 40 percent to 29 percent.
Eight percent of respondents said they had not seen any ads and 23 percent refused to specify which they believed to be more effective.


I. Magnin Chief Is Named President of Saks
Yet another senior executive at R. H. Macy &amp; Company is jumping ship.
Rose Marie Bravo, chairman and chief executive of Macy's I. Magnin specialty store chain, will leave the company to become president of Saks Fifth Avenue on Oct. 1, Saks and Macy each said yesterday.
Joseph Cicio, senior vice president of fashion direction and creative resources at Macy, will replace her at the faltering apparel chain.
Steven Kornajcik, currently senior vice president for sales promotion at Macy, will take Mr.
Cicio's place.


The 1992 Campaign; Incumbent Legislators Face Few Primary Challenges
For the great majority of New York State lawmakers, the real news in today's primary elections is that they have no news to worry about.
The redistricting battle in Albany has created a handful of open seats intended to elect members of minority groups, and in two cases in New York City it has thrown a pair of incumbents against each other in caustic primary races.
And in four districts north of the city, an anti-tax group is working to help the campaigns of Republican Assembly members who are challenging incumbent Republican state senators as betrayers of the conservative cause.


Lawyer Questions Disclosures In Washington Heights Case
The lawyer representing the family of Jose (Kiko) Garcia, the Dominican immigrant whose killing by a police officer set off several nights of disturbances in Washington Heights, has asked Federal prosecutors to investigate if secrecy laws were violated after a grand jury cleared the officer.
Santo Alessi, the lawyer, said the leak of the grand jury's decision several days before the public announcement last week and the subsequent release of a detailed 45-page summary of evidence and testimony by the Manhattan District Attorney may have violated grand-jury secrecy laws.
Mr.
Alessi, noting that he helped to persuade two sisters who said they witnessed the shooting to appear before the grand jury, said such disclosures undermined the grand jury process.


A Compromise Made of Jersey
The difference between a fashion show for retailers and one for private customers is often palpable.
Customers have a visceral response to the clothes on the runway and engage in animated conversations with their neighbors.
Store buyers are far more restrained.
So it was clear at John Anthony's couture show last week that his jersey dresses with lots of soft gathers above and below wide, taut midriffs were an audience favorite.
They were shown with big, roomy cloth coats.
In muted colors like beige or dark green, they proved a working alternative to the ubiquitous suit.


Information for Voters
Polls are open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Orange, Ulster and Erie Counties, and from noon to 9 P.M. elsewhere in New York State.
Polls in Connecticut are open from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.
New York City voters with questions may call 212-VOTE-NYC.
Voters elsewhere in New York State should call their county election boards.
Connecticut voters should call the office of the town clerk.


Serbs Shell Bosnian Capital as U.N. Monitors Watch
Although United Nations observers have begun monitoring Serbian artillery positions outside Sarajevo, their presence failed to prevent the Serbs from firing shells today as a new round of fighting erupted in the hills above the city.
Relentless exchanges of mortar and machine-gun fire could be heard at Serbian artillery and sniper positions above the Bosnian capital.
Serbian commanders asserted in interviews that their forces were firing because they had been fired upon.


Bush Looks Forward, Not Back


Leon Davis, 85, Head of Health-Care Union, Dies
Leon J. Davis, a Russian immigrant who founded a small New York union of drugstore clerks in Depression-era 1932 and built it into America's largest labor organization of health care workers, died yesterday at Long Island Jewish Medical Center.
He was 85 years old and lived in Queens and in Lake Worth, Fla.
He died of heart failure, union officials said.


Reviews/Fashion; Scaasi Couture Has a Light Touch
Arnold Scaasi has nothing against drama and excitement.
But in his couture collection, he says, his prevailing desire is to make women look pretty.
He does this with shapes that flatter a woman's body and with colors and patterns that cheer the spirit.
This time, he includes a lot of black, but with glistening lace and beaded flowers, it is lively, not dull.
After several decades at the helm of his couture business, his client list is still growing.
Barbara Bush, his best-known customer, sees his clothes privately, but a number of fashion-conscious younger women always sit in the front row at his salon, planning their wardrobes.
Yesterday, Jamie Gregory, Gayfryd Steinberg, Nina Griscomb-Baker, Mai Hallingby and Karen LeFrak were among the most visible, most of them still faithful to short skirts.
A few wore pants.


Classical Music in Review
Gerald Ranck  Harpsichordist The New York Society for Ethical Culture
Completeness has always seemed natural in the world of record collecting, where out-of-the-way and none-too-standard works can be sampled at random or shelved for reference.
In the concert world, the collector's passion for thoroughness has been served more rarely, although the original plan for the 92d Street Y's Schubertiade and the recently completed Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center suggest that the obsession may be a marketable concept.


11-Year-Old Boy Finds Parents Dead In Bronx Apartment
An 11-year-old Bronx boy arrived home from school yesterday afternoon to discover his mother and father shot to death in the living room of the family's apartment.
His 2-month-old brother lay unharmed in a stroller inches from the bodies, the police said.
Investigators said last night that they had no idea why the couple were killed.
The man, Nestor Julio Puente Mello, 31 years old, was shot in the head and abdomen, and his wife, Isabel Perez, 34, was shot in the head and neck.


McCaffery &amp; Ratner Wins 4 Accounts
McCaffery &amp; Ratner Inc. in New York was awarded four accounts with combined billings estimated to exceed $4.8 million: Jean Patou U.S.A. in New York, for fragrances like Joy, 1000 and Sublime; WQXR-AM and FM, the radio stations of The New York Times, for consumer and trade advertising and sales promotion; the Discovery of Italy 1992 event, sponsored by the Italian Trade Commission, being held in New York through Oct. 9, and the Philharmonia Virtuosi in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y..
WQXR was previously handled by Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano in New York, while the Philharmonia was previously handled in-house.


Israel Presents Peace Outline but Syria Is Cool
Israel presented Syria today with a new eight-page outline of its views of a Middle East peace, but the Syrians said the paper was not really serious because it failed to mention a total Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights.
While Syria's chief negotiator, Mouwafak al-Allaf, told reporters after a three-hour negotiating session at the State Department that he found the Israeli paper insufficient, he did not reject it out of hand.


Mud and Dark On First Day Of New Term
The tent city here was still knee deep in darkness as the children walked sleepily through the mud to catch the buses that would take them to school for the first time since Aug. 24, when Hurricane Andrew struck South Florida.
At 6 A.M. the Army mess was not yet ready, so Jason Vitaliano, a 17-year-old senior, picked up his looseleaf folder and flashlight and went straight for the bus, which was supposed to leave the tent complex at Harris Field by 6:15.
He was alone.


Q&amp;A
Tick Survival
Q.
If a deer tick got into the house accidentally, how long could it lurk in the rug without feeding?
A.
The deer tick, which often carries the Lyme disease microbe, requires very humid surroundings and would probably not survive longer than 48 hours in the dry air of a house, said Dr.
David T. Dennis, a physician and epidemiologist with the Centers for Disease Control who is based in Fort Collins, Colo.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The German Rate Cut
Germany's powerful central bank cut its high interest rates slightly.
The cuts were less than many political leaders and economists had hoped, but because high German rates have drawn money from other countries and stifled business investment, even the small step was welcomed around the world.  [ Page A1. ]
Germany's action was interpreted as a new willingness to respond to outside pressures and has opened a debate about whether the central bank has lost its independence.  [ D6. ]
The Bundesbank move was hailed as one that will spur world growth.
But economists do not expect a quick turnaround.  [ D6. ]
Despite a devaluation of the lira by 7 percent, Italy's Prime Minister got no relief from critics of his economic policy.  [ D6. ]  Markets
American stock prices took their biggest leap since December, with the Dow industrials rising 70.52 points, or 2.1 percent, to 3,376.22.
The jump came on heavy volume.  [ D1. ]
Bond prices gained, but not as much as those overseas.
Analysts said many traders were disappointed in the modest size of the German interest rate cuts.  [ D16. ]
Precious metals futures leaped on hopes that Germany's interest-rate cut would ignite higher inflation.  [ D17. ]  The dollar climbed against most currencies in New York and overseas.  [ D17. ]  International
The defense lawyer in a bank fraud trial accused the Bush Administration of manipulating the case to conceal "blunders" in its relationship with Iraq before the invasion of Kuwait.  [ D1. ]
The Administration offered Russia $1.15 billion in loan guarantees and food aid to buy American grain and livestock feed.  [ A6. ]
The French Government offered French voters a deal: it will lower interest rates if they ratify a treaty on European union.  [ A10. ]  The Economy
Two environmental groups have split over the North American Free Trade Agreement's conservation aspects and the Administration is likely to exploit the rift to gain passage of the pact.  [ D1. ]  Companies
The Neiman Marcus Christmas catalogue is a textbook example of using direct mail to reinforce image, enhance mystique and build excitement, retail analysts say.  [ D1. ]
Shearson agreed to sell the Boston Company, its fee-based bank and trust, to Mellon for about $1.5 billion.  [ D1. ]
First Chicago plans to sell its bad real estate loans and cover some of the losses with unreported investment profits.  [ D3. ]
Metropolitan Life and Aetna sued National Medical Enterprises, charging the psychiatric-hospital chain with fraud.  [ D3. ]
Kenneth H. Olsen, co-founder of Digital Equipment, will also leave the board when he retires as president next month.  [ D3. ]
Another Macy executive is leaving.
The chairman of I. Magnin will become president of Saks Fifth Avenue.  [ D3. ]
Australia's international airline Qantas merged with the domestic carrier Australian Airlines in a $290 million deal.  [ D4. ]  Today's Columns
The A.M.A. has taken an unusually active role in the Presidential race and is encouraging members to work in the campaigns.
Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
Eljer Industries is attracting more attention on Wall Street after a court ruling that its insurers are responsible for millions of dollars in product liability claims.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
Two fierce rivals in pay television, Home Box Office and Showtime, are cooperating in a marketing campaign to reverse waning viewership.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Lageman's Loss Sends Jets Into Tailspin
After losing in a humiliating way to Pittsburgh, 27-10, and falling to 0-2, the Jets were trying to dig their way out from underneath a pile of shattered expectations here today.
The job was made more difficult by the news that defensive end Jeff Lageman, perhaps the team's best pass rusher, will be lost for the season with a knee injury.
And quarterback Browning Nagle's status was described as doubtful for the Jets' game Sunday against San Francisco because of a bruised index finger, and he will probably be replaced as the starter by Ken O'Brien.


GERMAN RATES CUT, SETTING OFF SURGE IN WORLD MARKETS
Germany's powerful central bank cut its high interest rates slightly today -- less than many political leaders and economists had hoped -- but even the small cut was enough to provoke a strong worldwide rally in stocks.
The modest cuts, a half-point in one rate and a quarter-point in another, were the Bundesbank's first in five years and seemed as much a nod to the French vote on Sunday on the treaty on European unity as a change in Germany's long-term strategy.


Reaction Soft to German Rate Cut
Germany's interest rate cuts yesterday should have been good news for the American bond market, but investors and traders did not act like it was.
While prices on the domestic market rose, the gains were not as big as those in Europe and Tokyo after the surprise announcement Sunday that Germany would cut its rates.


Sports of The Times; Autumn In New York: Another Fall
AS soon as it became apparent that the Giants were in an irreversible state of decline, hopes hardened into expectations that the Jets would take over Giants Stadium this season: Playoffs for sure, division championship possibly, and who knows after that.
With New York fans becoming increasingly desperate for a winner, the young Jets were eager to accept the championship mantel that has been vacated by the city's pro teams.
So they barreled into the new season with a swagger one would expect from and hope for a team that sees itself on the rise.


Warrant to Be Dismissed
Nassau County authorities intend to dismiss an arrest warrant against 28-year-old Joseph Harris, a man jailed in Texas who had been considered a suspect in more than 50 robberies in Queens and Nassau County, according to a letter from the Nassau County District Attorney, Denis Dillon, that was released by the man's lawyer yesterday.
The lawyer, C. Vernon Mason, said his client was not in New York when the crimes were committed.


Executive Changes
BIOWHITTAKER INC., Walkersville, Md., which develops and produces clinical diagnostic testing systems, cell-culture products and endotoxin-detection assays, appointed Noel L. Buterbaugh chief executive.
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS INC., Minneapolis, which provides products and services to companies that finance their own employee benefit programs, named Richard J. Braun chief operating officer.
GARDNER MERCHANT FOOD SERVICES INC., Trumbull, Conn., a unit of Gardner Merchant Ltd., named Richard T. L. Hutchinson president and chief executive.
HERBALIFE INTERNATIONAL INC., Inglewood, Calif., a maker of health-care and cosmetic products, appointed Norman E. Friedmann chief operating officer.
MARVEL ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC., New York, the comic book publisher, named Jeffrey L. Kaplan executive vice president.
METROPOLITAN FINANCIAL CORP., Minneapolis, a financial-services holding company, named Steven B. Dewald chief financial officer.
MICRODYNE CORP., Alexandria, Va., which develops, manufactures and markets data communications and network connectivity products, appointed R. Dale D'Alessio senior vice president of sales.
QUAKER OATS CO., Chicago, appointed Douglas J. Ralston senior vice president of human resources.
SHOWTIME NETWORKS INC., New York, named Matt Riklin senior vice president of program &amp; distribution.
WHIRLPOOL CORP., Benton Harbor, Mich., manufacturer and marketer of home appliances, appointed Ralph F. Hake to head its North American Appliance Group, as executive vice president.


Slaying of Officer Called Self-Defense
The lawyer for a man accused in the killing of an off-duty Housing Authority officer said yesterday that he would argue that his client acted in self-defense in the shooting on a Queens street.
"The grand jury heard false and misleading information about the facts," the lawyer, Michael L. Santangelo, said as the defendant, Patrick Bannon, was arraigned in State Supreme Court in Queens on a murder indictment charging that he fatally shot the officer and a second man and wounded a third man after a brawl on a Bayside street on July 18.


Classical Music in Review
Leonid Hambro  Pianist Merkin Concert Hall
John Cage would have loved the concept of Leonid Hambro's piano recital on Sunday evening.
Much in the way Cage allowed chance processes and the whims of his performers to determine the directions his works took, Mr.
Hambro let his audience build his program.
Upon entering the hall, listeners were handed a program listing 103 works -- pieces as concise as Chopin's "Minute" Waltz or as big as the Beethoven "Les Adieux" Sonata -- as well as a numbered ticket.
An audience member selected numbers from a box, and those whose numbers were called requested works from Mr.
Hambro's list.


U.S. Backs a Vitamin To Foil Birth Defects
THE United States Public Health Service recommended yesterday that all women of childbearing age should take extra folic acid, a B vitamin, to prevent neural tube defects that affect 1 to 2 of every 1,000 babies born each year.
The effects of these birth defects include paralysis and death.
Researchers on birth defect and nutrition said that if the advice was followed the incidence of neural tube defects like spina bifida and anencephaly should fall to between a quarter and a half of the current figure of 2,300 cases a year.


Hanging Out and Climbing Up at Lunchtime


Candiates in Today's Primary
*
Denotes incumbent NEW YORK Democrat U.S.
SENATE Robert Arbrams Geraldine A. Ferraro Elizabeth Holtzman Al Sharption U.S.
REPRESENTATIVE Nassau 4th District Philip Schiliro Joan F. Axinn Peter T. King QUEENS, NASSAU, SUFFOLK 5th District Gary L. Ackerman*
Rita Louise A. Morris QUEENS 6th District Floyd H. Flake*
Simeon Golar BROOKLYN, MANHATTAN 8th District Arthur R. Block Ted Weiss+ BROOKLYN 10th District Susan D. Alter Franl R. Seddio Edolphus Towns*
QUEENS, BROOKLYN, MANHATTAN 12th District Elizabeth Colon Ruben Franco Eric Ruano Melendez Rafael Mendez Stephen J. Solarz*
Nydia M. Velazquez 14th District Abraham J. Hirschfeld Charles W. Juntikka Carolyn B. Maloney Frederick D. Newman MANHATTAN, BRONX, QUEENS 15th District Jessie Fields Harry C. Fotopoulos Charles B. Rangel*
BRONX, WESTCHESTER 17th District Mario Biaggi Eliot L. Engel*
WESTCHESTER, DUTCHESS, ORANGE, PUTNAM 19th District Catherine Portman-Laux Neil McCarthy ORANGE, DUTCHESS 26th District Juanita M. Crabb Barbara A. Wolfson Maurice D. Hinchey STATE SENATE NASSAU 7th District Michael J. Siris John Handler 9th District Judy Sanford Guise Charles E. Holster 3d BROOKLYN, QUEENS 12th District Adolphus C. Frazier Ada L. Smith*
BROOKLYN 17th District Rafael Esparra George Gonzalez Elba Roman Nellie Santiago BROOKLYN, MANHATTAN 25th District Martin Connor*
Luis W. Osorio BRONX, MANHATTAN 28th District Richard V. Irizarry Olga A. Mendez*
BRONX 31st District Efrain Gonzalez Jr.*
Luis A. Rivera 32d District Carmen E. Arroyo Pedro Espada Jr.
Lillian Fernandez BRONX, WESTCHESTER 33d District Jeffrey R. Korman*
Joseph L. Galiber*
STATE ASSEMBLY QUEENS 26th District Morton C. Hillman*
Lee M. Nigen 31st District Hulbert H. James Sr.
Gregory W. Meeks Kevin Pruitt 33d District Barbara M. Clark*
Anna L. Thompson 34th District Michael J. Crowley Ivan C. Lafayette* 36th District Denis J. Butler*
Archie Mavromatis 38th District Frank Sansivieri Jr.
Anthony S. Seminerio BROOKLYN 42d District Rhoda S. Jacobs*
Ernest N. Foster Edward A. Roberts Clarence A. Robertson 44th District James F. Brennan*
Christine La Cerva Joni Yoswein* 51st District Beatrice Boyd Marilyn Kneeland John Kennedy O'Hara Juan A. Perez Javier A. Nieves 53d District Vito J. Lopez*
Isabel Rodriguez 54th District F. Louis Carabello Thomas F. Catapano*
Darryl C. Towns 55th District Reginald H. Bowman William F. Boyland* 56th District Anthony Monk Albert Vann* 58th District Abu Aq Abu Everett W. George N. Nick Perry Mae West MANHATTAN 64th District Richard N. Gottfried*
Daniel Friedman 66th District Mary Fridley Deborah J. Glick* 67th District Harry Kresky Jerrold Nadler* 68th District Nelson Antonio Denis Bethsaida Colon-Diaz Angelo Del Toro*
Ada I. Vasquez 69th District Judith Jorrisch Edward C. Sullivan* 70th District Helen Daniels Eugene R. Daniels 3d Edward Fields Fordham I. Ronnie Holly Wilbert Kirby Peggy M. Shepard Barbara R. Taylor Keith L. Wright 71st District Herman D. Farrell Jr.*
Mary J. Sweeting 72d District William Alicea Julio C. Hernandez Doris Kelly John Brian Murtaugh* 73d District Trudy L. Mason Bonny Gildin Christopher R. Lynn BRONX 76th District Sarah Alleyne Josephine Martinez Armando Montano Jr.
Peter M. Rivera George L. Sanchez 77th District Claude K. Aska Aurelia Greene* 79th District Gloria Davis*
Gladys Diaz Dorothy Randolph 80th District George Friedman*
Irving A. Gelb WESTCHESTER 84th District James Gary Pretlow Joe L. Farmer Calville R. Dunnon CIVIL COURT BROOKLYN 2d District Harold A. Hall John L. Phillips Jr.
MANHATTAN 2d District Seymour D. Schorr Debra Rose Samuels REPUBLICAN U.S.
REPRESENTATIVE NASSAU 4th District David A. Levy Francis A. Levy Daniel Frisa QUEENS, BRONX 7th District Anna Pfoser Darby Dennis C. Shea STATEN ISLAND, BROOKLYN 13th District Susan Molinari*
Kathleen M. Murphy ORANGE, DUTCHESS 26th District Bob Moppert Robert R. Rossi STATE SENATE WESTCHESTER, DUTCHESS 37th District Mary B. Goodhue*
George E. Pataki STATE ASSEMBLY NASSAU 12th District Philip B. Healey*
Thomas R. Mullen 18th District J. Barrington Jackson Dan M. Hester Sr.
BROOKLYN 51st District Olga Gomez Edwin Ramos WESTCHESTER 89th District Peter M. Sullivan Terence P. Guerriere CONNECTICUT DEMOCRAT U.S.
REPRESENTATIVE 5th District Jim Lawlor Lynn Taborsak 6th District Gene Slason Alan DiCara REPUBLICAN U.S.
SENATE Chris Burnham Brook Johnson U.S.
REPRESENTATIVE 1st District Robert F. Ludgin Philip L. Steele 2d District Glenn Carberry Ed Munster + Died yesterday, but his name remains on the ballot.


Handley and His Defense Tangled at Halftime
At least five defensive players on the Giants said today that several veterans got into a shouting match with Coach Ray Handley at halftime Sunday.
They said Handley told the defense that he did not think the Giants had a chance to overcome a 27-0 deficit against the Dallas Cowboys and that he planned to use younger players in the second half.
They said the veterans who disagreed strongly included linebackers Pepper Johnson, Carl Banks and Steve DeOssie.


Cabdrivers Parade to Protest Inspection System
A chain of yellow cabs stretching at least five blocks disrupted traffic throughout Manhattan yesterday in a demonstration against the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission.
The drivers' complaints centered on the commission's inspection station in Woodside, Queens, where more than half of the city's 50 taxi inspectors were charged last July with taking bribes to overlook safety and emissions violations.


Jumps in Star Speeds Perplex Astronomers
SIXTEEN years ago Dr.
William G. Tifft found evidence of an astonishing phenomenon: the shifts in the spectra of light coming from distant galaxies are grouped in abrupt, regular steps, not a smoothly random distribution.
The observation was so heretical and difficult to explain that it was dismissed by most scientists.
It was as if galaxies could travel only at specific speeds, jumping abruptly from one speed to another, without passing through the intermediate speeds.


German Cut Not Seen as Quick Cure
The Bundesbank's decision to cut German interest rates was hailed in dozens of world capitals as a move that will spur growth in Europe and beyond.
But the cuts are not so sizable that economists expect them to fuel a quick or strong turnaround.
Where the rate cuts might help most, Bush Administration officials and economists said, is by steadying volatile exchange rates and calming the world's jittery markets.


CHRONICLE
DAVID BROZA, an Israeli folk-pop singer and songwriter, could not get the image of the children affected by Hurricane Andrew out of his mind.
"I had just returned from Israel and kept reading about how the school sytems in Florida had been affected," he said yesterday.
"I figured there must be thousands of kids who can't go anywhere, leaving their parents unable to deal with day-to-day problems."


Long Island Teen-Ager May Face New Charges


CHRONICLE
Never underestimate the power of a daughter, even over a king.
KING CARL GUSTAF XVI of Sweden, who used to be a heavy smoker, has given up smoking at the behest of his daughter, CROWN PRINCESS VICTORIA, according to the Associated Press.


Navy Yard Incinerator Will Pay New York an Energy Bonus
To the Editor:
The Brooklyn Navy Yard waste-to-energy facility, which has now been approved by the New York City Council (news article, Aug. 28), represents a sensible, open-minded approach to the city's solid waste crisis.
Engineers have for years debated the feasibility of recycling-only municipal solid-waste programs.
The consensus is that recycling and waste reduction alone cannot handle the volume of waste generated in big cities each day -- especially the 27,000 tons produced in New York City.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush, in Far West, Sides With Loggers
President Bush rushed today to side with Far West loggers in a war with environmentalists over a threatened owl, vowing to block renewal of the Endangered Species Act unless it takes into account jobs and the economy while protecting vanishing creatures.
The President's position, long implicit but not formally announced until now, would force a basic change in the 19-year-old law, one of the strongest environmental measures ever enacted.


U.N. Votes to Reinforce Its Troops in Bosnia
The Security Council voted tonight to add more than 5,000 troops to its force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, after China blocked an American attempt to strengthen the measure by adding a threat to use force to insure delivery of relief supplies.
The Council's vote to reinforce the 1,700 United Nations troops now deployed around Sarajevo airport will allow the peacekeepers to provide armed escorts for convoys of trucks delivering emergency supplies throughout the war-torn republic.


It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam; Clinton and Draft
To the Editor:
As one who came of political age in the 1960's, I am of the same generation as Dan Quayle and Bill Clinton.
Like them, I was not a hippie, but a typical young adult trying to sort out the political and social changes that seemed so overwhelming at that time.
I would like to take issue with Dan Quayle's defense of his joining the National Guard, which he claims was a patriotic deed, at the expense of Bill Clinton's search for a deferment, which Mr.
Quayle calls unpatriotic.
Many of us were against the war in Vietnam, and many did not wish to fight in a conflict they felt was morally wrong in a place where the casualties were devastating.
We all knew that among the methods of avoiding a trip to Vietnam were seeking deferments or joining the National Guard, which most often, was not sent to war but stayed on the home front.


When an Audience Becomes the Show
"If you stumble across this collection of loonies, it looks like a National Front rally," said John Drummond.
"It's rather worrying. But it's not planned like that, and it's really a rather good-humored occasion, without any edge of aggression."
Mr.
Drummond is the director of the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts, known informally as the BBC Proms.
With only a little exaggeration, the Proms calls itself "the greatest music festival in the world," offering in this, its 98th season, 66 summer concerts in the 5,500-seat Royal Albert Hall, a grand, crimson-and-gold Victorian barn on the south side of Hyde Park.
The various BBC orchestras form the heart of the instrumental forces.
But there are also visiting orchestras and operatic ensembles and a venturesome repertory that this year offered 17 premieres and commissions.
All Proms concerts are broadcast on BBC Radio 3 and many are also telecast.


RUSSIA AIDE FAULTS THE CENTRAL BANK
Injecting a new note of urgency into the domestic debate over the country's economic future, a high Government official bitterly accused the Russian Central Bank today of working to discredit the Government and undermine the entire process of economic reform.
The official, Sergei A. Vasiliyev, director of the Government Working Center for Economic Reform and a senior adviser to Acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, sharply criticized a steady issuance of credits by the Central Bank under its new director, Viktor Gerashchenko, and said monetary policy was now out of control.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; Bush Camp Gives Ultimatum on Debates
President Bush's campaign today spelled out its conditions for debates with Gov.
Bill Clinton and threatened to refuse to debate at all if the Arkansas Democrat does not give ground on the format.
The Clinton campaign quickly fired back, saying it would continue to insist on a format proposed by the independent Commission on Presidential Debates.
That format calls for three debates and a single moderator questioning the candidates.


Fond Memories of the Bronx of Yore; Many of Its Natives Are Long Gone, but the Old Borough Is Not Forgotten
Charles Medwin was like many people who grew up in the Bronx in the 40's, 50's and 60's: He couldn't wait to get out.
But now that Mr.
Medwin, a retired New York City police sergeant, lives in Las Vegas, Nev., he drives a car with "BRONX4" on the license plate.
He is also a card-carrying member of the Bronx Historical Society, and eagerly looks forward to news clippings about the Bronx sent by friends in New York.
"I get people honking at me all the time, even the cops," Mr.
Medwin said.
"There's a common bond. See, you didn't really appreciate it when you were there, but you appreciated it later." Down Memory Lane


It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam
To the Editor:
President Bush in his address to the American Legion (front page, Aug. 26) vowed that we would not recognize the Vietnamese Government and exchange diplomats until the prisoner of war-missing in action issue has been resolved.
If this is an example of his foreign policy expertise, proclaimed as one of his main assets qualifying him for another term, I beg to differ.
The opposite seems to me to be indicated.
The fighting in Indochina ended some 20 years ago.
No serious student of that war will deny that our involvement in an area we knew so little about was a tragic mistake.
It is time our Government leads the American people with the maturity expected from a superpower, admits this and acts accordingly.
The first step would be to normalize relations with Hanoi, which would quickly lead to resolution on the prisoners and missing.


Plants' Paths to Devouring Insects
CARNIVOROUS plants, those grisly little flora that trap and devour insects and thus gleefully defy the traditional order of the food chain, may not be such evolutionary oddities after all.
Researchers examining the genetic relationships among many of the 300 or so known species of flesh-eating plants, including the Venus flytrap and the common pitcher plant, have found that there are at least five major lineages of carnivorous plants and that each line developed its trapping mechanism and digestive system independently.


Respite From Teaching Proves Deadly to Wasps
PARKER V. GAMBINO is having those yellow jacket dreams again.
He's washing his hands and the soap bubbles start to move.
Turns out, the bubbles are really yellow jackets, hundreds of them moving in a hairy, humming mass on his body.
They're crawling all over his hands, up his arms and inside his shirt.


It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam; Begin With the Truth
To the Editor:
In "What's Still Missing on M.I.A.'s" (editorial, Aug. 18), you seem surprised that "official Washington misrepresented what it knew" about United States forces missing in action in Vietnam in 1973, and that the Government betrayed "its obligation to the families of the missing and the public at large." Perhaps the real reason there never has been an explanation or apology on the M.I.A. issue is that our Government has never told the American people the truth about our involvement in Vietnam.


With No Time to Lose, Wickman Can't Win
Bob Wickman was not supposed to pitch against the White Sox last night, and it showed.
Summoned into emergency duty after Scott Sanderson strained a muscle in his upper back minutes before the game, Wickman was rushed to the mound and then ambushed.
Wickman's fifth start proved to be his hastiest and his worst, and it also turned into his first major league loss as Chicago torched him for six runs in five innings and then cruised to an 8-6 victory over the Yankees last night at Yankee Stadium.
After winning six in a row to tie their season high, the Yanks have lost two straight.


Bush Adviser to Resign
Michael J. Boskin, the top economic adviser to President Bush, confirmed today that he would leave his post in the next few months regardless of the outcome of the November election.
At the annual convention of the National Association of Business Economists, Mr.
Boskin, who is 46 years old, said that he had agreed to the President's request in 1991 to finish the first Bush term, but had told him that it would then be time to return to private life.


INSIDE
Primaries in New York And Connecticut Today
The contest for the Democratic Senate nomination from New York ground to a bitter end in a whirlwind of street-corner rallies, appeals for upstate support and an emotional paid-television plea by Geraldine A. Ferraro.
Page B1.
A list of the candidates, highlights of the races and voter information for both states.
Page B8.
Iraq Policy's Day in Court
A lawyer for a banker in a fraud case involving Iraq accused the Administration of concealing "blunders" in its pre-gulf war policies.
Page D1.
Russia Invites Inspection
After months of questions about whether it has stopped work on biological weapons, Moscow is opening sites to inspection.
Page A6.
Trade and the Environment
A split has emerged among environmental groups on the conservation aspects of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Page D1.
Advice on Vitamin B
The Government urged all women of childbearing age to take extra folic acid, a B vitamin, to prevent birth defects.
Science Times, page C2.
Health-Care Labor Chief Dies
Leon J. Davis, who built a drugstore clerks union in New York into the largest health-care labor organization in America, died at 85.
Page D23.


Calcium and a Fertilization Mystery
SCIENTISTS are one step closer to explaining why an egg cell is fertilized by only one sperm cell, even when it surrounded by five million sperm.
A receptor molecule on the surface of the egg may trigger the key first steps.
During fertilization, the penetration of the first sperm is followed by a rise in calcium, which turns on the egg's defenses against the competing sperm, keeping them out.
But scientists have not been sure about how that calcium surge is set off.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Does HBO Tell Showtime? In This Campaign, It Does
IMAGINE Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola joining forces to try turning around the decline in cola consumption.
Or McDonald's and Burger King teaming to counter health claims against meat.
Or Bloomingdale's and Macy's getting together to encourage shoppers to leave specialty stores and return to department stores.
An actual version of those hypothetical examples of marketing's lions lying down with its lambs is being developed by the nation's two rivals in pay cable television, Home Box Office and Showtime Networks Inc.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ATLAS CORP., Denver, a gold exploration and production company, agreed to lease certain properties to subsidiaries of Newmont Mining Corp., Denver, for $30 million.
CORNING LAB SERVICES INC., a subsidiary of Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., acquired Southgate Medical Laboratory System, Cleveland.
Terms were not disclosed.
PFIZER INC., New York, signed an interim agreement with the Procter &amp; Gamble Co., Cincinnati, enabling the two companies to pursue joint development of Risedronate, a new prescription drug for osteoporosis by P.&amp; G. Terms were not disclosed.
U.S.
GENERATING CO., a joint venture of Pacific Gas and Electric Co., San Francisco, and Bechtel Group, San Francisco, which builds and manages electric-generating projects, plans to make an offer for AES Corp.'s cogeneration project in Florida by early October.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, an obituary of the actor Anthony Perkins yesterday included two scrambled passages in some editions.
The paragraph at the end of the first column was a quotation from Mr.
Perkins about AIDS.
It should have read: "There are many who believe that this disease is God's vengeance, but I believe it was sent to teach people how to love and understand and have compassion for each other."


Satellite Woes Undercut U.S. Hurricane Forecasts
The United States is facing heightened danger from hurricanes because delays in modernizing its weather satellites are forcing the use of spacecraft so antiquated and poorly positioned that they are raising the risk of forecasting errors, Federal scientists say.
The new limitations were driven home when a satellite instrument that helps gauge a hurricane's likely path was unable to view the critical area around Iniki, which took an unforeseen turn on Friday as it bore down on Hawaii.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Vilas Upended in Bordeaux Opener  Guillermo Vilas was beaten, 6-4, 3-6, 6-0, by German Lopez of Spain in the first round of the $330,000 Bordeaux Passing Shot tournament in France yesterday.
Seventh-seeded Andrei Cherkasov of Russia, the only seeded player in action, advanced by defeating Laurent Prades of France, 6-2, 7-6 (9-7).
In other first-round action, Alex Corretta of Spain beat Thierry Fontang of France, 6-4, 6-1; Francisco Roig of Spain beat countryman Jordi Burillo, 6-7 (4-7,) 6-1, 6-0; Claudio Pistolesi of Italy beat Arnaud Boetsch of France, 7-5, 6-7 (3-7), 6-3; and Guillermo Perez-Roldan won a battle of Argentines, 6-3, 6-7 (3-7), 6-3, against Juan Garat. (AP)


Getting Attention With Texas Excess
Neiman Marcus put more than three million Christmas cards in the mail yesterday in the form of a mail-order catalogue that has come to herald the holiday season.
The items range from the practical, a $19 pony-print apron, for instance, to the absolutely unnecessary, like the $100,000 fully operative, solid-gold miniature train carrying rubies, diamonds, sapphires and emeralds around a 41-foot track.
All this is the cull of a band of mail-order merchants who scour the earth, skies and sea for the 484 gifts offered on the catalogue's pages.


The 1992 Campaign; A Correction


When Women Began to Wear the Pants
To the Editor:
"Who's a Cross-Dresser?" (editorial, Sept. 4) states that "initially women who chose men's clothes -- a George Sand, say, or an Amelia Bloomer -- realized that assuming a man's clothes was a way of assuming a man's status." As early as the 1820's -- decades before Amelia Jenks Bloomer became active -- women in the New-Harmony utopian experiment in Indiana wore pants, as I discuss in "Utopian Episodes: Life in Experimental Colonies Dedicated to Changing the World," to be published next spring.
In the 1840's women at Brook Farm, a utopian colony near Boston, where men and women shared all work equally, favored this style.
Pants gained wide acceptance in other utopian colonies in the following decade.
These women adopted pants because that style helped them function better in a workaday world.
Try running up and down stairs in a floor-length muslin skirt, heavy with bulk and tradition, not to mention navigating the barnyard.
One Brook Farm member explained it quite simply: pants enabled women to "walk well and work well." So women did not don pants to assume power.
Those utopian women pioneered the idea that style should be responsive to function.


Bundesbank Takes Europe's View
The decision by Germany's central bank to cut its record high interest rates today, widely interpreted as a sign of its new willingness to respond to domestic and international pressures, has opened a debate here about whether the bank has lost its legendary independence.
Finance Minister Theo Waigel was jubilant on Sunday night when he announced that the Bundesbank would cut rates on Monday, calling the decision "a very important signal." His announcement startled people who could not recall an occasion when a Bundesbank action was announced by a Government official before it had taken place.


Cubs Keep Fumbling the Lead Before Mets Finally Hang On
There is September scoreboard monitoring to do yet for the Mets.
It's filled with considerable tension, if not great expectations.
The stakes are last place in the National League East, and the chase is on.
The Mets, who had slid backward toward the Phillies over the weekend, tonight managed to avoid surrendering further ground when, after tumult and tedium, they outlasted the Cubs, 10-8, at Wrigley Field.
In the fight with the Phillies, the Mets lead by four and one half games.


METRO DIGEST
THE 1992 CAMPAIGN  AFTER WEISS'S DEATH, CONFUSION
Representative Ted Weiss, the 64-year-old unreconstructed liberal who had long represented the West Side of Manhattan in Congress, died yesterday on the eve of today's primary -- prompting Democratic leaders to plead with voters to support a dead man rather than risk electing the fringe candidate who was Mr.
Weiss's sole rival.
Under the arcane provisions of New York's election laws, Democratic leaders can choose his successor only if Mr.
Weiss wins today against Arthur R. Block, a challenger from the New Alliance Party.
A1.
In Albany Legislature, incumbency reigns.
B6.


CHRONICLE
MARILYN HORNE let out a cry of astonishment when she drew the winning ticket at a raffle on Sunday at Carnegie Hall: "This is hysterical," she said.
"The name is Barbara Bush." The audience roared.
The prize, a trip for two to Scotland, the homeland of Andrew Carnegie, founder of the hall, was awarded at the culmination of a "Carnegie Insider" day that included an open house and a four-hour live broadcast on radio station WNCN.


Lira Drama: Critics Cry, 'What Next?'
After a weekend of high financial drama that culminated in a 7 percent devaluation of the lira, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato of Italy gained no relief today from a chorus of demands that he do what none of his predecessors has done: stop the nation from living beyond its means.
Mr.
Amato, less than three months in office, sought to depict the drop in the lira's worth as anything but a devaluation, saying: "This is not a lira devaluation. This is a revaluation of the mark and an agreement by Germany to cut its interest rates."


Major Races to Watch: Today's Primaries in New York and Connecticut
New York and Connecticut hold primary elections today, with races for the United States Senate, House of Representatives, State Legislature and other offices.
To cast a ballot in a party primary, a voter must be registered and enrolled in that party.
Here are the highlights of some major races.
THE SENATE NEW YORK
In New York, four Democrats are seeking the nomination to challenge Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican Senator.
The Candidates
ROBERT ABRAMS, 54.
Lawyer, State Attorney General since 1979.
Elected Bronx Borough President, 1969.
First won office as Assemblyman from the Bronx, 1965.
His compaign had raised about $4.2 million as of late last month.
GERALDINE A. FERRARO, 57.
Lawyer, former New York City public elementary school teacher and Assistant District Attorney in Queens.
Elected to Congress from Queens, 1978.
Chosen Democratic Vice-Presidental nominee in 1984.
Had raised about $4.3 million.
ELIZABETH HOLTZMAN, 51.
Lawyer, New York City Comptroller since 1989.
As Congresswoman, served on House Judiciary Committee during impeachment hearings of President Richard M. Nixon.
Won Democratic nomination for Senate in 1980, but lost election to Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Elected Brooklyn District Attorney, 1981.
Has raised about $1.8 million.
AL SHARPTON, 37.
Child preacher, ordained at age 10 by a Pentecostal minister in Brooklyn.
Active in various civil rights causes for two decades.
Making first run for elected office.
Had raised about $60,000.
The Issues
The Candidates have few major policy differences.
Mr.
Abrams and Ms.
Holtzman support cuts in defense spending three times as deep as those advocated by Ms.
Ferraro, and more sweeping changes in health insurance.
She alone supports the death penalty.
In the last month, the race has boiled down to a bitter referendum over Ms.
Ferraro's family finances, and she and her rivals have accused each other of lies and distortions.
Analysis
There are no publicly available statewide polls to provide a reliable picture of the race, but most analysis and the campaigns themselves foresee a close contest between Mr.
Abrams and Ms.
Ferraro.
The outcome depends heavily on turnout, which is forecast to be less than one-quarter of the state's 3.8 million registered Democrats.
Returns from upstate, where one-third of registered Democrats live, may prove pivotal.
Connecticut The Candidates
CHRIS BURNHAM, 35.
Two-term state representative from Stamford who is on leave from his job as a public finance specialist with First Boston.
His campaign has spent about $430,000.
BROOK JOHNSON, 45.
Millionaire textile executive and political greenhorn from Greenwich.
His campaign has spent about $900,000, much of it Mr.
Johnson's own money.
The Issues
Mr.
Burnham and Mr.
Johnson hold similar positions on the major issues.
Both favor the creation of private enterprise zones, tax breaks for investors to create jobs and stimulate the economy, and spending curbs to reduce the Federal deficit.
Both support a woman's right to choose an abortion.
Analysis
Mr.
Burnham is campaigning as a "grassroots" candidate whose greatest strength is his willingness to knock on doors and even walk across part of the state to reach voters.
He won the endorsement of the state Republican Party at its convention in July.
Polls show that few people are aware of his candidacy, and he is running 40 or more percentage points behind Mr.
Dodd.
Polls show that despite his spending twice as much as Mr.
Burnham, Mr.
Johnson is doing just about as poorly against the incumbent as his rival.
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 5TH DISTRICT: QUEENS, NASSAU The Candidates
GARY L. ACKERMAN, 49.
Former publisher of The Queens Tribune.
He served in the State Assembly from 1979 to 1983 and has represented the 7th Congressional District in central Queens since 1983.
RITA MORRIS, 68.
Professor of Library Science at Nassau County Community College.
Although she has been involved in local community and school groups in Westbury, L.I., she has no prior political experience.
The Issues
The cost of health care is important in the district and both candidates support a comprehensive national health insurance program that would be financed largely through employer payroll taxes.
Mr.
Ackerman fovors Federal aid to retool defense firms like Grumman, many of whose residents live in the district.
Mrs.
Morris has called for speeding up public works projects to create jobs.
Analysis
Mr.
Ackerman, who has apologized to constituents for writing 111 bad checks in the House bank scandal, is endorsed by Democratic committees in three counties.
They have lent volunteers and other support to his campaign, which has increased Mr.
Ackerman's already strong voter recognition, particularly in Queens, Ms.
Morris is considered a long shot, but this is the year of the woman and often of dissatisfaction with incumbents. 6TH DISTRICT: QUEENS The Candidates
FLOYD H. FLAKE, 47.
Has represented the southeast Queens district for six years.
He previously gained a local reputation as the socially active pastor of the 6,000-member Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church in Jamaica, Queens.
SIMEON GOLAR, 63.
Lawyer, former chairman of the city's Human Rights Commission and City Housing Authority and a Family Court judge.
He has run uncuccessfully for the House four times.
The District
The 6th District, which emerged relatively intact from the recent Congressional redistricting, includes predominantly black middle-class areas like Cambria Heights and Springfield Gardens, predominantly white middle-class sections like Bellerose and pockets of poverty and deterioration in South Jamiaca and the Rockaways.
The Issues
Mr.
Golar, backed by the Queens Democratic organization, says Mr.
Flake has been a "part-time congressman" who spends too much time on his church activities and not enough on his congressional duties.
Mr.
Flake dismisses the charges, saying the "real issue" is that he is working to help the community gain "grass roots" power and that this threatens local party loyalists, for whom Mr.
Golar is fronting.
Analysis
Mr.
Flake started as the far-better-known incumbent, with a small army of committed political workers from his church, so the outcome will depend on how successful Mr.
Golar and his own cadre of party workers are in making Mr.
Golar known to the voters and in persuading them that Mr.
Flake has shortcomings that shortchange them. 10TH DISTRICT: BROOKLYN The Candidates
EDOLPHUS TOWNS, 58.
Teacher, hospital administrator and college professor in New York before becoming deputy borough president of Brooklyn in 1976.
Elected to Congress in 1982.
SUSAN ALTER, 50.
A founder of the Flatbush Development Corporation.
Has been a member of the City Council since 1978.
FRANK SEDDIO, 45.
Lawyer and former police officer.
Former district manager of Community Planning Board 18 and former assistant commissioner of the New York City Department of Transportation.
The District
The new 10th District, which sits like a canopy over the northern part of Brooklyn, was redrawn this year to maximize black voter strength.
Still, it pulls in widely diverse areas, including predominantly white middle-income sections like Carroll Gardens and Brooklyn Heights; predominantly minority areas like Bedford-Stuyvesant and East New York; Williamsburg, where Hasidic and Hispanic residents co-exist uneasily, and white, blue-collar Cararsie.
The Issues
Mr.
Towns, who is backed by the Brooklyn Democratic organization, says Ms.
Alter, his principal opponent and a white woman, does not understand "the unity of the black community." He also argues that she does not have the seniority or connections to be effective in Congress.
Ms.
Alter criticizes Mr.
Towns for "poor constituent service," for his involvement in the House Bank scandal and for taking money from the tabacco industry.
Mr.
Towns rejects those charges, saying he had "overdrafts" but no bounced checks.
And he says he accepts less tobacco money than other New York congressmen.
Analysis
After facing only token opposition in the voting booth since his election to Congress in 1982, Mr.
Towns is contending against strong anti-incumbency sentiments, redistricting and an unexpectedly strong showing by Ms.
Alter.
Mr.
Towns has captured almost every major political endorsement but must hold on to the support of the largely minority sections of the new district to win.
Ms.
Alter, who entered the race late, has made inroads into the mostly black neighborhoods.
Mr.
Seddio is expected to get support mainly in Canarsie, where he is from. 12TH DISTRICT: QUEENS, BROOKLYN, MANHATTAN The Candidates
ELIZABETH COLON, 40.
Former executive director of the Association of Puerto Rican Executive Directors, a public policy and advocacy organization.
She lives on the Lower East Side.
RUBEN FRANCO, 45.
Former president of the Puerto Rican Legel Defense and Education Fund, a civil right group.
He lives in the South Bronx.
ERIC RUANO MELANDEZ, 42.
Assistant professor of psychology at Bronx Community College and is a member of the New Alliance Party.
He lives in the South Bronx.
STEPHEN J. SOLARZ, 51.
United States representative from the 13th District in Brooklyn since 1975.
Serves on the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Lives in Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn.
NYDIA M. VELAZUEZ, 39.
Former secretary of the Department of Puerto Rican Community Affairs in the United States.
Lives in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
The District
Hispanic residents represent 58 percent of the district's total population.
Of the registered Democrats, Hispanics represent 49 percent, non-Hispanic whites are 29 percent, blacks are 16 percent and Asian Americans are 5 percent.
The Issues
In a race where the leading candidates are not widely separated by ideology, the central issue is whether a non-Hispanic, Mr.
Solarz, can capably represent a district that is predominantly Hispanic.
Mr.
Solarz says that he can, and that he has the experience to deliver services more effectively.
His rivals say he will be out of touch with his Spanish-speaking constituents.
Analysis
With a $2 million warchest that has enabled him to inundate the Spanish and English-language media with advertisements.
Mr.
Solarz is considered the frontrunner.
But he has been wounded by the House bank scandal, and if one Hispanic candidate -- most likely Ms.
Velazquez or Ms.
Colon -- can grab a preponderance of Hispanic votes, the race could become extremely close. 17TH DISTRICT: BRONX, WESTCHESTER The Candidates
ELIOT L. ENGEL, 45.
Former teacher and State Assemblyman who grew up in Co-Op City.
Seeking his third term in the House, where he serves on the Foreign Affairs Committee
MARIO BAIGGI, 74.
Was Bronx Democratic Congressman for 20 years.
Mr.
Biaggi's most recent term was cut short in 1989, when he received an eight-year prison sentence for among other things, bribery and extortion.
A judge freed him last year to receive treatment for what were called life-threatening heart and neurological problems.
The District
The redrawn 17th District cuts through the northern Bronx and darts into parts of southern Westchester County.
Its population is now nearly two-thirds black and Hispanic.
Some of Mr.
Biaggi's former strong holds, like the white ethnic neighborhoods of Morris Park and Thogs Neck, were excised.
The district includes includes Co-Op City; the Irish working-class enclaves of Woodlawn and Norwood, and south Mount Vernon and its middle-class black homeowners.
The Issues
While neighborhoods vary, voters have many of the same concerns -- affordable health care and housing, more jobs, lower taxes and above all, safer streets.
And for many, Mr.
Biaggi himself is an issue.
He has based his comeback bid, in part, on his political record, a reputation for championing the working people through unflagging constituent service and legislation over 10 terms in Congress.
Mr.
Engel has tried to shift the focus to Mr.
Biaggi's conviction on charges stemming from the Wedtech bribery scandal.
Analysis
Mr.
Biaggi, a police officer for 23 years prior to his political career, has been endorsed by the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association and other police groups.
But he faces formidable obstacles, including Mr.
Engel's contention that Mr.
Biaggi "disgraced" his former office.
Democratic leaders have not welcomed Mr.
Biaggi back.
Though less colorful than his opponent, Mr.
Engel is better-organized and better-financed.


Kenneth Kendrick, 43, Magazine Art Director
Kenneth L. Kendrick, a former art director of The New York Times Magazine, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Kendrick died of complications of AIDS, said Owen Hartley, his companion.


Persian Gulf Journal; At 140degrees Below Decks, You Might Say War Is Hell
American aviators and sailors in the Persian Gulf, daily sending warplanes into the skies over southern Iraq, have discovered that the most debilitating force they confront is one that Saddam Hussein does not control: the sun.
"Heat is our biggest enemy," Capt.
Carter B. Refo said, gazing out at the water from the bridge.
"We have paid a lot of attention to training people how to deal with heat. In this weather you have to force-feed the body with fluids."


How to Tell Colleges From Canned Soup
To the Editor:
"M.I.T. Ruled Guilty in Antitrust Case" (front page, Sept. 3) shows again the poor understanding throughout society about education, its principles and its agencies.
An antitrust action against a university implies that it is a business and has violated a law of trade.
If a college or university is a business, why is it tax-exempt?
Why does it never show a profit and yet keeps going?
Why does it give money to some of its customers?


Germany's Pollution Offers A Shield
ALTHOUGH they occupy similar latitudes in opposite hemispheres, New Zealand is exposed to nearly twice as much harmful ultraviolet radiation from the Sun as Germany, scientists have found.
Ozone in the atmosphere screens out the radiation, and the scientists attributed the sharp difference to reduced ozone in the upper atmosphere, or stratosphere, over New Zealand and increased ozone polluting the lower atmosphere, or troposphere, over Germany.


Environment Rift Emerges In Trade Pact
On the eve of Congressional hearings on one of the most contentious aspects of the North American Free Trade Agreement, a split has emerged among environmental groups on the conservation aspects of the accord.
And the Bush Administration is likely to exploit that rift to try to gain passage of the trade pact.
The accord is opposed by the Sierra Club and various other groups, which predict that it will lead to less stringent environmental safeguards.
But the National Wildlife Federation, the nation's largest conservation group, is leaning toward issuing a public statement in support of the agreement, said Stewart J. Hudson, a trade expert with the group.
And at the World Wildlife Fund, the chairman, Russell E. Train, is waging a campaign to persuade the group's president, Kathryn S. Fuller, to endorse the trade agreement.
Both organizations helped draft parts of the pact.


Trenton G.O.P. Chief Runs for Congress
Assemblyman Robert D. Franks, chairman of the Republican State Committee, announced his candidacy today for the Seventh District Congressional seat being vacated by Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo.
Flanked by Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian and Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco and with virtually the entire Republican Assembly majority looking on, Mr.
Franks began his Congressional campaign with a familiar refrain -- painting the Democratic-controlled Congress as a club of greedy insiders and himself as a reformer.


Business and Health; Partisan Doctors In Campaign '92
THIS year's Presidential election could well be a watershed event for doctors.
Many physicians think it could determine the future of the nation's troubled health-care system, perhaps radically changing their profession.
And so, abandoning their usual stance on the sidelines in Presidential races, many doctors are volunteering to assist in the Bush-Quayle or Clinton-Gore campaigns.
The doctors' concerns reflect national sentiments: recent public surveys have found health-care to be second only to the economy as the most important issue.


Will Honors Finally Follow Eckersley's Heroics?
Maybe this isn't a subject for September, but in the final weeks of a season gone mad, there is still something orderly about the baseball summer.
Dennis Eckersley is pitching the Oakland Athletics to another division title, and won't somebody finally suggest that he is the most valuable player in the American League?
It might be time.
Eckersley, for all his wondrous work the past five seasons, has never been recognized for what he surely is: the best reliever in the game and the most important component on a team that is approaching its fourth American League West championship in five years.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Acquired Tony Campbell, forward, from the Minnesota Timberwolves for a conditional second-round draft choice.
Global Basketball Association
GREENVILLE SPINNERS -- Signed Gordon Winchester, forward.
SOUTH GEORGIA BLUES -- Traded Andy Toolson, guard, to Cedar Rapids for Sean Gay, guard.
Signed Craig Sutters and Charles McGill, guards.


No Headline
This is just such a bloodless business, politics.
The man just died and people are asking if I am going to run. -- FRANZ S. LEICHTER, a State Senator mentioned to replace Representative Ted Weiss.  [ B7:2. ]


Review/Dance; Despite the Title, Moves Fill 'The Planted Foot'
Carol Blanco, Curt Haworth and Carol Kueffer communicated their love of movement in a program called "The Planted Foot," which they presented on Sunday night at the Cunningham Dance Studio in the West Village.
Although their works were never choreographically profound, they managed to avoid both triviality and pretentiousness.
There were moments when the dancers did indeed plant their feet firmly on the ground.
At other times, feet took to the air.
And wherever their feet may have been, the performers always danced with zest.
Mr.
Haworth's "Round and Round," to music by Toby Twining, was filled with curving and twisting movements that kept bringing Juli Greenberg and Mr.
Haworth together and then drawing them apart.
The two dancers could have been tying and untying emotional knots.


Murder Charge in Crash
A 64-year-old Queens man was killed yesterday when the livery cab in which he was riding was struck by a stolen car at the intersection of Skillman Avenue and 39th Street in Queens , the police said.
The driver of the stolen Pontiac, identified as Patrick Marrin, 22 years old, of 63-37 Fresh Pond Road, was arrested and charged with second-degree murder, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.


Doctors' Group Offers Plan To Curb Health-Care Costs
The American College of Physicians, the largest medical specialty group in the United States, said today that there should be an overall national limit on health-care spending, with new restrictions on the amounts charged by doctors and hospitals.
The proposal signals a turning point in the debate over the future of the American health-care system because it indicates that significant numbers of doctors now support an approach favored by many labor unions, big businesses and Democratic members of Congress.


Irish Poll Swoon After Tie May Affect Bowl Lineup
To the surprise of the harried people in the home-team dressing room at Notre Dame Stadium, the question is no longer whether the 17-17 tie with Michigan will hurt the Fighting Irish.
The question now is how much damage has been done.
The controversy surrounding Notre Dame's conservative approach in the final 65 seconds of the game here Saturday, and the resulting four-place drop to seventh in two polls, could have long-range consequences because the new coalition of bowl games will be guided by The Associated Press's poll of reporters and broadcasters in its selection process.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about the Democratic primary in New York's 14th Congressional District omitted part of the district, on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
A corrected map appears today on page B6.


BRIEFS
Debt
*
Fifth Third Bancorp, Cincinnati, a holding company for the Fifth Third Bank, is offering $100 million of 4 percent notes due 1994 at a price of 99.94 to yield 4.031 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P. *
H.
J.
Heinz Co., Pittsburgh, is offering $250 million of 5 1/2 percent notes due 1997 at 99.805 to yield 5.545 percent through Dillon, Read &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P. *
MBNA American Bank N.A., a unit of MBNA Corp., is offering $200 million of 7 1/4 percent 10-year subordinated debt securities at a price of 99.403 to yield 7.335 percent through Merrill Lynch.


AMDAHL FORECASTS A LOSS FOR THE SECOND QUARTER
The Amdahl Corporation said yesterday that an unexpected decline in demand recently for its new mainframe computers was likely to result in a loss for the third quarter.
Amdahl, which is based in Sunnyvale, Calif., cited the sluggish worldwide economy and its adverse effect on capital spending as the primary factors that are limiting demand for its mainframes, tape and disk drives.


U.S. and Israel Working Out Deal To Offset Warplane Sale to Saudis
The United States and Israel are negotiating a major military cooperation package that would help compensate Israel for the sale of top-of-the-line F-15 fighter jets to Saudi Arabia, Israeli and American officials said today.
The package focuses on how to provide Israel with more access to American satellite intelligence and military equipment, especially high-technology items that would enable Israel to improve its own weaponry.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.01
5.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.91
5.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.93
5.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.80
5.87
7.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.25
7.29
7.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.44
9.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.24
6.24
6.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Observer; Two in Pangloss Mode
When Ross Perot quit he freed President Bush and Governor NotBush to avoid the subject, and they have since been avoiding it with zest.
The subject, of course, is: "What's it going to take to haul the economy out of the pit?"
Mr.
Perot decided the answer was, "Sacrifice." The word gives off noble vibration, but everybody knows that, after we enjoy the pleasure of being called to sacrifice, pain cometh swiftly to all but the canny and the well connected.
That's why seasoned politicians handle sacrifice gingerly.


Clara Rotter, 82, Times Critics' Aide On the Theater Beat
Clara Rotter, for many years secretary of The New York Times drama department and a well-known figure in Broadway circles, died on Sunday at her home in Woodside, Queens.
She was 82 years old.
She died after a long illness, said her brother Alex, of Queens.


Market Place; Eyes Are on Eljer As It Wins Ruling
AN appeals court ruling last month favoring Eljer Industries Inc., a maker of plumbing and air-conditioning systems, in a suit with its insurer has sparked renewed interest from investors who have seen the company's financial performance and stock price pummeled by a lower court's adverse decision last year.
In June 1991, a district court effectively denied Eljer insurance coverage for product-liability claims from homeowners and others over leaks in the joints of about 5 percent of its plastic plumbing systems.
The company has since shifted from plastic fittings to the more durable brass type.


Remember the Massacre
The dying 102d Congress has only three weeks to renew the expiring 1978 independent counsel law.
Failure to do so will give added weight to the movement to impose term limits on Congress.
After all, what good is it for members to stick around a long time if they won't act on their memory of Watergate, the Saturday Night Massacre and a President who claimed the right to fire prosecutors on his trail?
If White House veto threats make agreement difficult, Congress could pass a simple temporary extension.
To let this law lapse without a fight is to ignore the grave evidence of recent history.


Philharmonic Ready To Mark 150th Year With Music and More
Today and tomorrow Kurt Masur, the New York Philharmonic musicians, the soprano Kathleen Battle and the "Live From Lincoln Center" camera crews will have their final rehearsals for the celebratory concert that will open the orchestra's 150th season, tomorrow evening at 8.
But as the musicians polish the details of Leonard Bernstein's "Fanfare for Bima," the Symphonic Dances from "West Side Story," the selection of Strauss and Bernstein songs that Miss Battle is to sing and Mr.
Masur's own suite from Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet," others on the orchestra's staff will be putting the finishing touches on an ambitious program of nonmusical activities tied to the anniversary.
Starting this week and running through June, stores, restaurants and museums all over Manhattan are presenting tributes to the Philharmonic, America's oldest symphony orchestra, using material drawn largely from the Philharmonic's own archives.
There is plenty of memorabilia to draw on: photographs of legendary conductors and performers, posters advertising landmark concerts, antique program books, correspondence between the orchestra, conductors and composers, some 4,000 radio and television broadcast tapes, and a collection of batons used by most of the orchestra's directors, from its founder, Ureli Corelli Hill, to Zubin Mehta. (Mr. Masur will have to contribute something else to the collection: he does not use a baton.)  New Kinds of Programs
The orchestra is also adding some special features to its programming as part of the celebration, and Deborah Borda, the orchestra's managing director, said the other day that many of these innovations would become part of the orchestra's regular programming mix.
Included are special celebrations: a week devoted to the actual anniversary of the orchestra's Dec. 7, 1842, debut, and another devoted to the music of Leonard Bernstein, in June.
A series of pre-concert lectures has been added.


National Medical Faces Second Suit by Insurers
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and Aetna Life Insurance Company filed suit yesterday, charging that National Medical Enterprises, which operates a chain of more than 70 psychiatric hospitals, committed a $500 million insurance fraud.
The suit follows by five days the seizure of documents by Federal and state law-enforcement officials at a National Medical Enterprises hospital in Wisconsin, where the agencies said they had found evidence of fraud in Medicaid billings.


Botanists Seek The First Flower
SCHOLARS of vertebrate evolution may endlessly ponder why the dinosaurs died and how reptiles gave rise to mammals, but for botanists the most glorious mystery of all is the origin of the first flowering plants.
Today, flowering plants, or angiosperms, are the lords of the botanical kingdom, greatly outnumbering nonflowering plants and defining the contours of nearly every terrestrial habitat on earth, from the American plains to the Amazon rain forest.


U.S. Investigates Arms Exports to Southern Africa
A Federal investigation into the possible diversion of arms shipments to South Africa was disclosed yesterday when an anti-apartheid group asked a Federal judge in Manhattan to compel the Commerce Department to disclose all arms exports to southern Africa.
The Federal inquiry was reported to center on allegations that some arms manufacturers forged export documents on weapons they were shipping to the region.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH  In a speech in Colville, Wash., yesterday.
"Technology is key not just to our economic future, but our environmental future as well. . . . Command and control regulation locks this old technology in place. You need incentives -- you need investment -- to make new breakthroughs possible. These programs all reject the old command-and-control mentality that drove up the costs, reduced jobs and never achieved the environmental progress that we desired.


U.S. PANEL BACKING BROADCAST TO ASIA
A Congressional commission recommended today that the United States expand broadcasting to China and other Asian Communist nations with programs that support democratic movements and provide uncensored news of events in those countries.
But the 11-member commission, established by Congress in October 1991 with strong bipartisan support, was sharply divided over whether to set up new services for Asia similar to Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, or to rely on the existing network of the Voice of America.
The issue now goes to Congress, where hearings begin in the Senate on Tuesday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Movement on Debates Reflects Shifting Needs
The sudden proposal by the Bush campaign to open direct negotiations with Gov.
Bill Clinton's staff on the subject of Presidential debates means more than just a realization by Republicans that their strategy of holding out was hurting them politically.
It is, perhaps, also an indication that they sense their campaign is listing, and that a dramatic event is needed to right the ship.


Russia and West Reach Accord on Monitoring Germ-Weapon Ban
In response to pressure from the West for proof that Russia has shut down its germ-warfare program, Moscow has agreed to provide access to its biological research sites.
In a statement today, American, British and Russian officials announced the agreement, which was reached in secret talks the three nations held last week in Moscow.


It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam; American Heroes Too
To the Editor:
Bill Clinton explained to the American Legion convention (front page, Aug. 26) that he would have gone to Vietnam if drafted, but he was relieved when his draft number did not come up, "because I believed so strongly that our policy in Vietnam was wrong." Mr.
Clinton, myself and many others who opposed the war took a middle ground, avoiding going to Vietnam, yet not risking much to stop the war.
Some did more.
I remember another front-page story, from the spring of 1966, about the court-martial in Vietnam of Flukie Suarez.
Flukie was a 21-year-old black man I worked with in the civil rights movement.
He and I drove from Louisiana to Washington in the fall of 1965 to participate in an antiwar demonstration.


Round Two: D'Amato Takes Aim At Opponent
Even before he found out that Robert Abrams would most likely be his Democratic opponent, Republican Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato was spewing venom in Mr.
Abrams's direction.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Mr.
D'Amato skewered the State Attorney General with several select adjectives: "insipid" and "flaccid, no, no, I mean, placid, placid."


The Athletics Hammer In the Last Nail
The Oakland Athletics may have approached their series with the Minnesota Twins with cautious optimism, but it was obvious tonight that there was no need for restraint.
The A's, nearing their fourth American League West title in five seasons, dispatched the second-place Twins for the second straight game, this time with a 2-1 victory that extended their division lead to eight games.


Dinkins Tries To Heal Rift With Police On Shooting
Mayor David N. Dinkins used the Police Department's annual medal day ceremony yesterday to reach out to police officers in an attempt to heal a rift caused by his visit to the family of a drug suspect who was fatally shot by a police officer in Washington Heights.
On Thursday, Mr.
Dinkins showed anger in explaining his position to an officer who confronted him during roll call in the 34th Precinct station house.
But yesterday, the Mayor was conciliatory before the 500 people, mostly police officers and their families, who had gathered in front of police headquarters in lower Manhattan to honor the acts of courage or community service by 67 police officers.


Alexander Marble, 90, Physician And Leader at a Diabetes Center
Dr.
Alexander Marble, an expert on diabetes and president emeritus of the Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston, died Sunday at Carlton Willard Village, a retirement community in Bedford, Mass.
A former resident of Brookline, Mass., he was 90 years old.
He died after a long illness, the center said.


Harvey Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Campus Journal; Twin Goals: $250,000 for AIDS and a Lofty Peak
Thinking about his passion for mountain climbing and his desire to raise money for AIDS research, Alex Friedman did what undergraduates like himself are often taught to do in college: he reached for the interconnectedness of things.
"My whole idea was to kind of bridge the idea of AIDS and of fighting AIDS," he said last week, back at Princeton to begin his senior year as a politics major.
"Climbing is a really elemental challenge, where your well-being depends on the support of those around you and how much effort you give. Fighting AIDS, you need the support and the energy of all around you. So the symbolism really worked for me."


It's Matisse vs. Music As the Fall Season Gets Under Way
Perhaps when you're installing 400 works by Matisse, it's easy to get distracted, so distracted that you don't hear the New York Philharmonic tuning up across town.
And the Philharmonic can hardly be blamed for assuming that no one would dare give a party to compete with its 150th-birthday celebration.
Surprise.
Two blockbuster openers take place tonight: the first in a series of private previews of the Henri Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art, and the gala opening concert of the New York Philharmonic's 150th-anniversary season.


CHINA-JAPAN LINK ON MISSILES SEEN
The Toshiba Machine Company, which was penalized by the United States for selling equipment that helped the Soviet Union silence its submarines in the 1980's, also sold a machine that may now be helping China build better missiles, a Japanese magazine reports.
Toshiba Machine concedes that in 1985 it sold an electron beam machine, a sophisticated piece of equipment used in making integrated circuits, to a company in Hong Kong.
Both the company and the machine mysteriously vanished.


Review/Music; The Tully Behind The Hall Turns 90
Nelson A. Rockefeller once introduced her as Miss Alice Tully Hall.
She piloted planes for the Civil Air Patrol during the Second World War.
She had a 14-year career as a dramatic soprano in Europe and the United States.
She is a second cousin of Katharine Hepburn, the niece of an Ambassador to the Court of St.
James's and a granddaughter of the founder of Corning Glass.
She is also among the most active patrons of musical performance in our time.
And at a gala concert on Monday night in honor of her 90th birthday in the hall that bears her name, Alice Tully's achievement was demonstrated as well as described.
Though she was ill and could not attend ("those stubborn doctors," she told a friend), her presence was palpable in the testimonials and performances.
In excerpts of some of Miss Tully's favorite works, such soloists as Isaac Stern, Yo-Yo Ma, Richard Goode and Andre Previn, along with members of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, joined forces to pay tribute.


Dense-Pac Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


McCormick &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Reso Kidnapper Admits State Charges
A week after confessing his crimes in Federal Court, Arthur D. Seale pleaded guilty today to state kidnapping charges in the abduction and death of the Exxon executive Sidney J. Reso.
Mr.
Seale, a 45-year-old former Hillside police officer and Exxon security official, pleaded guilty before a grand jury had indicted him, apologizing to the victim's wife and accepting the virtual certainty of life in prison and several million dollars in fines.


REP. SOLARZ LOSES IN A NEW DISTRICT
United States Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the nine-term incumbent from Brooklyn, was defeated for re-election last night by Nydia M. Velazquez, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico's former representative in New York, in a Democratic primary.
Ms.
Velazquez was thus virtually assured of becoming the first Hispanic woman elected to represent New York City in Congress.
Ms.
Velazquez, 39 years old, did what political analysts said was virtually impossible, winning in the newly drawn 12th Congressional District, despite a crowded field of five Hispanic candidates and Mr.
Solarz's overwhelming campaign fund of $2 million, more than all the other candidates combined.
A Hispanic District
Mr.
Solarz had struggled to save his career after legislators in Albany wiped out his old Brooklyn district.
He took the risk of running in a district drawn specifically to maximize Hispanic voting strength.


Voicing Confidence, Italian Leader Bets on French 'Yes' to Europe
Six days before a French referendum on the treaty on European union, the Italian Prime Minister, Giuliano Amato, said today that he believed that the chances of a "yes" vote were strengthening and that his own country would ratify the pact whatever the outcome in France.
Possibly more than other European Governments, Rome has a lot riding on the French vote, because many of its leaders and financial thinkers believe Italy needs the fiscal discipline demanded by the treaty to solve pressing economic problems rooted in runaway Government spending and widespread tax evasion.


Alimentation Couche-Tard reports earnings for Qtr to July 26


Advanced Photonix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Left-Hand Trouble A Given For Mets
The endless summer for the Mets has once more extended the club's search for a dependable left-hander in the bullpen.
The organization's quest has been a misadventure, the list of failed candidates lengthy and occasionally laughable.
To be sure, the population of major-league-quality left-handed middle relievers is microscopic.
But the Mets are a club with a giant checkbook, and one whose system used to be loaded with pitching prospects, and their inability to attract, produce or keep a left-handed reliever has been perplexing.


CRAY RESEARCH AND MOTOROLA INC. FORM A CHIP VENTURE
Cray Research Inc. and Motorola Inc. said yesterday that they had formed a partnership to develop application-specific integrated circuits, a chip designed to perform certain tasks.
The agreement stems from a long-term customer-supplier relationship between the two companies, in which Motorola has produced high-performance chips for many of Cray's supercomputers.
Cray will apply Motorola's manufacturing knowledge to construct and operate a new chip-production operation in Chippewa Falls, Wis.


Garret G. Ackerson, 88, Envoy In East Europe During Cold War
Garret G. Ackerson Jr., a retired career Foreign Service officer who headed United States legations and embassies in Eastern Europe during some of the most difficult periods of the cold war, died Monday at his home in Lexington, Mass.
He was 88 years old.
Mr.
Ackerson, who had long suffered from Parkinson's disease, died of kidney failure, said his daughter, Rhoda A. Weyr of Manhattan.


Stocks Fall as Markets Rethink German Role
One day after Germany's central bank grudgingly nudged its interest rates down, financial markets across Europe and in the United States fell today as investors concluded that the Bundesbank by itself could not foster economic recovery or ease currency strains.
The widespread declines in stock prices wiped out much of the gains recorded on Monday.
Despite the German rate cuts, key currencies like the British pound tumbled in value relative to the German mark, and the Italian central bank was forced to intervene to support the lira just two days after it was devalued by 7 percent.


Foreigners Didn't Cause German Violence
To the Editor:
"German Unrest Expected to Bring Tightening of Law on Immigration" (front page, Sept. 2) reports that the latest violent attacks against foreigners in Germany has renewed calls to restrict the right to asylum guaranteed in Germany's Constitution.
German officials condemn the violence, yet call for limiting foreigner access to Germany.
This may respond to the political climate in Germany, but ignores the severity of the crimes German citizens are committing against foreigners, thus subtly shifting the focus and the blame to the foreigners themselves.
The rise in right-wing violence is not solely, or even primarily, the result of Germany's asylum policy.
It reflects the breakdown of the economic and social infrastructure in Eastern Germany following reunification.
Eastern Germany is struggling with the legacy of its Communist past and with its new role in a unified Germany.
The failed ideology of the former East Germany has not been replaced with a new set of values.
An underlying xenophobia among portions of the population has not been acknowledged or addressed.


With X Gone, T. C. Looks to Garden Stage
So the X-Man's gone.
Don't nobody fret.
T.
C.'s here to be the new Top Cat.
Tony Campbell didn't put it exactly that way yesterday, but the newest Knick came close.
Campbell, also known as T. C. and Top Cat, is a rap writer and producer who was, appropriately enough, in a New Jersey recording studio on Monday cutting a demo of a rap rendition called "Real Deal" when he got the news of the deal that sent him from Minnesota to New York as Xavier McDaniel's replacement.


DISPUTED OFFICIAL SEATED IN MEXICO
A Governor from the ruling party took office here today in the most important bastion of the Mexican left, ending at least a chapter in the conflict over a crucial state election and raising questions about the opposition's political future.
Still claiming to have won the July 12 vote, the leftist candidate, Cristobal Arias, took his own, unofficial oath of office before thousands of supporters from around Michoacan State.


ITT Names Chief Financial Officer
The ITT Corporation named Robert A. Bowman chief financial officer yesterday, a year and a half after he joined the $21 billion conglomerate from his previous job as treasurer for the state of Michigan.
Mr.
Bowman, who is 37 years old and was chief financial officer of the ITT Sheraton Corporation, the hotel chain, replaces M. Cabell Woodward Jr., 63, who will continue to be vice chairman.


Winners in the Race for the House


METRO DIGEST
THE 1992 CAMPAIGN  ABRAMS APPEARS TO WIN PRIMARY
Robert Abrams apparently edged out Geraldine A. Ferraro in a bitterly close race for the Democratic nomination for United States Senate from New York, setting the stage for a tough fight with the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
A1.
D'AMATO LOOKS AHEAD
While the Democratic candidates for his seat fretted through the final day of their campaign, Senator D'Amato spent an uneventful day in Washington, wondering whether his opponent would be "him" or "her." "Whoever it is, it is not going to be an easy race," he said.
Nonetheless, he directed most of his initial venom at "him," Mr.
Abrams.
B7.


Gay Bashing, the Quayle Way
Hatred of gay Americans was written into the Republican Party platform and trumpeted from the speakers' podium in Houston.
Vice President Quayle didn't initiate these ugly sentiments but he exploited them in his convention speech and afterward, right along with the arch-practitioners Pat Robertson and Patrick Buchanan.
Now the Vice President is trying to backpedal from Houston in a disingenuous way.
He wants to hint at fairness for gay people while humoring the zealots who revile them.
In a television interview last weekend, Mr.
Quayle said repeatedly that homosexuality was "a wrong choice," though researchers remain uncertain whether sexual preference is "chosen" or inherited.
Then he tried to soften the statement by declaring that the Bush Administration had a policy of nondiscrimination toward gay people.


In a State Known for Landsides, There Have Been Tight Races
In New York politics, landslides are more common than races as close as yesterday's Democratic primary for the United States Senate.
But the nerve-rackingly narrow margin that separated Robert Abrams and Geraldine A. Ferraro is by no means unique.
Only two years ago, David N. Dinkins's lead in the New York City mayoral race evaporated as the unofficial count proceeded on Election Night despite earlier voter surveys that suggested he would win by a comfortable margin.
When the official tally was certified weeks later, Mr.
Dinkins had 917,544 votes to Rudolph W. Giuliani's 815,387.


Leader Gone, Maoists Still Stalk Lima Slums
They came early this morning, a band of about five or six Shining Path rebels.
The people of this shantytown some 12 miles west of Lima awoke to find their walls daubed with dozens of revolutionary slogans and praises of the rebel leader, Abimael Guzman Reynoso.
It was as if Mr.
Guzman had not been turned from the country's most-wanted fugitive into its No. 1 prisoner.


Motorman Goes to Trial in Subway Deaths
In a case that led to random drug and alcohol testing of bus and subway operators, opening arguments in the murder trial of the motorman charged with killing five passengers in a subway derailment at the Union Square Station are to be presented tomorrow in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
The motorman, Robert Ray, is charged with second-degree murder on the ground that he showed "depraved indifference" in taking control of a Lexington Avenue IRT express train in the Bronx and operating it at excessive speed.
The train jumped the track and crashed a few yards north of the Union Square Station at 14th Street shortly after midnight on Aug. 28, 1991.


Brady (W.H.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
RICHARD DREYFUSS, the Academy-Award-winning actor, has filed for divorce from his wife of nine years, JERAMIE RAIN DREYFUSS.
Richard Grant, a spokesman for the star, said yesterday that "the agreement to part was mutual and amicable."


New Environmental Debate Expected as U.N. Convenes
A new round of disputes over environmental issues, pitting the United States and Western Europe against developing countries, is expected to be a major theme of the 47th United Nations General Assembly, which opened today.
One of the Assembly's major undertakings this fall is expected to be the creation of an international agency to hear and assess criticism of the way governments treat the environment.


Struggling With Those Who Seek the Virgin Mary; Reported Vision Has Brought Grumbling and Expenses to Officials in Marlboro Township
Until Joseph Januszkiewicz started reporting visions of the Virgin Mary near the blue spruce trees in his yard, local government was free to devote its energies to earthly matters like repaving roads or recruiting volunteer firefighters.
But the day-to-day routine of municipal affairs is gone now, trampled by the estimated 21,000 people who have come to Mr.
Januszkiewicz's lawn on the first Sundays of June, July, August and September to pray, meditate and, they hope, to share in whatever it is that Mr.
Januszkiewicz sees or hears at the statue of St.
Mary at the end of his patio.


CHRONICLE
JUDD HIRSCH, the actor, has had his share of cancellations, but he's feeling good about the one that he will experience today.
To honor Mr.
Hirsch's Tony-Award-winning role in "Conversations With My Father," the United States Postal Service is producing a special commemorative stamp cancellation for Citizenship Day, which is tomorrow.
This afternoon, from noon to 4 P.M., a postal truck will be parked in front of the Royale Theater, at 242 West 45th Street, where the public can have their mail marked with the one-time-only cancellation showing Mr.
Hirsch in the play, about an immigrant from Russia who raises two sons on the Lower East Side.
"I've been canceled before," Mr.
Hirsch said, "and usually that is a word to avoid. The cancellation of the television series 'Taxi' was a disappointment and the one of 'Dear John' a surprise. This is the most honorable cancellation one could experience, and hopefully there will be more of these."


Right Out of the 60's, With Plenty of Hair, But Actually Dressed (Mostly in Versace)
IT was, as they used to say, a happening.
Monday night's "Rock n' Rule," Gianni Versace's combination benefit fashion show and rock concert (with a bit of rap and rave thrown in), was both a throwback to the 1960's and a this-minute way to present his outrageous designs.
"It will be like Barnum &amp; Bailey," the designer had promised before the show.
Well, there were no elephants or lion tamers, but there were some elements of a three-ring circus.


Have Archives, Will Travel
There is nothing dashing about William Asadorian, the brainy archivist tucked back in the main Queens Public Library.
At 44, his hair is crawling farther from his forehead each year, and he still cannot seem to knot his tie flat; its muted colors tumble over a paunch that mocks all bypassed lunches.
But Mr.
Asadorian's talents, like the treasures he unearths combing the craters of building sites and out sleuthing antique dealers, come camouflaged.
The improbable "Indiana Jones of the Long Island Room," where Mr.
Asadorian works, can often be found on his knees below ground level, rescuing shards of the past.


How to Make Presidency and Congress Work; Parliamentary Solution
To the Editor:
Cokie Roberts's "Divided Government Is the Best Revenge" (Op-Ed, Aug. 27) gets something important by the wrong end.
Today's nihilistic shortsightedness in choosing legislators of one party and chief executives of another to show dislike of destructive deadlocks between Capitol Hill and White House entertains her.
She blithely waves away the "political scientists" who sing the "praises of the parliamentary system."
Actually, that system is crucial to the problem she is discussing.
It presents a promisingly systemic remedy for our chronic deadlock.
Among its proponents have been such impressive observers as Barbara Tuchman and former Senator J. W. Fulbright.
Awareness of how such governments work for our cousins in Australia, Canada and New Zealand, as well as Britain, confirms the pertinence of the prescription.


Cytel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 11
Sept 4
Sept 13
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.8
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.8
3.1
Gasoline stocks
204.2
202.1
213.2
Distillate stocks
129.5
123.5
132.9
Crude imports, daily
6.6
5.8
5.6
Product imports, daily
2.3
1.5
1.7
Crude stocks
325.6
327.1
336.0
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
90.5
85.5
90.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


As Tensions Rise, Lebanese Resume Exodus
Lebanese are again leaving the country by the thousands because of recurring political tension, a worsening economic crisis and soaring unemployment.
A report published here this week warned that the country is being depopulated.
The study, prepared jointly by the Arab Monetary Fund and Arab Fund for Social and Economic Development, which are part of the Arab League, put the total population of Lebanon at 2,730,000, compared to nearly four million a decade ago.
The report said the drop is not because of a low birth rate but an exodus brought on by 15 years of civil war and an economic malaise verging on depression.


Edward J. Grenier; Lawyer, 87
Edward J. Grenier, a lawyer who practiced in New York City for more than 50 years, died on Sept. 11 at his home.
He was 87 years old.
His son, Edward J. Grenier Jr., gave no specific cause of death.


Light Trucks Pace Rise in Vehicle Sales
Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks rose 10.1 percent in early September, though car sales remained stuck at a fairly low level.
"The best that can be said is that a painfully slow recovery continues," said Tom Webb, chief economist for the National Automobile Dealers Association.


Input/Output Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Rangers' Kovalev Is Fast Becoming Americanized
Aleksei Kovalev left behind his family, his girlfriend, his skates.
By midseason, he hopes, he will still be in New York, reunited with all but his skates.
"Too old," he said of his rusty blades back in Talaytiev, Russia.
"I use new ones. I'm here, now, for good."


Homestead's Bonfire Consumes Hurricane Debris
From where Ed Hawtree sits, high up on his bulldozer, ramming the mangled remains of somebody's house -- a carpet, a record player, a red striped Hula Hoop -- straight into a 15-foot-high wall of fire, it is like barging right into hell.
The dozer is swallowed by foul yellowish smoke, and as Mr.
Hawtree pushes debris left by Hurricane Andrew into the flames of an open fire that runs some 200 feet wide by some 400 feet long, the air itself seems hot enough to burn.


PDG Environmental Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bridge
The most prolific author of bridge books in North America is Mike Lawrence of Kensington Calif., a former world team champion.
Two of his recent efforts provide the serious enthusiast with a wealth of practical advice on bidding, covering areas that are neglected elsewhere in the literature of the game.
They are "Contested Auctions" and "Bidding Quizzes: The Uncontested Auction." They are available for $17.20 and $16.05 respectively, including mailing, from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025.
When he is not writing books, and putting out a monthly newsletter, Lawrence tours the world of bridge.
In January he was in St.
Moritz, Switzerland, and sat East on the diagramed deal from a team event.
His opponents climbed ambitiously to four hearts, and his partner, Manfred Kamras of Sweden, started well for the defense by leading a diamond.


POPULATION POLICY IN ASIA IS FAULTED
Serious flaws in family-planning programs in China and India make it unlikely that the world's two most populous nations will be able to stabilize growth until well into the next century, by which time they may have added more than 1.5 billion people to the world's population, according to findings published this week by the independent Population Crisis Committee.
The problem is especially acute in India, the research group says.
India, with a population of about 882 million that is growing 2.1 percent a year, is likely to overtake China as the most populous country by 2035, the committee says; India's population may reach 2 billion before leveling off.


Giants Coach Does A Quick About-Face
No matter what he tries, it hasn't been coming out right for Coach Ray Handley -- with his players or with the public.
So now, maybe coincidentally, maybe on purpose, there is some fence-mending.
He will make life simpler for the defense.
He is naming his quarterback early in the week so there is no confusion about who's in charge.
He even is smiling for the camera.


Holtzman Defends Her Losing Strategy
Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, tried last night to put the best face on her last-place finish in the Democratic Senate primary, even though voters dealt her a stunning blow by giving her less support than the Rev.
Al Sharpton, who ran third.
She conceded only 40 minutes after the polls closed, as if lingering later into the night would have been unseemly for a proud and combative candidate who insisted in her final speech to supporters that she ran because she wanted to fight the "Reagan-Bush-D'Amato mob" and the "go-along-get-along Democrats" in Congress.


Executive Changes
BIDERMANN INDUSTRIES, New York, a unit of Bidermann International that manufactures men's and women's apparel, named Edward Gilgallon executive vice president for merchandising.
GOODY PRODUCTS INC., Kearny, N.J., a maker of hair accessories, named John A. Creel senior vice president for marketing in the United States.


Foreigners Didn't Cause German Violence; No Immigration Law
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 2 front page report on Germany refers to Germany's "immigration law." Germany does not have an immigration law.
That is one cause of its problems with the hundreds of thousands of refugees coming in, mainly from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, and the often violent opposition to them.
Germany's constitution (Article 16) guarantees an unqualified right to political asylum.
The refugees coming in try to claim they are politically persecuted, not unlike the United States situation with refugees from Haiti.
Only Germany is smaller, and the numbers claiming asylum much bigger.
Germany's "foreigners law" prescribes procedures for determinations on political asylum.
It is the Constitution's Article 16 that is soon likely to be tightened.


A Crack! But It Wasn't From Bonilla's Bat
The afternoon sky was as black as night.
Wind swirled through Wrigley Field and lightning zigzagged crazily against the Chicago skyline.
Bobby Bonilla stood in the batter's box, and then it was over.
Not the world.
Just Bonilla's season.
Bonilla, who will cut his season short to have surgery on his ailing right shoulder, concluded 1992 with a groundout to shortstop.
He was 1 for 4 for the afternoon, with a run scored.
It was about par for the season.


Senate Votes to Rebuild Base Destroyed by Storm
The Senate voted today to rebuild a vastly scaled-down Homestead Air Force Base into a mostly civilian complex, which would provide some relief toSouth Florida and head off a political quarrel.
The Senate Appropriations Committee last week rejected the Bush Administration's proposal to rebuild the base at a cost of $480 million, prompting charges from the White House that Democrats were not committed to rebuilding the hurricane-ravaged area.


Admar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Owners Convince Bankers They Are Not Risky Borrowers
Bankers who have extended major league baseball clubs a $260 million line of credit received assurances yesterday that everything is running smoothly despite the departure of Commissioner Fay Vincent.
Bud Selig, the Milwaukee Brewers' owner who is temporarily in charge of the majors, and Nelson Doubleday of the Mets met with representatives of 12 banks at CitiCorp headquarters in Manhattan.
Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner, and Jeff White, the chief financial officer, also attended the meeting.


COMPANY NEWS
BALLY's GRAND INC., a unit of the Bally Manufacturing Corp., Chicago, the casino, hotel and fitness center operator, said a Federal Bankruptcy Court in New Jersey had approved its reorganization plan.
COMCAST CORP. , a cellular and cable television company, bought 3.57 million shares of Fleet Call Inc. at $14 each.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ohio Voters; Smattering of Fire but Mostly Unease in a District That Bush Carried in '88
A few weeks ago, Jane Shade got so scared at what she saw on the nightly news that she did something she had never done before: she registered to vote.
What frightened the 30-year-old housewife was how well Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas was doing in the polls compared with her choice in the fall election, President Bush.


Metro-North Train Jumps Track in Connecticut


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate; ABRAMS, IN TIGHT SENATE VOTE, APPEARS TO EDGE OUT FERRARO
State Attorney General Robert Abrams apparently edged out former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro in a bitterly close race for the Democratic nomination for United States Senate from New York last night, setting the stage for a tough fight with the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
The extreme closeness of the race raised the strong possibility of a recount or litigation.
Absentee ballots and paper ballots will not be counted for another week, and state election officials said they could not estimate how many there would be.


Serbian Snipers Content to Let Sarajevo Just Bleed
From the Serbian sniper position known as No. 8, a bombed-out nightclub that has been converted into a heavily protected bunker, there is a magnificent view of this besieged city along the banks of the Miljacka River.
The Bosnian capital, in which nobody seems to stir, is dotted with the minarets of mosques and the spires of churches, built as expressions of religious faith but now stark symbols of the conflict between Orthodox Christian Serbs and Bosnian Muslims that has ravaged the city.
At one end of the panorama commanded by No. 8 there is the yellowish Holiday Inn, and at the other the Bascarsija market district, all perfectly visible through telescopic sights.


Alpine Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Umm el Fahm Journal; Winds of Islam Sweep Israel, Changing Landscape
The golden dome of an imposing new mosque soars above the narrow streets and crowded buildings of this Arab town, boldly proclaiming its return to Islam.
The towering mosque complex, which includes a medical clinic and a library, is a project of the Islamic Movement, an organization that is leading a religious revival among Israeli Arabs and changing the face of Muslim towns and villages.


Lincoln Center Nominates Programming Director
Lincoln Center's 14-month search for a new director of programming has apparently come to an end.
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, said yesterday that he would nominate Jane S. Moss for the post at a Lincoln Center board of directors meeting on Monday.
He said that he expected the board to vote immediately on the nomination, and that if the board approved her, she would take over the institution's programming before the end of the year.
Ms.
Moss, whose name was first mentioned as the leading candidate for the job in Newsday yesterday, has been an executive director of Meet the Composer and the Alliance of Resident Theaters/New York, and a managing director of Playwrights Horizons.
For the last two years, she has been a private arts consultant, and has worked on projects with several of Lincoln Center's constituents.
She is generally well regarded by those in the music world who have worked with her, but she has never been responsible for programming. 'She Knows the Field'
Reached yesterday, Ms.
Moss said only that "Any comment I might make would be premature." But Mr.
Leventhal said that Ms.
Moss "brings a fresh sense of creativity to the process."


Detroit &amp; Canada Tunnel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Yields Fall At Banks
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates were down for the week ended today, The Bank Rate Monitor said in its most recent survey.
Yields on deposits in New York area banks were down significantly.
The average money market account was off 3 basis points, to 2.92 percent, and three-month certificates were off 5 basis points, to 2.95 percent.
The six-month certificates were off 7 basis points, to 3.12 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Symbols That Win, or Lose, Consumers' Seal of Approval
WHAT'S in a name? Never mind, it's what's in a logo that matters.
According to a survey by the Schechter Group, a New York corporate-identity consultant, consumer attitudes about brands and the companies marketing them are significantly influenced by logo design, color and other components.


U.S. Clears Use of Gene Therapy Against a Form of Lung Cancer
The first gene therapy treatment for lung cancer received the unanimous approval of an important Federal panel yesterday, bringing the once-rarefied and experimental science of manipulating human genes to bear on the most common cause of cancer death in America.
Dr.
Jack A. Roth of the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston received permission from the Federal Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to treat 14 patients suffering from a fatal type of lung cancer called non-small cell carcinoma, a disease often caused by smoking.


The Pop Life
Rhythmic Additives
Suzanne Vega has made a career of chilliness, a sort of frozen intimacy.
Armed with an acoustic guitar and lean backup band, she exemplified vanguard pop from the 1980's, mixing traditions from folk to performance art.
Her new album, "99.9 F" (A&amp;M), her first in two years, is a radical departure, and it's full of activity.
For one, it's bursting with samples and odd noises and manipulated voices.
In 1990, Ms.
Vega had a backhanded success with the song "Tom's Diner," which became a dance-floor hit as remixed by the English group DNA.
The idea caught on.
When an album-length set of remixes, also called "Tom's Diner," came out later that year, it was clear that Ms.
Vega's chilliness was blank enough to be filled up.
Her new album does just that.


Ogilvy Adams Loses 2 Executives
The Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart public relations firm suffered a blow as two top executives at its New York office left to form their own public relations shop.
Jonathan Rinehart, chairman and chief executive of Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, said yesterday that George Sard, who was chairman of the New York office, and Paul Verbinnen, who was a managing director, had both resigned, confirming a report in The New York Post.


Killearn Properties reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Helen A. Wilson, 79, Leader in Refugee Aid
Helen A. Wilson, a retired executive for international refugee and development agencies, died Friday at her house in Washington.
She was 79 years old.
She died of complications from emphysema, said Marion Connell, a colleague and friend.


Luria (L.) &amp; Sons (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Gotti Is Still Crime Boss, U.S. Asserts
John Gotti is continuing to run the Gambino crime family from his maximum-security prison cell, using relatives to relay orders to Gambino members, Federal prosecutors say.
Mr.
Gotti's son, John, and his brother, Peter, are Gambino captains who visit him in prison and then meet with the remaining captains, soldiers and associates in the organization, the prosecutors said in documents filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Sales Drop, But Inflation Stays Low
American consumers remain extraordinarily reluctant to spend, and that reluctance is helping to hold inflation down to the levels of the 1960's.
Retail sales, which account for about a third of economic activity, fell five-tenths of a percent in August, the biggest drop since March, after rising 1 percent in July.


Jaco Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


F.B.I. Forms Unit to Battle 'Carjacking'
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that the armed theft of cars from drivers was becoming such a serious problem nationwide that his agency was adding it to the list of violent crimes being handled by a special force of agents.
The F.B.I. said the case of a Maryland woman being dragged to her death last week by thieves stealing her car prompted a survey of such carjackings around the country.
Officials said the survey found that armed theft of cars in parking garages, shopping center lots and at traffic stops had become so extensive that it should no longer be considered simple auto theft.


Internet Communications reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Islanders' Pay Mirrors Performance
In the 22-team National Hockey League last season, the Islanders finished 14th in the overall standing and dead last in home attendance.
Therefore, it should come as little surprise that their pay scale is one of the lowest in what is now a 24-team league.


Official of Christian Party Is Kidnapped in East Beirut
A senior official of Lebanon's largest Christian party was kidnapped today.
The official, Boutros Khawand, 53 years old, was seized by gunmen outside his home in East Beirut.


Real Estate; Philadelphia Arts Area Gets Boost
AN insurance company's gift of a building to a theater company in Philadelphia has provided a small boost to the city's longstanding efforts to strengthen downtown theater attractions.
The Arden Theater Company has been given an 8,025-square-foot building on Ludlow Street between 9th and 10th Streets by the Pennsylvania Manufacturers' Association, an insurance company.
The building was once an electric powerhouse that served the former Federal Reserve Bank building at 10th and Chestnut Streets, which the insurance company now occupies.


Former West German Chancellor Bids Farewell to Socialist International


150 Miles Away, the Doctor Is Examining Your Tonsils
On the television screen in the small room at the Medical College of Georgia here an image jumped and jerked as, 150 miles away, a doctor brought an instrument into position in the ear of a patient.
An operator here manipulated dials, zooming in, increasing the lighting and sharpening the focus of the image of the patient's inner ear and the scarring that was the focus of the examination.
She and the specialist beside her had at least as good a view of what their colleague on the scene was seeing.
The distance between them seemed to shrink to nothing as they examined the patient together.


Highland Superstores reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Fernandez to Let Students Transfer to Any District
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez will let parents send their children to any school outside their district throughout New York City's five boroughs next year, giving the city one of the largest school-choice arrangements in the nation.
The plan will let a Staten Island parent shift a child as far away as the north Bronx or a parent from a shabby quarter of Jackson Heights, Queens, send a child to a tidy suburban patch of Bayside, Queens.
Parents who live in boroughs outside Manhattan but work there will be able to drop their children off at schools near their offices, as long as space is available.


Wine Talk
SEPTEMBER is the beginning of the wine-shopping season.
More money will be spent on wine -- and spirits, too -- from now until Christmas than in all the other months combined.
If you are planning to buy a bottle or two yourself in the weeks ahead, these guidelines might prove useful.


Chief at Troubled J. I. Case Stepping Down
Tenneco Inc. said yesterday that the chairman and chief executive of J. I. Case, its troubled agricultural and construction equipment manufacturer, was stepping down.
The chairman and chief executive, Robert J. Carlson, 63 years old, will become vice chairman at Case, focusing on strategic marketing issues, the company said.
He will remain on the board of Tenneco, the Houston-based conglomerate whose major businesses include natural gas pipelines, automotive parts and shipbuilding.


Federal Reserve Goes Astray on Recession
To the Editor:
In the third year of the recession, Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve chairman, is still fighting inflation.
Yes, the Fed is supposed to fight inflation.
William McC.
Martin Jr., Fed chief under five Presidents, said in effect: "Our job is to lean against the economic winds. If an inflationary wind is blowing, we lean against that. If a deflationary wind is blowing, and prices fall, we do the opposite."
But the Fed's actions affect the economy in many ways, and it should do more, within its powers, to help the whole economy.
This, Mr.
Greenspan did not do.
For example, the Fed, through its open market committee, could have bought more Treasury securities from the banks, giving the banks additional cash reserves for more generous loan policies toward business.
This would have acted as a powerful stimulant for business to hire more people and give more jobs.


Cott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Cooper Companies reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
A dance-company poster might seem an unlikely item for an astronaut to carry into space, but Dr.
MAE C. JEMISON, now on the shuttle Endeavor, was determined to bring along some memento of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
The first black woman to become an astronaut, Dr.
Jemison, a 35-year-old physician and chemical engineer, wrote to JUDITH JAMISON, director of the company, asking to borrow a costume.


Metropolitan Diary
A FRIEND writes:
I have a new favorite word: "Mary-thon." It is the name the cable station "Nick at Nite" has given to its weeklong broadcast (131 episodes, from last Saturday night through next Saturday morning) of the "Mary Tyler Moore Show." Originally aired from September 1970 through 1977, the series won 27 Emmys, along with millions of admirers, of which I proudly admit I am one.
Twenty-two years ago I had yet to discover the pleasures (and frustrations) of a VCR; thus, all 168 episodes of bell-bottomed, boot-wearing Mary went untaped.
Thanks to "Nick at Nite," that sad situation is changing: beginning last Saturday night, my life has revolved around taping Mary and her pals.
This is not an easy task.
There are two things I have never mastered: mathematics and using my VCR.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Two Spaniards Are Upset in Bordeaux
The seeded Spaniards Emilio Sanchez and Jordi Arrese were upset yesterday in the opening round of the $330,000 Bordeaux Passing Shot tournament in France.
Andrei Chesnokov of Russia downed the fifth-seeded Sanchez, 7-6 (7-2), 7-5, and Rodolphe Gilbert of France beat the sixth-seeded Arrese, 7-6 (8-6), 6-3.
Arrese won the silver medal in Olympic singles competition.
In other matches, top-seeded Ivan Lendl cruised past Carl Limberger of Australia, 6-0, 6-0; two-time champion Guy Forget of France, seeded third, advanced over a countryman, Thierry Champion, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4), and eighth-seeded Fabrice Santoro of France topped Roberto Alvarez of Argentina, 6-2, 7-6 (7-4).
Bjorn Borg was again swept in straight sets as he continues to attempt a return to the regular tour.
Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine easily downed Borg, 6-2, 6-2.
It was the sixth time in as many ATP Tour tournaments that Borg, a five-time Wimbledon champion, failed to win a set.
Medvedev, 18 years old and ranked 33d in the world, won in less than an hour. (AP)


A.T.&amp;T. Sees Profit for Unit
The chief executives of A.T.&amp;T. and NCR said yesterday that the two companies' $7.5 billion merger a year ago and that A.T.&amp;T.'s computer operations, troubled for much of the 1980's, would be profitable in 1992.
Robert E. Allen, chairman and chief executive of the AmericanTelephone and Telegraph Company, said at a news conference, however, that because the company's computer business now comprises NCR, A.T.&amp;T.'s own old computer operations and the recently acquired Teradata, comparing this year's financial performance with last year's was mixing "apples, oranges and peaches."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Federal regulators cut in half a proposed increase in the premiums banks pay to the deposit insurance fund and exempted three-quarters of the industry from any increase.
The move came after pressure from the Administration, which wants to convey that the bank and savings and loan crisis is over.  [ Page A1. ]
Consumers remain extraordinarily reluctant to spend, and inflation is low, the Government said.
Retail sales fell five-tenths of 1 percent in August, the biggest drop since March, after rising 1 percent in July.  [ D1. ]


Food Notes
Restaurant Sauce at Home
Rao's, a restaurant that opened in 1896 and is still going strong at the corner of East 114th Street and Pleasant Avenue in Manhattan, has just introduced its first packaged food product, Rao's Homemade Marinara Sauce.
It's touted as the alternative to waiting for a reservation at the tiny restaurant, which is perennially booked with regular customers.
Whether it will replace dining out altogether is open to question.
But the chunky, fresh-tasting and well-seasoned sauce could certainly enhance dinner at home.
The sauce is fairly oily, a negative attribute to many people, but probably one that contributes substantially to its good flavor.


Trenton Legislator to Offer Bill To Lift Some Speed Limits to 65
Fresh from an overwhelming victory in banning photo radar from New Jersey's highways, Assemblyman Steven Mikulak now says he will introduce a bill that would raise the speed limit on 400 miles of state highways to 65 miles an hour.
The reason, says Mr.
Mikulak, a first-term Republican from Woodbridge, is that most Garden State drivers go that fast already, as acknowledged by no less an authority than Justin Dintino, the superintendent of state police, who conceded at his confirmation hearings two year ago that he routinely does 65 on the New Jersey Turnpike.
He did not condone it, and pledged to set a better example as the state's top cop, but added, "If you go 55, a tractor-trailer's going to run up your back."


How to Make Presidency and Congress Work
To the Editor:
In "Divided Government Is the Best Revenge" (Op-Ed, Aug. 27), Cokie Roberts argues that most voters like divided government -- meaning a President of one party and a majority of the other party in one or both houses of Congress.
She cites polls favoring the proposition that divided government is a good thing and anecdotal evidence that voters mistrust Washington so much that they prefer deadlock over granting either party the power to carry out its policies.
This sounds like the joke about the camper who, on seeing his wife attacked by a bear, said to himself: "Go wife, go bear!"
But there is a lot of persuasive evidence on the other side.
While we have indeed ended up with divided government for 16 of the last 20 years, exit polls tell us that in Presidential election years somewhere between 70 percent and 80 percent of voters usually vote straight tickets for all of one party's candidates for Federal office.
Only 20 percent to 30 percent split their tickets between the Presidential candidate of one party and the House and Senate candidates of the other party.


After Death, Victory for Weiss and His Party
Even though he died on Monday, Representative Ted Weiss won the Democratic primary in the Eighth District yesterday, after a day in which residents of his base on the Upper West Side struggled to suppress the feeling that voting for him this time was macabre, ridiculous or even somehow illegal.
"I liked him, but he's dead -- how could I vote for him?" one woman muttered, leaving a polling place on West 93d Street.
Intricacies of Election Laws


Vehicle Ban On S.I. Ferry Is Planned
New York City has decided to ban vehicles permanently from the Staten Island Ferry to discourage motorists from driving to Manhattan and to allow for a $112 million renovation of the ferry's downtown terminal.
Vehicles have been prohibited since an arson fire last year seriously damaged the roof and ceiling of the terminal, in lower Manhattan.
But last month, the city concluded that by building a new terminal without space for vehicles it could reduce roadway congestion, enlarge a nearby pedestrian mall and increase space for ferry passengers.
The city would also expand parking at the terminal on Staten Island.


Harry F. Gaugh Dies; Art Professor Was 53
Harry F. Gaugh, a professor of art at Skidmore College and a specialist in the Abstract Expressionist period, died on Saturday at Glens Falls Hospital in Glens Falls, N.Y.
He was 53 years old and lived in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He died of lymphoma, said Robert Kimmerle, the director of college relations for Skidmore.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Acquired Mark Hampton, pitcher, from the Texas Rangers to complete an earlier deal that sent Edwin Nunez, pitcher, to Texas.
Assigned Hampton to Stockton of the California League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Purchased the contract of Dan Howitt, outfielder, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.


For Sheet Music, Just Pick a Key And Print It Out
Music may soothe the savage breast, but generating the soothing sounds can be savagely difficult, particularly when transposing sheet music to a different key.
For all but expert musicians, the job can take several hours.
Enter Notestation, a computerized kiosk developed by Musicwriter Inc., a start-up company based in Los Gatos, Calif.
The device, a bit smaller than a video-arcade game, works somewhat like an automated teller machine with touch-screen commands.
Songs can be selected by title, artist or composer, and snippets of a Spartan, computer-synthesized arrangement can be heard.
Customers can have the song transposed to another key and then hear it played.
They can also select the desired arrangement -- easy-to-play piano, say, or a full-dress organ solo -- from the choices available for that particular piece of music.


2 KURDISH PARTIES AGREE TO MERGER
In a major step toward further centralizing power in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq, the Kurds' two main political parties agreed today to merge their guerrilla units into a single force under Kurdish Government command, officials said.
"We reached a good agreement," said Massoud Barzani, head of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, at the end of a day-long meeting in this mountain village with top officials of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.


Owners Play a Game In Which the Rules Are Forever Changing
Consistency has never been one of the strengths of the club owners.
They demand it of the players whom they pay millions of dollars; they demand it of their managers and general managers, and if they don't get it, they fire them.
But if scouts were rating the owners on consistency, like they rate players on power, speed and defense, the numbers next to their names would be low.
They would be labeled "no prospect."
Indeed, there may be no prospect of the owners ever being consistent.


Dr. Julius W. Bell, 91, Specialist and Teacher
Dr.
Julius W. Bell, an ear, nose and throat specialist who practiced and taught in Manhattan for 56 years, died on Sept. 8 at Memorial Hospital in Hollywood, Fla.
He was 91 years old and had moved to Hollywood from Manhattan when he retired eight years ago.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Big Plans Are Swept Away by Hurricane Andrew
The financial losses from Hurricane Andrew can be reckoned in two ways: in the brain-numbing aggregate of billions of dollars or in the suddenly changed life circumstances and plans of people like Jose Garcia.
The 27-year-old Mr.
Garcia is Homestead's version of a yuppie, ambitious and upwardly mobile.
The eldest son of migrant farm workers who settled here, he started out as a manual laborer at 16, but he worked his way up to head grower at a big ornamental-flower nursery while studying botany at night school.
He married last May, and he and his wife, Shana, assistant manager of a nearby florist shop, were saving for the future.
The plan was first to buy a stake in a business, then purchase a house and start a family.


Light Sentences Against Germans Who Killed Foreigner Stir Debate
Light sentences handed down this week to five youths found guilty in the beating death of an African immigrant have touched off a political debate in Germany.
In a verdict announced on Monday, a court in the eastern city of Frankfurt-on-Oder sentenced the youths to terms of two to four years.
Applicable laws would have permitted sentences of up to 10 years.


Biaggi Fails in His Bid to Return to Congress
Having tested the limits of political redemption, Mario Biaggi wearily conceded last night that voters' unwillingness to forgive and forget his felonies contributed to his overwhelming defeat in the Democratic primary in the 17th District to the incumbent, Eliot L. Engel.
"This would have been a classic illustration of society practicing what society preaches," Mr.
Biaggi said.
"There are millions of people out there who have had traffic with the law."


Bowl America reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN I was the chef at Le Pavillon restaurant in Manhattan, we offered a selection of egg dishes at lunch every day.
It might have been eggs en cocotte with fresh herbs, eggs en gelee (aspic) with various seasonings, cold omelets with savory fillings and more.
They were among the most popular items we served.
You rarely see these dishes on menus today, partly because of health concerns, partly because eggs have simply fallen out of fashion.
I still make such dishes at home, for they are easy, quick and delicious, especially when made with fresh herbs and vegetables from a late-summer garden.
The recipe here for eggs in tomato shells is a wonderful appetizer or light lunch.
Tomatoes have been extremely late to ripen in the Northeast this summer, and my crop began to come in only two weeks ago.
Pick four large, ripe red tomatoes for this dish and core them, then scoop out the pulp.
The pulp, when mixed with olive oil, garlic, basil and seasonings, makes a terrific garnish.
When you bake the eggs inside the hollowed-out tomatoes be careful not to overcook the yolks and not to allow them to become too firm.


U.S. Regulators Scale Back Rise In Banking Fees
Bowing to political pressure, Federal regulators today cut in half a proposed increase in the insurance premiums that banks pay to the deposit insurance fund -- and exempted three-quarters of the industry from any increase at all.
The decision by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to set the rate increase at an average of 10.4 percent, half the amount proposed in May, came after intense lobbying by the Bush Administration and the banking industry.


Two Weeks Late, but DuBose Has a Clash Schedule
On a bright, warm late-summer afternoon last Saturday, the kind that seemed perfect for opening the gates at Notre Dame Stadium, Demetrius DuBose found himself in the wrong place at the wrong time.
It was bad enough that he was temporarily a former linebacker, completing a two-game suspension by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


AT THE DOOR WITH: Drew Nieporent; The Restaurateur As Diplomat And Rising Star
"HI, how are you?"
Drew Nieporent, trend-setting restaurateur, greeted a party of two as they arrived for an 8:15 reservation at TriBeCa Grill in lower Manhattan one recent evening.
They were handed over to one of the restaurant's managers.
"Show the lady and gentleman to 39," Mr.
Nieporent, a co-owner of the restaurant, said as he picked up the insistent phone at his elbow.


No Headline
"There is just no feasible way that is environmentally safe and sound to get rid of all this stuff." -- DAVID P. MAZUR, on the trash problem in Homestead, Fla.  [ A16:4. ]


Sports of The Times The Garden Glitters At Midday
A GOOD OMEN in that otherwise dismal railroad station under Madison Square Garden.
A young man, a young black man who looked like a college student, was wearing a crisp, cream-colored Dodgers shirt with the reddest No. 42 emblazoned on the front.
"Nice shirt," I said. "Thanks," he said.


Hawaii All-Star Lineup Ready to Roll
The 16-driver lineup is almost set for the first running of the Hawaiian Super Gran Prix, a 100-mile race with a $1 million first prize that is scheduled for Jan. 24 in Honolulu.
The organizers announced yesterday that they have received acceptances from the Indy-car drivers MARIO ANDRETTI, AL UNSER JR. and Japan's HIRO MATSUSHITA ; the Formula One drivers MARTIN BRUNDLE of England, ERIK COMAS of France and MICHAEL SCHUMACHER of Germany; the stock-car racers KYLE PETTY and BILL ELLIOTT ; the sports-car drivers DEREK WARWICK of England and JUAN MANUEL FANGIO 2d of Argentina and a sprint-car star, STEVE KINSER.
In addition, MICHAEL ANDRETTI and the Italian Formula One driver RICCARDO PATRESE are likely to take part.


Economists View Election
A poll published on Monday by the National Association of Business Economists found two-thirds of the membership expecting that the Democratic nominee, Bill Clinton, would be elected in November and that economic growth under him would probably be higher than during a second Bush term.
Of 243 respondents to the survey, 52.8 percent said growth would be better under Mr.
Clinton, 22.7 percent said it would be worse and 24.5 percent said it would be the same.
A majority, 52.8 percent, also said that regulation, inflation, the budget deficit and interest rates would be higher than under Mr.
Bush while the dollar and the stock market would be lower.


Letter: On Trade; Just a Push to End Arab Boycott of Israel
To the Editor:
"In Israel, for the First Time . . ." (editorial, Aug. 30) refers to the procedures of the Arab boycott of Israel but fails to distinguish between the primary and the secondary boycotts and glosses over the capricious way in which they are enforced.
The primary boycott refers to the concerted policy of all 20 Arab states to refrain from diplomatic, political, economic and cultural relations with Israel.
The secondary boycott is an effort to punish commercial companies all over the world with economic ties to Israel.
Only 12 Arab nations, principally the Persian Gulf states and Libya, participate in that boycott.


Holtzman and Ferraro Fought Double Standards as Well as Each Other
In this year in which so much attention has been paid to the role and prospects of women in politics, New York's Democratic Senate primary, pitting Geraldine A. Ferraro against Elizabeth Holtzman, was always a centerpiece of discussion and a source of awkward pride.
Feminists and voters who said that women might be the ones to bring about significant political change saw it, from the start, as proof of changing times.
At first, the awkwardness was over an "embarrassment of riches," as it was so often called, that one state could have two such prominent women facing each other in the polls.
That sentiment was at times expressed with a nervous concern that voters would split over the two and that one candidate should have bowed out to let the other run alone.
Later, as the race unfolded and grew increasingly intense and perhaps inevitably more bitter, the awkwardness had more to do with concern that the conflict was undermining the more fundamental goal of gains for women at the highest levels of national politics.
Final, Ugly Moments


A Cheaper Way of Linking Offices
Anticipating adoption of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Mexican telephone company is about to initiate a sophisticated network service that should make it easier for multinational corporations to do business with, and within, Mexico.
The service, known as virtual private networks, is already wildly popular among business customers in the United States, allowing corporations to link far-flung branch offices with voice and data-communications circuits that can make phoning from coast to coast almost as fast and easy as calling a co-worker across the hall -- and at rates much lower than those on the regular long-distance network.


Bill Clinton's Vietnam Test, Cont'd.
President Bush had the grace to say in his speech to the National Guard Association yesterday that never to have seen "the awful horror of battle" did not mean "you can never be Commander in Chief." By forgoing a more frontal attack on Bill Clinton's record of draft avoidance, Mr.
Bush conveyed an impression of moral magnanimity.
It's only an impression; his co-campaigners, including Vice President Quayle, are still picking at the scab.
"Once again he has misled us," Mr.
Quayle said yesterday while campaigning in South Dakota.


Weiss Wins, Biaggi Loses In House Bids
Voters in New York's Congressional primaries last night rejected Mario Biaggi, a convicted felon aiming for a political comeback in the Bronx, and handed victory to Ted Weiss, a dead man whose selection will allow Democratic Party leaders to designate someone else to run in his place in November.
Overall it was a successful night for incumbents of both parties, with the stunning exception of Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Democrat who lost in a Brooklyn-Manhattan-Queens district that was drawn to include a majority of Hispanic voters.


Trade Pact vs. Environment: A Clash at a House Hearing
House Democrats and the Bush Administration clashed today over the environmental impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement, with lawmakers asserting that safeguards are inadequate and the Administration acknowledging that the treaty would prevent the United States from directly enforcing tough conservation rules in Mexico.
Under insistent questioning by Democratic members of the House Ways and Means Committee, William K. Reilly, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said that if Mexico chose to relax its environmental standards to attract American factories, "we have no direct recourse to apply sanctions to that company's products."


Vote for Incinerator Let All New Yorkers Down
To the Editor:
Re "Clean, Courageous Politics" (editorial, Aug. 28): The New York City Council vote on the city's solid-waste-management plan was neither clean nor courageous.
Overwhelming and honest constituent opposition to incineration marked the process.
Only political horse-trading and middle-of-the-night arm-twisting resulted in a plan out of line with the public's view.
Many Council members were willing to have an incinerator in somebody else's backyard only when they believed there wouldn't be one in their own district -- hardly an example of courage.
The plan undermines recycling.
The Council failed to obtain a commitment that the Department of Sanitation would even meet the tonnage goals required by Local Law 19 of 1989 (a law the Mayor is trying to weaken in court).
Yard waste, recycling of batteries and tires were also delayed by at least four to five years.
The city's plan contains no commitment to citywide food and organic waste composting (two of the largest segments of the waste stream).


INSIDE
Stock Rally Is Reversed; Limits Seen to German Role
A day after Germany's central bank nudged its interest rates down, stocks fell in Europe and the United States as investors concluded that the Bundesbank could not by itself bring recovery to Europe.
Page D1.
Eurocrats on Trial
As France prepares to vote on a European union treaty, the Community's bureaucracy in Brussels is under growing attack.
Page A12.
An Environmental Encore
New environmental arguments between rich and poor nations are expected as the United Nations General Assembly convenes.
Page A10.
Beyond the Last Planet
Astronomers have detected a small, faint object that could be evidence for the existence of a belt of icy minor planets beyond Pluto.
Page A22.
No Cars on the Ferry
Vehicles will no longer be allowed on the Staten Island Ferry, a ban prompted by terminal work.
Page B1.


Aura Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


The Agonies of Waiting for the Thrill of Victory
First it looked as though Robert Abrams was winning, and then it seemed equally clear that Geraldine A. Ferraro was ahead, and then it all swung back again.
With every turn in a truly topsy-turvy evening, the spirit at the headquarters of both front-runners soared and plunged in dizzying succession.
If there was one element of consistency among supporters of the two camps last night, it was that the wait -- with its frequent upheavals -- was agonizing.


Cassell Expects to Stay on Job
OLLAN CASSELL, executive director of The Athletics Congress, the governing body for track and field in the United States, will very likely remain in his position at least two more years after a committee of officials voted to retain him during meetings over the weekend in Denver.
All that remains for Cassell, the only person to serve in his capacity since the late 1970's, to continue serving is formal approval by the board of directors of the congress at its annual convention in December.
Approval is expected.


William L. Dill; Lawyer, 89
William L. Dill, a lawyer and a former mayor of Montclair, N.J., died on Monday at his home in Upper Montclair, N.J.
He was 89 years old.
No cause of death was given.
Mr.
Dill served two terms as Mayor of Montclair from 1953 to 1960.
He was previously chairman of the town's Board of Adjustment, chairman of its planning board and president of the town redevelopment agency.


Ex-Albanian Chief Seeks Help
Albania's former Communist President, Ramiz Alia, has appealed to international organizations for protection after being placed under house arrest, Tirana radio said today.
It said Mr.
Alia had sent letters to international organizations and to some individual foreigners to protest against confinement in his Tirana villa.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  THE SUFFERING OF SUDAN
In the southern Sudan, war, famine and the Government's scorched-earth policy have displaced more than a million people, but constant shelling means that relief flights have been only sporadic.
A1  U.N.
AS ECOLOGICAL BATTLEFIELD
The 47th United Nations General Assembly convened today, poised for a new battle between the West and developing countries over environmental issues.
A10  TAKING AIM AT THE EUROCRATS
Taking a cue from the Thatcherites, the French are fearful of the homogenizing effect a European "super state" might have.
A12
Italy says its voters would ratify the European Union pact.
A12  THE VIEW FROM NUMBER 8
Serbian gun position Number 8, and emplacements like it, afford a commanding advantage, but the war in Sarajevo does not appear to be one they wish to win in any conventional sense.
A3  PENTAGON CHANGES COPTER STORY
After denying that a U.S. helicopter had been hit by gunfire in Bosnia, the Pentagon said today that closer in inspection revealed a small bullet hole.
A3  PERU'S SHANTYTOWN WAR RAGES
The violence continues uninterrupted in the shantytowns of Lima, despite the fact that the leader of the Shining Path, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, is now behind bars.
A10  FROM ATLANTA TO BAGHDAD
A bank fraud case in Atlanta has shed light on how Iraq illegally obtained billions of dollars in loans, some of which was vital to Saddam Hussein's arms buildup.A6  A LOSS FOR MEXICO'S OPPOSITION
The future of the major Mexican opposition party was in doubt as a member of the governing party moved into the Governor's office in the historically left-wing state of Michoacan.
A13  INDIAN POPULATION SOARING
India, with a population of about 882 million, is likely to overtake China as the world's most populous country by 2035, a report predicts.
A9  Toshiba reportedly sold China a machine that may improve missiles.
A7  North and South Korea open their eighth round of direct talks.
A8  Political and economic tensions are forcing Lebanese to leave.
A5  Light sentences in attack on foreigner stir debate in Germany.
A14  Two leading Kurdish parties will merge their guerrilla units.
A15  Umm el Fahm Journal: Islam flowers in Israel.
A4  National A16-22  NOMINEES POLITELY SPAR
Speaking to National Guard officers, President Bush took note of the questions on Gov.
Bill Clinton's draft record, but maintained a distance from them.
Speaking to the same group, Mr.
Clinton, in turn, ignored the issue altogether.
A1  CLINTON KEEPS HIS LEAD
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows Gov.
Clinton has the backing of 49 percent of the voters overall, while 37 percent say they are supporting President Bush.
The poll highlights the formidable task facing Mr.
Bush and his new political team.
A1
Politics and the economy in a suburban Ohio town.  A17  BANK PREMIUMS CUT IN HALF
Bowing to political pressure, Federal regulators slashed in half a proposed increase in the insurance premiums banks pay to the deposit insurance fund -- and exempted three-quarters of the industry from any increase.
A1  STORM RUINS GO UP IN SMOKE
With so much debris from Hurricane Andrew gathering dust and attracting pests, southern Florida communities have had to do away with civilized niceties like trash separation, recycling and environmentally safe disposal for the quick, raw relief offered by fire.
A16
Senators agreed to rebuild a scaled-down base in Homestead.
A16  BEHAVIOR AND BRAIN CHANGE
A study has found that behavior modification therapy, like drug therapy, produces changes in the brains of people with obsessive compulsive disorder.
It is the first time that behavior therapy has been shown to physically alter brain function in a mental disorder.
A20  PLANETS BEYOND PLUTO?
Astronomers have detected a small, faint object beyond Neptune and Pluto that could be the first direct evidence of a broad belt of icy minor planets that may be the source of many comets streaking in from the fringes of the solar system.
A22
The first gene therapy treatment for lung cancer is approved.
A20  Simi Valley Journal: chili and white supremacists.
A16  Turning attention to the armed robbery of cars from drivers.
A21  Education Page B10  Colorado will vote on giving parents public money to teach at home.
Brown announces an unusual plan to endow chairs for junior professors.
Campus Journal: Students plan mountain-climbing for a cause.
Metro Digest B1  ABRAMS SEEN AS VICTOR
State Attorney General Robert Abrams apparently edged out former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro in a bitterly close race for the Democratic nomination for United States Senate from New York, setting the stage for a tough fight with the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
A1  SOLARZ DEFEATED
United States Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the nine-term incumbent from Brooklyn, was defeated for re-election by Nydia M. Velazquez, who was thus virtually assured of becoming the first Hispanic woman elected to represent New York City in Congress.
A1  LETTING PUPILS PICK SCHOOLS
Joseph A. Fernandez, the New York City Schools Chancellor, will let parents send their children to any school throughout the five boroughs next year, giving the city one of the largest school-choice arrangements in the nation.
A1  Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10
Emilia-Romagna: What Italians say to mean "the best." C1  At the door with Drew Nieporent.
C1  Serving up gardens by the glass, juice bars flow into the mainstream.
C1  Right out of the 60's, with plenty of hair.
C8  Wine Talk C10  Health Page C14  Medicine by phone takes hold in some areas.
Personal Health: Why patients fail to comply with medical advice.
Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Matisse vs. music.
C15  Lincoln Center nominates programming director.
C15  Anthony Perkins's wife describes two years of secrecy.
C15  Music: Honoring Alice Tully.
C15  Sports B11-16  Baseball:White Sox top Yanks.
B11  Mets still waiting for lefty.
B13  Basketball: Nets' Mills accepts Pistons' offer.
B11  Columns: Vecsey on the Garden.
B11  Chass on Baseball.
B13  Football: DuBose ready to return to Irish.
B11  Handley opens up.
B15  A test for Thomas.
B15  Hockey: Rangers' Kovalwv gets attention.
B16 Devils stage a derby at center.
B16 Islander payroll mirrors performance.
B16 Sports People B14 Obituaries D25  Walter B. Jones, Democratic Representative of North Carolina.
Dr. Alexander Marble, an expert on diabetes.
Garret G. Ackerson Jr., an envoy in Eastern Europe during cold war.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Bill Clinton's Vietnam test, cont'd.
Don't gut credit reform.
Gay bashing, the Quayle way.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Great expectations.
Hans Magnus Enzensberger: Balkan tribalism, as Uganda sees it.
Alan C. Michaels: Baseball's charade.


Ambulatory Medical Care reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Brown Promoted 8 in Last Days
Days before leaving his post as Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown promoted eight members of the security detail that guarded him, six of them without the usual practice of giving notice in the New York City Police Department's interoffice memorandums.
The Police Department acknowledged yesterday that three detectives were promoted from third grade to second and five from second grade to first.
Those promoted received a pay raise at each step of between $4,000 and $7,000, representing a total cost of about $50,000.
Typically, a second-grade detective makes from $49,000 to about $54,000; a first-grade detective from $54,000 to $61,000.


At Work, High Above the Fast Track
IVOR HANSON, a 28-year-old admiral's son, Vassar graduate and musician, makes his living by washing windows and so knows a lot about the fear of falling.
He has worked on windows as high as 45 stories above the city's surface and there have been times when frightening thoughts came to mind.
Usually they flickered unbidden for no clear reason, though once they imposed themselves understandably enough when a worn ledge crumbled, leaving him supported only by his safety belt.


Iraqi Bank-Fraud Scheme Described
The case of an Atlanta banker involved in a huge fraud has shed light on the remarkably sophisticated system set up by Iraq to illegally obtain billions of dollars in loans in the United States, some of which was vital to Saddam Hussein's arms buildup.
At the time the loans were made, Iraq owed its creditors around the world $80 billion, was defaulting on many of its loans and desperately needed money from the Atlanta bank because of its inability to borrow large sums of money from legitimate banks, the prosecution said today.
The assertion, along with other evidence, contradicts the Bush Administration position that although Iraq had credit problems, it was a reliable borrower which always paid back its American lenders.


Brown Seeks Endowments for 65 Junior Professors
In what is believed to be the first attempt of its kind, Brown University will try to create 65 endowed chairs for assistant professors, the university's president announced last night.
Such chairs are usually reserved for full professors of senior stature.
The president, Vartan Gregorian, said the endowed teaching positions would help Brown compete for the best young scholars in a decade when faculty shortages are anticipated.
He made the announcement at a fund-raising event in Manhattan as part of the university's five-year $450 million capital campaign.
The endowed chairs would be financed by individual donations of $1 million each.


Foodarama Supermarkets reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Red Object Sighted Beyond Pluto May Be Part of Minor Planet Belt
Astronomers have detected a small, faint object beyond Neptune and Pluto that could be the first direct evidence for the existence of a broad belt of icy minor planets that is presumably the source of many comets streaking in from the fringes of the solar system.
The new planetary object was sighted two weeks ago by astronomers using electronic sensors on an 88-inch visible-light telescope operated by the University of Hawaii on Mauna Kea.
The initial observations, described yesterday, indicate that the object is about 120 miles in diameter and has a reddish glow, suggesting an icy surface rich in organic material.


John Lahr Is Appointed New Yorker Drama Critic
John Lahr, a critic, biographer and author of books about the theater, has been named drama critic of The New Yorker, Tina Brown announced yesterday.
He replaces Mimi Kramer, who will go back to writing features at her own request, said Ms.
Brown, who becomes the magazine's editor at the end of this month.
Edith Oliver will continue as The New Yorker's second drama critic.


Simi Valley Journal; Spotlight of Trial Fades, Leaving Sense of Peace
Beneath multi-colored tents dotting the parking lot of a drive-in theater here, there was more brewing than the pots of chili competing for first place in the annual Simi Valley Days Festival.
Residents say they are still frustrated by the spotlight that burned brightly here more than four months ago, when a jury in the Simi Valley courthouse found four white Los Angeles police officers not guilty in the beating of a black motorist.


Books of The Times; The Great Arts Debate In the Debaters' Words
Culture Wars  Documents From the Recent Controversies in the Arts  Edited by Richard Bolton  Illustrated. 363 pages.
New Press.
Paperback, $19.95.
The rancorous recent debate over the arts and just how much, if at all, the Government should pay for and control them has produced the widest possible range of views.
And these views all appear in "Culture Wars," a valuable documentary record of the continuing dispute over artistic freedom and the Government's judgmental role in giving grants to the arts and humanities.
The book is edited by Richard Bolton, an associate professor and chairman of the art studio at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
It includes 101 articles, letters, excerpts from Senate debates and assorted pronunciamentos about American cultural life, opinions that echo down to the 1992 Presidential conventions and campaign.


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Theater in Review
The Adding Machine
Joseph Papp Public Theater 425 Lafayette Street  Greenwich Village Today
Written by Elmer Rice; directed by Michael Schwabe; original music composition by Evan Chen; technical direction and stage management by James Rossow; design and construction by Mr.
Basgall, Kevin Byrne, Pam Clouse, Richard Goodman, John Gegenhuber, Pat O'Hara, Cynthia Orthal, Timm Reinhard, Mr.
Rossow, Mr.
Schwabe and Jayson Stahl.
A Jim Henson Foundation presentation of Puppetry at the Public: The International Festival of Puppet Theater, executive producer, Cheryl Henson; producing director, Leslee Asch; associate producers, Bill Yates and Anne Dennin.
WITH: Tracey Gilbert, Dave Herzog, Mr.
Basgall and Mr.
Schwabe.
When "The Adding Machine" was first produced in 1923, it was considered a classic of expressionist theater.
Anyone expecting this Elmer Rice play to show its age is due for a jolt.
In the expert hands of the Hystopolis Puppet Theater, "The Adding Machine" is a bold and timely reflection on the perils of an industrialized society.


Bomb Hoax at Hunter College Is One of Two Such Scares


Koala Technologies reports earnings for Year to June 30


Don't Gut Credit Reform
Norwich, Vt., remains unsurpassed as a reason for reforming the laws that govern the credit reporting industry.
TRW Inc., one of three companies that dominate the business, once threatened the credit rating of every taxpayer in Norwich -- the result of erroneous information entered into credit histories.
A bill requiring greater accuracy in the credit reporting process, The Consumer Reporting Reform Act, is due for a vote in the House this week.
Unfortunately, the bill contains a provision that would invalidate state statutes that are more effective.
Before passing the bill, Congress would be wise to delete the provision pre-empting state statutes.
The Senate would then do well to get moving on its version, which languishes in committee.
The credit reporting industry is dominated by three companies -- TRW, Equifax Inc. and the Trans Union Corporation.
The three keep files on 170 million people, drawn from public records, banks, retailers and independent data collectors.
The credit reports are used mainly to screen applications for loans, mortgages and credit cards, but some employers use them to turn away job applicants as well.
Few errors are as large as the Norwich fiasco.
But last year the Federal Trade Commission received more than 9,000 complaints about credit reports.
That put the credit industry first on the F.T.C.'s complaint list, ahead of automobiles and debt collectors.
The House bill sets an $8 cap on the price of a credit report -- not as good as the Senate bill, which grants consumers the right to a free report every other year, or when an error is discovered.
The bill also requires credit reporting companies to offer toll-free 800 numbers and to correct errors within 30 days.
Another provision prohibits employers from snooping in credit files without the job applicant's written permission.
These protections are welcome.
But consumers should not have to relinquish stronger safeguards to get them.
The bill's pre-emption provision would unwisely invalidate stiffer credit reporting rules in places like Maryland and Vermont.
Federal law is meant to enhance protection, not erode it.


Market Place; Tracing the Trail Of Perfume Money
EVEN with its dull-sounding name, a Schedule 13-D is greeted on Wall Street with the kind of breathless excitement that usually reserved for a royal scandal.
The filing, required of investors who acquire more than 5 percent of a company, is the calling card of takeover bids, often touching off sharp run-ups in a company's stock.
But when a 13-D was recently filed for Ross Cometics Distribution Centers Inc., the market barely hiccupped.
Why?
For one thing, the filing on the perfume and cosmetics company was six years late.
And, unlike other 13-D's, it included little information that would affect the stock.
Rather, it filled in the blanks of Ross's disclosure in June that it was secretly controlled by its own largest supplier -- a revelation that made Ross stock plunge 66 percent and led to its chairman's resignation.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Harold Louis Humes, a novelist, misidentified one of his children.
Devin Loman is one of Mr.
Humes's two sons; Mr.
Humes also had three daughters.


Public &amp; Private; Great Expectations
When liberal Democrats talk about the Presidential election these days, they seem a bit like the bride determined that the groom not see her before the ceremony.
They fear a jinx -- the jinx of optimism in this, their best-chance year in many years.
Which goes some way toward explaining why, if Bill Clinton wins -- don't say it, don't say it, don't even say it, they keen in certain circles, afraid of the unfamiliar feel of hope -- he will take office with the enormous curse of great expectations.


Personal Health
ONE of the most serious and costly epidemics in America today arouses almost no public concern and is all but ignored by health officials.
Unlike AIDS or polio, it is not caused by infection and it can be cured.
But few have put their minds to bringing it under control.
It is an epidemic of illness, disability and occasionally death from what the medical profession calls noncompliance: the failure of patients to follow doctors' preventive or therapeutic orders.
Each year, studies have indicated, 125,000 people with treatable ailments die simply because they did not take prescribed medications properly or at all.


Insurer to Buy Olympia Office Tower
Four days after New York City signed a bill granting tax breaks to property owners who modernize aging office buildings, Mutual of America said it had reached an agreement to buy and improve a vacant office tower on 320 Park Avenue from Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd..
The building, which has an asbestos problem, formerly served as the headquarters for the ITT Corporation and has reportedly cost Olympia &amp; York about $20 million a year in taxes, upkeep and interest payments in the two years since it has had a prime tenant.


Emilia-Romagna: What Italians Say To Mean 'The Best'
THE Emilia-Romagna region is Italy's culinary heartland, a broad chunk of terrain that almost spans the peninsula north of Tuscany and south of the Alps.
But despite its fame among Italians, the region is almost unknown elsewhere and is seldom visited by tourists who speed across the great fertile plain of the Po valley en route from Florence to Venice or Milan, unaware of the gastronomic treasures they are passing by.
"I don't know another part of Italy that's so important gastronomically," said Lynne Rossetto Kasper, the author of "The Splendid Table," just published by William Morrow ($30).
The book is an authoritative and imaginative celebration of the food of the little-known region of Emilia-Romagna.


Accounts
*
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Co., New York, to Goldsmith/Jeffrey Inc., New York, to handle its United States private banking advertising account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


With New Design Chief, G.M. Quiets Speculation
The General Motors Corporation named Wayne K. Cherry its new vice president of design staff today, filling a key position that oversees how all G.M. cars and trucks look, as well as their comfort and styling characteristics.
The appointment ended months of speculation over who would succeed Charles M. Jordan, who will turn 65 years old next month and then retire.
Mr.
Jordan, G.M.'s fourth design chief since the position was created by the legendary G.M. chairman Alfred Sloan in 1940, served as head of design since October 1986.


Datapoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Stocks, Off 48.90, Give Back Much of Gains
Wall Street's euphoria over Germany's interest rate cuts evaporated yesterday as it had in Europe.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 48.90 points, or 1.4 percent, to 3,327.32, consuming more than two-thirds of Monday's 70.52-point gain, the year's largest.
The United States bond market also reversed direction yesterday, selling off even after a favorable inflation report and downcast retail sales figures, the sort of news that normally supports bond prices.


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Broccoli Sauce a la Pesto, With Far Less Fat
BROCCOLI fans will think that this recipe for pasta sauce is the greatest thing since President Bush trashed the vegetable and gave it a high profile.
Though this sauce is made with broccoli, it resembles pesto because it calls for garlic, basil and pine nuts.
Its color is as pretty as anything pesto has to offer, and it has far less fat.


A Hidden Disaster Grows In Sudan, Aid Officials Say
As relief agencies and diplomats struggle to deal with the famine in Somalia, they say a huge disaster, largely hidden from the world, has developed across the southern Sudan.
The famine is the result of a long-running civil war between the fundamentalist Islamic Government and a southern rebel group.
It has reached a new intensity in recent months as the Government has made new gains and practiced scorched-earth policies against civilians.


Jets Wait for Thomas to Turn Handoff Into Liftoff
Stop the run on defense. Run the ball on offense.
Based on last year's statistics when the Jets were fourth and fifth, respectively, in those two categories among the 28 teams in the National Football League it didn't seem too much to ask of them this year.
But in the first two weeks of this season, they haven't done either very well.


Hi-Tech Pharmacal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Eastern College Report
Syracuse
Saturday's opponent is Ohio State, a familiar foe.
The two played in the Hall of Fame Bowl last New Year's in Tampa, Fla., and Syracuse won comfortably, 24-17, thanks to a big offensive display by Marvin Graves, its quarterback.
A 60-yard touchdown pass, Graves to Antonio Johnson, was a play the Buckeyes remember.
Johnson is merely the No. 4 wide receiver for the Orange now.


2 KOREAS RESUME TALKS ON NEW TIES
The Prime Ministers of North and South Korea opened a new round of talks tonight, amid concern that the effort to reconcile the two countries is stalling.
The two days of talks in Pyongyang, North Korea's capital, mark the eighth round since the two countries began negotiating directly more than a year ago, and the first since Seoul's announcement last month that it was beginning diplomatic relations with North Korea's staunchest ally, China.
So far the North Koreans, who denounced the former Soviet Union when it recognized South Korea, have said nothing about China's move.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.22
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.89
5.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.90
5.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.86
5.80
7.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.30
7.25
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.42
8.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.24
6.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pentagon Says a Rescue Helicopter Was Fired On in Bosnia
A Marine Corps helicopter that was dispatched to the crash site of an Italian relief plane in Bosnia earlier this month was struck by small-arms fire, the Pentagon said today.
The incident, which occurred on Sept. 3, was the first in which an American aircraft was hit by gunfire during the Balkan conflict.
The Pentagon said at the time that the helicopter had not been hit, but a small bullet hole was discovered four days later.


Senate Contest Isn't Over Till Absentee Votes Are In
Local election boards will count hundreds of absentee ballots next week to determine the final tally in the election for the Democratic nomination for the Senate.
Geraldine A. Ferraro, in saying good night to her supporters shortly after midnight, said that 20,000 absentee ballots remained to be counted.
But several election board officials said that no estimate of the number of absentee ballots was available and that it was impossible to guess the number that would be returned.


Hideo Gosha; Film Director, 63
Hideo Gosha, a film director known for his samurai movies, died on Aug. 30 at a hospital in Kyoto, Japan.
He was 63 years old.
He had had dyspnea, a breathing disorder, said a spokesman for the World Artists Cinema Corporation, which released two of his films on home video.


Militello's Masterpiece Ruined by Monteleone
Dead arm?
Who were the Yankees trying to fool when they rested rookie Sam Militello for the last 10 days and said his right arm was dead?
The only thing dead about last night was the procession of White Sox hitters who were fooled by Militello's crafty pitching.
But when Militello left after throwing a prescribed 90 pitches in seven innings, the White Sox arose from the dead, punished Rich Monteleone for three runs in the eighth and swiped a 4-2 victory last night at Yankee Stadium.
Monteleone had not allowed an earned run in his last 11 innings, but he was blitzed for four hits and three runs in one-third of an inning as he failed to protect Militello's lead and doomed the Yankees to their third straight loss.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Comerica Inc. is offering $150 million of senior bank notes with a 5.95 percent coupon at 99.963 to yield 5.959 percent, through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. *
Conagra Inc. is offering $300 million of 7.40 percent 12-year subordinated-debt securities at 99.676 to yield 7.441 percent, through First Boston Corp.
The noncallable securities are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P.


Bond Prices Stage a Broad Retreat
The bond market, many traders are saying, has had too much of a good thing: bad news on the economy and positive news on inflation.
And now, after a vibrant rally, slow economic growth and declining inflation is just not enough to keep the climb going.
The economic data on retail sales and inflation released yesterday should have been positive for the bond market.


Review/Television; Seinfeld's Quirky Road to Reality
Tonight at 9 on NBC, "Seinfeld" returns with a special one-hour episode to open its new season and to demonstrate once again that if you're looking for quirkiness, the hot prime-time commodity of the moment, you don't necessarily have to send a nice Jewish boy to Alaska.
You can keep him in a nondescript New York City apartment and just let him shmooze with a gaggle of somewhat odd but entirely recognizable friends.
What's more, "Seinfeld" has to be a lot cheaper to produce than "Northern Exposure."
Like Bill Cosby and Roseanne Arnold, Jerry Seinfeld has made the big and lucrative crossover from stand-up comedy to a weekly television series.
But Mr.
Seinfeld's transition has been considerably more Pirandellian.
He plays a character named Jerry Seinfeld who makes a living as a stand-up comic.
Each week, the sitcom portions of the show are punctuated with excerpts from the character's solo club routines, which are used as commentaries on the plots.
Will the real Jerry Seinfeld stand up?
Not likely.
He is known to be a very private, obsessively fastidious man.


Laser Recording Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Astronauts Await Results of Breeding Frogs


Book Notes
Full Circle
In the mutual-back-scratching business of book blurbs -- those come-hither tidbits by the famous and not-so-famous on book jackets that are meant to lure readers -- the name of the game is connections.
Author A knows Author B, or Author A's friend knows Author B, and with a flurry of phone calls or notes, a coveted quote is won.
An appearance on "The Oprah Winfrey Show," an interview on National Public Radio or a mention by the radio personality Don Imus are also critical for getting a book attention and sales.


Falcon Oil &amp; Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Fastcomm Communications reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Behavior Therapy Can Change How the Brain Functions, Researchers Say
Like drug therapy, behavior modification therapy produces metabolic and functional changes in the brains of people with obsessive compulsive disorder, scientists are reporting today.
It is the first time that behavior therapy, a method that changes the way people think about uncomfortable thoughts or feelings, has been shown to physically alter brain function in a mental disorder, said Dr.
Daniel X. Freedman, a psychiatrist at the University of California at Los Angeles and editor of The Archives of General Psychiatry, which is publishing the report.


Anthony Perkins's Wife Tells of 2 Years of Secrecy
For two years Anthony Perkins and his wife, Berry Berenson, kept silent that the actor was dying of AIDS.
"He simply never wanted anyone to know," Ms.
Berenson said in an interview at their home today.
"He figured if anyone knew they'd never give him work again."
Three days after the death of her husband, who was the the star of Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho" and many other films, Ms.
Berenson sat this morning in her home and quietly discussed his life, her devastated marriage and the singular problem of facing AIDS in Hollywood.


Police Panel: Shadow of 60's Hangs Over Council
A debate that two decades ago divided New York City will be resurrected today as the City Council prepares to wrestle with a proposal from Mayor David N. Dinkins to create an independent, civilian-controlled agency to investigate police misconduct.
When Mayor John V. Lindsay tried unsuccessfully in the 1960's to give civilians control over the review of accusations of police misconduct, the proposal set off an ugly political fight that pitted blacks against whites.
This time, city officials and Council members say they are hoping that race will not become the center of the debate, but many fear the issue has the potential to polarize New York along racial lines.


Mills Accepts $10 Million Piston Offer
Terry Mills took a giant, if indirect, step toward landing a lucrative contract with the Nets yesterday by accepting a five-year, $10 million offer from the Detroit Pistons.
Mills, a 6-foot-10-inch forward who averaged 9 points and 5.5 rebounds a game last season, largely as a backup to Derrick Coleman, is a restricted free agent, which means the Nets have 15 days to retain him by matching a rival offer, something team officials have said they would do.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Clinton's Invited Guests Hope to Bash Arkansas
"Washington, come on down!"
That was Mr.
Clinton's invitation to Washington insiders, especially those in the Bush Administration, when he delivered his acceptance speech at the Democratic Convention in July.


School-Choice Plan On Ballot in Colorado Puts State in Spotlight
In the newest battleground over "school choice," a ballot initiative in Colorado would give parents up to $2,500 in public money each year to cover the expense of private or parochial schools and even of educating a child at home.
The citizen-led initiative, which is on the ballot in November, has touched off another rancorous debate over the merits of school choice, in which parents are allowed to use public dollars at whatever schools they wish.
Opponents assert that if the measure is approved it will undermine public schools by siphoning money away from them.
But proponents say giving all parents more choices will improve public schools through competition.


Oracle Picks Ex-General As Chairman
The Oracle Corporation, the world's largest supplier of data base software, today named James Abrahamson chairman of the board.
He succeeds Lawrence J. Ellison, Oracle's co-founder, who continues as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Abrahamson, who is 59 years old, was most recently executive vice president of the Hughes Aircraft Corporation and president of its transportation sector.
A retired Air Force lieutenant general, he directed the space shuttle program for NASA from 1981 to 1984.
He also directed the Strategic Defense Initiative under President Ronald Reagan from April 1984 until his retirement from the Air Force in March 1989.


French Vote Puts Eurocrats on Trial
It was not long ago that Margaret Thatcher, when she was British Prime Minister, was being dismissed by her European partners as an eccentric nationalist for her fierce attacks on the unelected bureaucrats who run the European Community's executive commission here.
Yet suddenly her message has struck home in France.
And as France prepares to vote on a treaty on European union in a referendum on Sunday, many French have been persuaded that the independent power exercised by those Eurocrats, as they are known, also poses a grave threat to French sovereignty.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Bush Subtly Avoids Direct Attack Against Clinton on the Draft Issue
In a day marked by some of the most subtle political jousting of the campaign, President Bush today took note of the controversy over Gov.
Bill Clinton's draft record but said he did not want to attack his opponent over it.
Instead, he invited an audience of National Guard officers to compare the candidates' credentials to be Commander in Chief.
Standing in front of a big blue curtain and flanked by American flags before several thousand conventioneers of the National Guard Association, Mr.
Bush began his thrusts at Mr.
Clinton by noting, as if in an aside, that "there has been a lot of controversy swirling around about service to country, about using influence to avoid the military."


American Film Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll; Clinton Retains a Wide Lead in Latest Survey
Despite President Bush's efforts to rebuild his political base, Gov.
Bill Clinton is holding on to both a significant lead in this race and the support of important elements of the Reagan-Bush coalition, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The poll shows Mr.
Clinton with strong backing from young people, suburbanites, independents, Roman Catholics and Democrats who said they voted for Ronald Reagan and Mr.
Bush.
Emphasis on the Economy
Riding a wave of economic discontent, the Democratic nominee now has the backing of 49 percent of the voters over all, compared with 37 percent who say they are supporting Mr.
Bush, the poll shows.
Despite Mr.
Bush's efforts to refocus his campaign and repackage his economic agenda, those standings are essentially unchanged from the last Times/CBS poll three weeks ago.


Birtcher Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Cable TV Regulation Battle Heats Up Before Showdown
As opposing sides intensified their lobbying on a bill to regulate cable television prices and accused each other of deception, a leading House Democrat charged today that it would cost consumers heavily and vowed to fight it.
Final votes are scheduled in the House and Senate in the coming days, and the bill is virtually assured of passage in both, by wide margins.
But an alliance between cable television companies and Hollywood producers has been trying to generate enough opposition to sustain a veto by President Bush.


For a Simple End to Summer, It's Fish the Light Basque Way
IN this simple, light menu still suggestive of summer, whiting is featured in a main dish inspired by the cooking of the Basques, the people of northern Spain and southwest France.
Whiting, or merluza, as the Basques call it, is plentiful and inexpensive in that region and in most parts of the United States.
If you can't find it, substitute another economical species -- perhaps porgy or bluefish, providing it is fresh.
I prepare the fish in the Basque style, en cazuela.
The term refers specifically to a type of earthenware cooking pot common to that region, but it is also used in a broader context to describe the airtight, moist cooking, or braising, that is done in these and similar pots and that is a speciality there.


Brook Johnson Captures Republican Senate Race
Brook Johnson, a millionaire business executive from Greenwich who was completely unknown in Connecticut politics until he announced his candidacy last May, scored a decisive victory yesterday in the Republican primary for the United States Senate.
His victory over a better-known opponent -- Chris Burnham, a two-term State Representative from Stamford -- underscored the power of intensive spending, particularly on television commercials.


Emergency Response Kept a Company Going
To the Editor:
On Sept. 1, our company found out firsthand that New York-bashers are dead wrong: the city works.
Local press and television stations gave profuse coverage to the water main break under South Street that severely disrupted operations at our headquarters building.
What the news media missed was the response to help us through the crisis.


Executive Changes
ALTEON INC., Northvale, N.J., a pharmaceutical company, appointed Dr.
Jere E. Goyan senior vice president of research and development.
GENPHARM U.S., Mountain View, Calif., a unit of Genpharm International Inc., appointed Dr.
David L. Winter president and chief operating officer.


Jockey Banned in Race-Fix Inquiry
One jockey was banned from all tracks and horse races in Massachusetts and six others were cleared yesterday after a state inquiry into race-fixing at the Three-County Fair in Northampton, Mass.
PAUL LUCE, the barred jockey, was accused of interfering with a fellow rider, JERRY HALIMI, in at least one race on Sept. 8.


Critic's Notebook; Spanish Dance Festival in France
If the Lyons Dance Biennial here has become one of the world's foremost dance festivals, it is thanks largely to its spectacular overview of French dance in 1988 and of American dance in 1990.
What, then, could be easier than a similar three-week celebration of Spanish dance in 1992?
Yet "Pasion de Espana," as this year's event (the fifth since 1984) is aptly called, has erupted into colorful and passionate complexity even within its first few days.


Review/Music; An AIDS Benefit Concert
"Embrace the Human Race" was the title of a Saturday-night benefit at St.
Clement's Church for the People With AIDS Coalition.
The concert was further dedicated to "the Earth, World Peace, and Healing." Most of the music on the program reflected these bland sentiments, but one work, Dawn Buckholz's "Absence and Recall," managed to venture beyond them.
The concert began and ended with breezily banal new-age pieces by Richard Shulman.
His "Fanfare Suite" hammered away at simple harmonies while dancers traipsed about with bright flags.
Maureen Snyder's "For You" occupied the same colorless idiom.


Losing Its Luster, 'Star Wars' Is Object of Lawmakers' Budget Ax
One year after Congress approved record spending on missile defenses to protect the nation against nuclear attack, lawmakers are revising spending plans for much of the "Star Wars" anti-missile system.
While Congress is likely to cut the current $4.15 billion level of financing by only about $150 million for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1, lawmakers are redistributing that money and fundamentally changing the direction and pace of the overall program.


F.C.C. Plans New Rules For Pocket Telephones
Hoping to head off a confrontation with Congress, the Federal Communications Commission will propose rules Thursday that would gradually free a wide range of radio frequencies for new pocket-telephone services.
The proposal is an attempt to placate electric utilities, railroads and other groups that now use these frequencies for microwave communications and have waged an intense political battle to keep them.


Specialist in Turnarounds Is Named to Run Phar-Mor
Phar-Mor Inc., the discount pharmacy chain that filed for bankruptcy protection last month, yesterday named Antonio C. Alvarez, a turnaround specialist, as president and chief operating officer.
The company filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code on Aug. 17 after it accusing two senior executives of embezzling and reporting $350 million in nonexistent profits.


Market Place; Agility Counts in Currency Chaos
The world's currency markets, it seems, are no longer governed by central bankers in Washington and Bonn, but by traders and investors in Tokyo, London and New York, as the chaos in the currency markets this past week has shown.
The lucky, the canny and the nimble among them have found ways to gain an advantage even as they confront the worst monetary crisis of their lives.
"I haven't seen such turmoil and uncertainty and fear in the years I have been a central banker and in the private markets," said Peter O'Shea, who served for the Irish central bank and now works in London as a managing director in foreign exchange for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Cherkasov Is Upset  Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine upset seventh-seeded Andrei Cherkasov of Russia, 5-7, 6-2, 7-5, yesterday to advance to the quarterfinals of a clay-court tournament in Bordeaux, France.
Medvedev, an 18-year-old who has risen from junior champion at the French Open last year to No. 33 in the world, beat Bjorn Borg in the opening round.
In other second-round matches, second-seeded Carlos Costa of Spain beat a countryman, Francisco Roig, 6-3, 6-1, and third-seeded Guy Forget of France downed Claudio Pistolesi of Italy, 6-4, 6-4.
Halard Leads the Way: Top-seeded Julie Halard of France led a quartet of seeded players into the quarterfinals of the Paris women's tournament.
Halard topped Silke Frankl of Germany, 6-1, 6-1, in the second round.
The only seeded player to lose was fifth-seeded Barbara Paulus of Austria, who was beaten by Silke Meier of Germany, 6-3, 6-2. (AP) 6-3, 6-2. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Ecuadorean Wins Walk  Jefferson Perez of Ecuador won the 10,000-meter walk yesterday, the only event decided on the opening day of the world junior championships in Seoul, South Korea.
Perez won by eight seconds with a time of 40 minutes 42.66 seconds.
Jacek and Grzegorz Muller, Polish twins, finished second and third with times of 40:50.82 and 41:12.28.
The five-day event has attracted 1,002 athletes from 99 countries.
The competitors are aged 16 to 19. (AP)


Why the Currency Crisis Erupted: A Primer
A currency crisis is something that is not supposed to happen these days.
The very idea evokes images from old newsreels, with grave statesmen in top hats emerging from limousines to urge calm in gravelly voices.
But suddenly Europe is up to its eyebrows in one.
And while the immediate impact on most people's daily lives will be slight, it could derail the drive to European unity that only a few months ago seemed as inevitable as tomorrow's sunrise.
How could something so important have happened with so little warning?
And why are elected officials who have staked their careers on the currency arrangement known as the European Monetary System seemingly powerless to prevent its meltdown?
The answers lie in the basic economics of international finance -- and the even more basic conflicts between domestic and regional political priorities.
Trading Francs for Pounds
Francs are the coin of the realm in France.
But when a French company wants to import machinery from a producer in Manchester, England, it must pay the bills in British pounds.
And to obtain the pounds, the company must find someone willing to exchange British currency for francs.


Escape Tarnishes Colombian Leader's Image
The political fallout from the prison escape of the drug boss Pablo Escobar has taken a heavy toll on the credibility of President Cesar Gaviria and his ability to govern.
The President will appear before a Senate investigative committee later this month to explain why he failed to prevent both the escape and the sumptuous lifestyle Mr.
Escobar led while jailed.


Where Shining Path Took Root, the Seed of Hope
Here in the Andean cradle of Peru's Maoist revolt, the news of the arrest of the founder of the rebel Shining Path is provoking reactions ranging from denial to shock to glimmerings of hope.
"It was a big bucket of cold water," said an anthropology professor at the National University of San Cristobal de Huamanga, where the rebel leader, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, taught courses in philosophy by day and Marxist people's war at night.


Bettors Can Now 'Screen' More of Their Picks
If you go to the Meadowlands this afternoon for a day at the races, you won't see any live horses on the track until 7:30 in the evening.
But you can spend the afternoon sitting in front of television monitors and betting your money on 21 races beamed in from Pimlico in Maryland and Freehold in New Jersey.
Then, if you have any investment cash left, you still have the 10 regularly scheduled races on the Meadowlands track in the evening, this time featuring live horses, plus 12 more races on teleivision from Garden State Park to keep you from getting bored.


Bonilla Promises to Come Out Swinging at the Plate and at Attacks
Bobby Bonilla autographed some baseball cards last night in the clubhouse, and considered once again the price of fame in New York City.
It was steep, he decided.
"I always knew it would be, with this $29 million bull's-eye on my back," Bonilla said before last night's game.


Teamster Official Is Accused of Misusing Funds
Barry Feinstein, one of the city's pre-eminent labor leaders, was accused yesterday by a federally appointed investigator of "embezzling" more than $300,000 from the union over seven years to pay for expenses at his East Side apartment.
The investigator charged that the money paid for rent, cable television, housekeeping, furniture and space in a parking garage.
Mr.
Feinstein is also accused of improperly receiving almost $100,000 in interest-free loans and $73,000 for what he described as out-of-pocket expenses, and of improperly turning unused vacation time into cash over the seven-year period, stretching from 1985 through 1991.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mel Torme
Michael's Pub  211 East 55th Street  Midtown Manhattan  Through Oct. 11
Mel Torme's secret weapon has always been rhythm.
The singer, who opened his seventh consecutive fall season at Michael's Pub on Tuesday evening, was once nicknamed the Velvet Fog for the smoothness of his timbre.
But Machine-Gun Mel would be just as apt, since it describes the rat-a-tat precision of scat singing that treats improvisations as vocalized drumbeats.


In Test of G.O.P. Leader, Loyalist Wins in Nassau
Although shaken by a string of recent losses to Democrats, the Nassau County Republican Committee and its chairman, Joseph N. Mondello, came up big winners in Tuesday's primary.
Republican voters resisted a call for a change in party leadership and supported Mr.
Mondello's candidate, David A. Levy, a Hemsptead Town Councilman and party loyalist.
Mr.
Levy easily won the party's nomination in the newly redrawn Fourth Congressional District, defeating an insurgent, Daniel Frisa, a four-term State Assemblyman.


Thousands of Police Officers Close the Brooklyn Bridge in Angry Protest


A Glenn Gould Tribute
A daylong tribute to Glenn Gould is to take place at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Oct. 10, to observe the 10th anniversary of the pianist's death.
The event will include a lecture, two different series of video screenings in which Gould discusses and performs works by Bach, Beethoven, Strauss and Schoenberg, and the first New York performance of Gould's String Quartet.
The concert includes a video performance by Gould of Bach's "Goldberg" Variations.
Tickets for the entire event are $20; for the lecture and one screening series, $5; for the concert, $10.
Tickets: (212) 570-3949.


Budd Buszek, 76, Dies; Advertising Executive
Budd Buszek, a former advertising executive and president of the Traffic Audit Bureau, died on Sept. 10 at his home in Margaretville, N.Y.
He was 76.
Mr.
Buszek died from complications related to cancer, said Pamela Richards, a spokeswoman for the family.


Shortchanging the World's Children
Two years ago, more than 70 heads of state came together on behalf of the world's children.
They wisely pledged to make the next generation stronger and smarter.
Now the United States is wavering in its financial commitment to the cause.
With an additional $100 million, Congress could set things right.
The plight of many of the world's children is heart-rending.
An estimated 40,000 die each day from preventable diseases like measles, pneumonia, whooping cough and diarrheal dehydration.
Countless others also suffer from a lack of education and dangerous working conditions.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
TO those who have never tried it, hanging a picture or a set of shelves on a wall might seem simple enough: select a location, hammer a nail or drive a few screws and that's that.
But people who have tried it know differently.
Walls in most homes are hollow, consisting of an inner framework of narrow, widely spaced vertical supports of wood or metal called studs, which are covered by a layer of drywall (wallboard), plaster or thin plywood paneling.
These covering materials do not grip nails or screws tightly and, unless the fastener enters a stud, it will usually fall out when a picture or a shelf bracket is hung from it.


Russell Niles, 90, Ex-Chancellor; Of N.Y.U. and Law School Dean
Russell D. Niles, a former chancellor of New York University and a professor of law, died on Tuesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 90 years old.
The exact cause of his death had not been determined, said Thomas Debley, a spokesman for the Hastings College of Law at the University of California, where Professor Niles was an emeritus professor of law.


COMPANY NEWS
BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY AND FOSTER'S, both based in Australian, saw their shares decline yesterday as investors absorbed Foster's huge annual loss announced Tuesday.
Broken Hill shares closed down 50 cents Australian at $11.98 Australian, while Foster's shares fell 8 Australian cents each to $1.38 Australian.
WITCO CORP, New York, has created a four-person office of the chairman in a reorganization of senior management.


Breath of Fresh Air for Subway Riders
A VENTILATION shaft that might be described as beautiful is hard to visualize.
But at Morton and West streets in Greenwich Village there are two new comely shafts that stand like monoliths.
The 40-foot shafts, which were completed in July for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, provide emergency ventilation fans and exits for the PATH subway system underneath.


Review/Television; Cheating On Welfare, Cheerfully
The soft spot that television news usually shows for people on welfare is not evident in tonight's edition of "Prime Time Live." The subject of Diane Sawyer's tough-minded report is the cheaters whose number, she says, far exceeds the official figure of 2 percent.
One investigator puts the figure at closer to 50 percent, and tonight's exposure of the ease with which the system can be bilked makes that seem plausible.
The main scam, explained by several scammers for the benefit of a hidden camera, involves working at an unreported job and drawing welfare payments too.
"Absolutely I'm lying to them: right," one man tells Ms.
Sawyer.
"But it's for my benefit. Why should I tell them the truth of the matter? I'm trying to get the maximum money I can out of them."


Crisis Is Seen for Sub-Saharan Africa
As the world grapples with starvation in Somalia, American and international aid officials say they are looking ahead to a crisis many times larger building across sub-Saharan Africa, where drought and civil war may put millions more at risk over the next few months.
"Something like 110 million people live in the countries affected by the drought," said Andrew Natsios, Assistant Administrator for Food and Humanitarian Assistance at the United States Agency for International Development.


Making School Choice Real Choice
For five years, the schools of the Lower East Side have been hemorrhaging students, mostly to a neighboring Manhattan school district that has been setting up small experimental schools with seductive programs.
Now the gritty Lower East Side is fighting back, setting up its own programs like a just-opened Earth School that emphasizes the environment.
William E. Ubinas, the superintendent of Community School District 1, claims his Lower East Side district is even luring back students who fled to his rival, District 2, which covers midtown and the Upper East Side.


New New Jersey Tomato (Fresh From Tel Aviv)
Once feared as poisonous and at other times treasured as an aphrodisiac, the New Jersey tomato is going international.
Gov.
Jim Florio on Tuesday signed an agreement with Israeli officials in Tel Aviv for the Israelis to develop a new and hardier tomato that would have a longer shelf life, be able to withstand shipping when ripe and be unique to New Jersey.


Millicent Fenwick, 82, Dies; Gave Character to Congress
Millicent H. Fenwick, a retired Republican Congresswoman renowned for her political independence and championing of liberal causes, died yesterday at her home in Bernardsville, N.J.
She was 82 years old.
She died of heart failure, her family said.


Ithaca and Tradition Hard to Beat
Everybody has a story about Jim Butterfield, the Ithaca College football coach, whose team began its season predictably last Saturday.
The Bombers beat Albany, 51-7.
The team's trainer, Kent Scriber, remembers the day in 1979 when the team was scheduled to leave for Dubuque, Ia., for an opening-round game in the Division III playoffs.


Increasingly Isolated, North Korea Seeks Better Relations With U.S.
The North Korean Government, increasingly abandoned by its traditional allies, sent a quiet appeal to the United States earlier this month calling for a major improvement in relations and a series of high-level meetings, American and South Korean diplomats said today.
But officials said the offer was quickly rebuffed by the State Department, which repeated its insistence on a much stronger regime of inspections of the country's nuclear installations before moving toward closer ties with the Communist Government of President Kim Il Sung.


U.S.-China Rift at Trade Talks Is Still Wide
American and Chinese negotiators concluded a third day of talks today on a number of contentious trade issues, but the two sides remained far apart on what could prove a landmark trade agreement.
The United States has given China until Oct. 10 to agree to lower a range of import barriers or face punitive tariffs against $3.9 billion worth of Chinese exports to the United States.
China has threatened to retaliate by raising tariffs on $4 billion worth of imports of American goods if the United States imposes sanctions.


Europe's Turmoil May Aid the U.S.
The turmoil in Europe's financial markets is primarily a European affair and the United States will not get involved, officials of the Bush Administration and the Federal Reserve said yesterday.
In fact, the turbulence could help the American economy, they said, by lowering interest rates and spurring growth in Europe and the United States.
Beyond that, Europe's trauma has given the Fed more flexibility to lower interest rates because it has strengthened the dollar, they said.
Business Day, page D8.


Sampson Takes Coaching Job in Virginia
Two of the biggest names in Virginia basketball, RALPH SAMPSON and LEFTY DRIESELL, will team up this season at James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Va.
Sampson, the 7-foot-4-inch former pro basketball player from Harrisonburg, who was an all-American at the University of Virginia, has been hired as the James Madison part-time assistant coach, The Harrisonburg Daily News-Record reported Tuesday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; First TV Debate Canceled as Bush Sticks to Objections Over Format
The bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates today canceled the first televised debate, scheduled for Tuesday, after President Bush refused to accept the commission's proposal that he and Gov.
Bill Clinton be questioned by a single moderator.
Bush aides have said the President is best suited for another, more traditional format, in which three panelists and a moderator ask questions.
But one moderator, the aides said, would encourage more sparring between the candidates.
They have said they are concerned that that might benefit Mr.
Clinton, who they think might be faster on his feet than the President.
Bush Expresses Willingness
A panel of questioners might also make it easier for Mr.
Bush to appear more Presidential, the aides said, since such a format would be less likely to prompt a head-to-head rhetorical fight with Mr.
Clinton.


Multimedia Unit by Sony Is Portable
The Sony Corporation said yesterday that it would introduce next month a $999 portable multimedia player, a two-pound device that marries some of the capabilities of compact disk players, video players and computers.
To help sell the machines, companies including I.B.M. are developing business and consumer software.
About 60 titles will be available by the end of the year.


Review/Pop; A Girl Group for a Changing World
En Vogue's first album proclaimed that the four-woman group was "Born to Sing" (East West).
At Radio City Music Hall on Tuesday night, En Vogue was also born to pose in designer clothes, to dance and to tease spectators with glamorous images just out of reach.
Terry Ellis, Cindy Herron, Maxine Jones and Dawn Robinson are accomplished, hard-working entertainers, singing ballads or sinuous funk or hard rock with the giggles and poise of runway models.
En Vogue is the modern version of the girl group, a project that is fabricated and scripted by producers and songwriters, usually male.
The group embodies a male vision of fantasies calculated to appeal to female listeners.
Girl-group music was once dismissed as trivial, insubstantial pop, but the girl group has proved to be a durable institution, registering changes in female roles and the rituals of courtship.


D'Amato on the Attack
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato began his television advertising campaign yesterday against his Democratic opponent, Robert Abrams, with four commercials appearing across the state.
THE SCRIPT: Announcer's voice: "Al D'Amato. Bob Abrams. The difference is clear.  "Al D'Amato wants to cut taxes and freeze spending.
Bob Abrams plans to raise taxes on all families earning $36,000 and individuals earning $22,000.
"Al D'Amato supports the balanced budget amendment. Bob Abrams wants a 6 percent tax on every job in America. "That's just plain wrong.
Bob Abrams taxes and spends.
Bob Abrams, hopelessly liberal.
PRODUCER: Russo Marsh &amp; Assoc. of Sacramento, Calif.
ON THE SCREEN: Frozen images of a smiling Mr.
D'Amato wearing a white shirt against a red and blue background, and Mr.
Abrams, frowning, against a black background.
Words fromthe spoken text appear.
The candidate's pictures alternate rather than appearing side byside, because, Tony Marsh of Russo Marsh said, they look alike.
ACCURACY: Mr.
D'Amato is using Mr.
Abrams's support for the national health care program of Representative Marty Russo of Illinois to support his claim that Mr.
Abrams wants to raise taxes.
The Russo plan would impose tax increases to pay for the health insurance.
The Russo plan would tax families earning about $51,000 or more.
Those earning $51,000 would have taxable incomes of $36,000, the figure Mr.
D'Amato's ad cites.
Families earning a gross income of $36,000 would not be affected.
Similarly, only individuals earning more than $27,550, with a
taxable
income of $22,000, would pay more.
Mr.
Abrams's spokesman, Timothy Gilles, said that Mr.
Abrams has never endorsed the taxing structure of Mr.
Russo's legislation tro finance the program.
He has said that a payroll tax would be a good way to finance a national health care program.
The D'Amato ad translates that into Mr.
Abrams's support of a 6 percent tax on every job.
What is not included in any of Mr.
D'Amato's calculations are health-cost savings that could help families and businesses offset tax increases.
SCORECARD: Mr.
D'Amato's ad creates the misleading impression that Mr.
Abrams has endorsed several specific tax increases.
What he has actually said is he would support some kind of tax to finance a national health insurance system.
That said, the ad does what it sets out to do: paint Abrams as a tax-and-spend liberal.
And with few words, it leaves viewers with one very catchy, and slightly comic, phrase: "Hopelessly liberal."  Mr.
D'Amato endeavors to turn Mr.
Abrams's own portrayal of himself -- as more liberal than his Democratic primary opponents -- into something ridiculous and sinister.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chemical Bank, a unit of Chemical Banking Corp., New York, is offering $300 million of 7 1/4 percent 10-year subordinated notes at 99.298 to yield 7.35 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Clark Oil and Refining Corp., a unit of Horsham Corp., Toronto, is offering $175 million of 9.5 percent senior notes due in 2004 at par to yield 9.5 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The notes are rated Ba-2 by Moody's and BB+ by S.&amp; P.


The Season, Just Like a Lead, Is Officially Lost
The Mets, refusing to back into their own mathematical elimination, panicked with genuine passion in the final two innings last night against St.
Louis.
Displaying exactly the sort of ineptitude that has marked their sharp decline, the Mets officially exited from the National League East race with a graceless 10-4 defeat.
If the Mets win the rest of their games this season, and if the Pittsburgh Pirates lose the rest of theirs, Shea Stadium will remain sadly shut in mid-October.


Disruptive Students Need Attention as Well as Separation
To the Editor:
As a former New York City junior high school principal, I was annoyed by "Guard Against Dumping-Ground Schools" (editorial, Sept. 4), blasting the 600 schools.
The writer's knowledge of secondary schools ended with graduation years ago from a nice, quiet middle-class high school.


Most House Primaries Defy Anti-Incumbent Mood
Though anti-incumbent attitudes are running higher than a decade ago, only two Representatives lost bids for renomination in primaries on Tuesday.
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll showed that a third of registered voters said they wanted to cast ballots against their incumbent lawmakers in House races, as against a fifth of voters in polls a decade ago.


Romanesque With Modern Twists
THE Romanesque churches in Cologne, Germany, took a beating in World War II.
Now the dozen Roman Catholic churches, built from about the 10th century to the mid-13th century, have been restored and reconstructed, with some modern twists.
"It hasn't been an exact reconstruction," said Ulrich Krings, the conservator of Cologne's monuments.
"We have, for example, put modern windows in many of the churches, whereas other churches have had their original windows restored."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: 12th District  Woman in the News; Loyalty and Labor; Nydia M. Velazquez
Two years ago, Nydia M. Velazquez found herself the focus of attention at festivities to celebrate the mayoral primary victory of David N. Dinkins, when she was described as the engine behind a large and ultimately crucial Hispanic voter turnout.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Mysterious Mandrake
Q.
Strange stories abound concerning mandrake.
Is this plant real, or what? -- Leila J. Pierce, San Francisco.


Bridge
After almost a year, the New York Double Knockout Teams for the Von Zedtwitz nears its conclusion.
Surviving are an unbeaten team led by Michael Camp, and three once-beaten teams headed by Dorothy Truscott, Jim Becker and John Racz.
One member of the Truscott team is Irina Levitina of Teaneck, N.J., one of the few people in the world who plays both bridge and chess at a high level.
She recently won the United States women's chess championship, and is now playing in a major chess tournament in Finland.
In five weeks she will be in a qualifying tournament in Shanghai, with the world women's title beckoning on the horizon.


Bush Administration Called Lax In Investigating Bank Fraud Case
The defense lawyer in a multibillion dollar bank fraud case today made public information that he says proves that the Bush Adminsitration, blinded by foreign-policy considerations, never thoroughly investigated the possible complicity of one of Italy's largest banks.
The lawyer, Bobby Lee Cook, said a Government task force assigned to the inquiry failed to follow up evidence suggesting that top Italian executives of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro knew that their tiny Atlanta office was making billions of dollars in loans to Iraq, some of which financed Saddam Hussein's military buildup.


Graves Tries to Shrug Off Slings and Arrows
In Toronto, they compared him to an ax murderer.
Adam Graves has forgotten most things: the cab driver who called him names, the signs the Pittsburgh fans hung to abuse him, the vicious things that were said.
He slashed Mario Lemieux in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
He was suspended.
People were unhappy.
The Penguins won; the Rangers lost.
It is over.
It is a new season.
Adam Graves would like to start over.
Still, he was unmercifully ripped by the news media in Toronto last spring, the spring of the Rangers' post-season collapse, the spring that Graves sent Lemieux from the playoffs for four games with a few misplaced cracks on the wrist.
In Pittsburgh, home of the wounded hero, Graves is a goon and a thug.
And in a schoolyard in suburban Toronto, where his family lives, he is a jerk and a bully -- or so said the kids who taunted Graves's younger brothers, who happen to be 14, 10 and 8 years old.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Clinton Addresses Unemployment


Nine Unions Seek Accord On Owner
With a deadline looming for an across-the-board wage cut, the nine unions at The Daily News struggled yesterday to agree on a new owner for the bankrupt paper.
While Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, is considered the heavy favorite because he has reached agreements with eight of the nine unions, his prospects were dimmed yesterday by the emergence of a new prospective buyer, the Whitman Group, a New York concern that specializes in bankruptcies.


Islander Defensemen Are Looking Over Shoulders
You can't blame some of the veterans of the Islanders defense if they are feeling a little defensive.
With 17 defensemen in training camp and one top draft choice possibly on the way, a trade of one or two established players for a power forward is a strong possibility.
Most teams dress six or seven defensemen a game.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  THE 1992 CAMPAIGN  LOOKING TO NOVEMBER
The general election campaign for the Senate from New York began in earnest, as the Democratic nominee, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, fresh from his narrow victory over Geraldine A. Ferraro, squared off for a bruising battle against the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
A1.
A CRUSHING DISAPPOINTMENT
The Senate primary, one of the most visible races in this political year, turned into a crushing disappointment for the feminist movement, leaving bitter divisions and questions about the damage to the political careers of two feminist heroines, Geraldine A. Ferraro and Elizabeth Holtzman.
B5.
A NEW ROLE FOR SHARPTON
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, the often flamboyant protest leader, did something new this week.
He collected votes -- more than 160,000 of them in the Senate Democratic primary -- and, according to many politicians, succeeded in catapulting himself, at least for the moment, to a new level as a serious political force.
B5.
The Abrams image.
News analysis, B4.
Nydia M. Velazquez, the woman who defeated Solarz.
Woman in the news, B6.
Republican nominee begins Connecticut campaign.
B6.
NEW YORK CITY  A GROWING FLOOD OF HOMELESS FAMILIES  The number of homeless families entering New York City's troubled shelter system this summer is almost twice last summer's level, causing a backup that has left more than 100 families a night sleeping on floors and tables in city welfare offices.
B3.
ANOTHER NEWS BID?
With a deadline looming for a wage cut, the unions at The Daily News struggled to agree on a new owner for the paper and another prospective buyer appeared on the scene.
B3.
Officers won't be prosecuted in a shooting.
B3.
Research center dedicated at Columbia.
B3.
REGION  NEW CHALLENGES IN BROOKHAVEN
A group of environmental lawyers and state legislators, frustrated by the Brookhaven Town Board's approval of projects proposed by John McNamara, a car dealer and developer, is challenging those approvals in light of Mr.
McNamara's admission that he bribed town officials.
B7.
A VICTORY FOR THE NASSAU G.O.P.
The Nassau County Republican Committee and its chairman, Joseph N. Mondello, came up big winners in Tuesday's primary.
Republican voters resisted a call for a change in party leadership and supported Mr.
Mondello's candidate for Congress in the newly redrawn Fourth Congressional District.
B7.
COMING UP WITH A BETTER TOMATO
Once feared as poisonous and at other times treasured as an aphrodisiac, the New Jersey tomato is going international.
An Israeli research group will help develop a hardier tomato.
B7. 500,000 FINE FOR NUCLEAR PLANT?
Federal authorities proposed fining the New York State Power Authority $500,000, saying it had suffered "a significant breakdown in management and administrative control" at the James A. Fitzpatrick nuclear plant.
B7.


Another Win By a Woman, This One 'Mom'
Outsiders, many of them women, have leaped to the forefront this year in American politics, but Tuesday's primary election in Washington State has produced perhaps the most powerful variation yet in sexual politics: a candidate for the United States Senate running as "just a mom in tennis shoes."
Casting herself as a working mother with suburban concerns, the Democratic candidate, Patty Murray, running in an open primary, outpolled all her opponents in both parties, including two better-known male politicians.
She and the No. 2 vote-getter, Representative Rod Chandler, a five-term Republican Congressman from the Seattle suburb of Bellevue, will face off in the general election.


American May Dissolve 4-Tier Fares
Financial analysts who met with the chairman of American Airlines this week said yesterday that he suggested the airline might dissolve the simplified four-tier fare structure it started in April.
"We will not defend value pricing forever," the chairman, Robert L. Crandall, said of the new structure, according to the analysts.


Nazi Hunter Says C.I.A. Has Files On Man Accused of War Crimes
A former lawyer with the Justice Department's Nazi-hunting unit has told the Central Intelligence Agency where he says it can find its own documents on a Ukrainian fascist leader whom it reportedly recruited and taken to the United States after World War II.
The agency, which said last month it could not find any records on the man, Mykola Lebed of Yonkers, confirmed that it had received the leads and said it was pursuing them as part of a new policy to release long-secret files on its involvement with Nazi war criminals.


AT HOME IN THE GARDEN WITH: Len Marino; A Cunning Cottage 3 Could Share (Public Invited)
LEN MARINO and his family live in a storybook-quaint stone cottage nestled on 240 leafy acres complete with river and small forest.
Of course, they share their backyard's sprawling sylvan splendor with rabbits, squirrels, ducks and hawks.
And a half million tourists each year.


Executives Urge Focus On Deficit
A group of business executives and academic leaders chided the two Presidential candidates today for failing to make substantial proposals to cut the budget deficit and said tax increases would probably be necessary.
The group, headed by A. W. Clausen, chairman of the executive committee of BankAmerica's board, urged the Government to eliminate the deficit in five to ten years, saying the United States had to nurse its economy back to health to strengthen its world leadership role.


When the Glitter's Off the Gilding
ELI RIOS, an antiques restorer in Manhattan, recalls with pleasure a somber black and brown Portuguese screen with Japanese imagery.
The owner, believing that the screen had black paint over brown leather, asked Mr.
Rios to clean the brown background.
Instead, Mr.
Rios concentrated on the black, which turned out to be silver gilding that had tarnished.
The client wound up with a gleaming silver and brown antique screen.
The ancient art of gilding is generally considered the process of applying a thin layer of real or imitation gold as decoration on a plainer surface.
But all that's gilded isn't necessarily gold.
Through the years, platinum, palladium, silver, aluminum, white gold and even tin have been used to impart a silvery glow.
All but tin are still used.


Electrician Indicted in Insider Deal
The Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday accused an electrician of trading illegally on insider information he got while installing a security system at the office of a company planning a takeover.
The commission also charged six others, including his wife and his accountant, with violating trading laws in connection with Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.'s 1988 takeover offer for the Pillsbury Company.
The takeover took place in 1989.
In a separate criminal action, the electrician, Robert Falbo, and Anthony Capricuso, his accountant, were indicted by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan on one count of conspiracy and nine counts of securities fraud.
The indictment said the two had reaped profits of more than $400,000.


Page Takes Step Toward Judicial Post
The Hall of Famer ALAN PAGE made history on the football field.
Now he is one step away from making history in Minnesota politics.
Page, who in 1971 became the first defensive player to be named National Football League player of the year, earned a place in the Nov. 3 general election Tuesday by easily winning a three-man preliminary race for one of the seats on the Minnesota Supreme Court.
He will face the second-place finisher, KEVIN JOHNSON, an assistant Hennepin County Attorney.


Cosby Benefit Is Postponed
Bill Cosby's benefit show for Carnegie Hall on Nov. 11 has been postponed to March 29 because of scheduling difficulties, the hall has announced.
Tickets, which will go on sale in early 1993, are $15 to $75 for the show and $1,000 for a pre-show reception with Mr.
Cosby, first-class seats for the show and a supper afterward.
Tickets at $500 include the show and supper.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.20
5.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.91
5.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.92
5.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.88
5.86
7.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.30
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.42
8.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.32
6.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Expos Stay Very Much Alive on Grissom's Heroics
The Pittsburgh Pirates saw enough of Marquis Grissom tonight to last until next season.
But, to their displeasure, they have to see him three more times in the next eight days.
They just hope they don't see him in the National League playoffs.
Grissom, who would love to play against his hometown Atlanta Braves next month, did just about everything one player could do to get the Montreal Expos headed in that direction.
He ripped three hits, scored three runs, drove in one run, had two stolen bases and threw out a runner at the plate as the Expos defeated the Pirates, 6-3, and sliced the gap between them to three games.


Managed Care Is More of What We Have Now
To the Editor:
"Half Right on Health" (editorial, Aug. 31) favors the so-called "Jackson Hole global budget" -- referring to the health-care experts who invented the term for a system that sets "only the premium that providers would be allowed to charge for basic coverage" and remove incentives for "unnecessary services." This plan is a thinly disguised attempt to consolidate control of the country's sickness-care industry among those few health insurers who promote health maintenance organizations.
It is not health care reform.


Glamorous Rooms, Not Just For Show
BLOOMINGDALE'S model rooms always seem to be lighted for the cocktail hour.
They appear to be waiting for people to walk in making witty conversation and clutching martinis.
This fall's collection is no exception.
On Sunday, the store opened its seven "Only at Bloomingdale's" rooms, fantasy environments in famous locations past and present, including the Cloisters, Sutton Place, Battery Park and the old Astor Hotel.
They focus on furnishings that are exclusive to Bloomingdale's.


The Downtown Walker
To the Editor:
Emerging from the subway in Lower Manhattan, I didn't know how to reach my destination -- a small street with a strange-sounding name.
As I pondered, a blind man with a white cane approached.
I asked if I could help him cross the street.
He accepted and asked my destination.
I told him and said I didn't know how to get there.
He said he was going in that direction; he would show me the way.
HELEN EMANUEL ROSENBERG  Brooklyn, Sept. 1, 1992


Lindros Is an Early Sensation
Philadelphia Flyer officials are getting a glimpse of what ERIC LINDROS could mean to the team's coffers.
About 1,500 people have jammed the rink at O'Leary, Prince Edward Island, every day, paying $5 just to watch him practice.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police escort him from the rink to a van after practice.
Tuesday night's intrasquad scrimmage at Charlottetown sold out all 3,000 seats at $10 a seat.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Bush and Clinton Lob Economic Plans
The Presidential race moved into a transcontinental bidding war on the economy and compassion today as President Bush offered a $500 million tax credit to companies that provide family emergency leaves and Gov.
Bill Clinton outlined a $1.5 billion program to revive the inner cities.
Campaigning at opposite ends of the country -- Mr.
Bush in the Oval Office and Mr.
Clinton in Los Angeles -- both candidates tried to focus attention on their economic proposals.


1.1% Growth in World Economy Seen
After experiencing no growth last year, the world economy will expand only 1.1 percent this year and accelerate to a merely respectable 3 percent next year, the International Monetary Fund predicted today.
But even that 3 percent means that the recovery will be weaker than most other postwar rebounds, the fund added in its semiannual economic forecast, making clear that the global economy would largely parallel the ups and downs of the United States, which accounts for 25 percent of world output.


Contretemps Lifts Ad Rate For 'Murphy'
"MURPHY BROWN" is not the only one who owes Vice President Dan Quayle "big time," as he joked after the CBS series he attacked took top honors at the Emmy Awards.
So, too, does Laurence A. Tisch, the network's chairman, president and chief executive.
The sitcom was already CBS's highest-rated entertainment series before the Vice President castigated the eponymous fictional newswoman, portrayed by Candice Bergen, for bearing a son out of wedlock.
Yet by building anticipation for the coming season, the contretemps has helped propel ad rates for "Murphy Brown" to the moon, as another CBS star, Jackie Gleason, used to say.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Secrecy Over TV Ads, or, the Peculiar Logic of Political Combat
Gov.
Bill Clinton put a new commercial on the air last week, hoping it will be seen by millions of people somewhere in America.
But the Clinton campaign will not say where.
President Bush, too, is preparing advertisements that could go on television any day now in crucial states.
But even after the commercials go on, the Bush campaign will not be telling in which states.


Officers Rally And Dinkins Is Their Target
Thousands of off-duty police officers thronged around City Hall yesterday, swarming through police barricades to rally on the steps of the hall and blocking traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge for nearly an hour in the most unruly and angry police demonstration in recent memory.
The 300 uniformed officers who were supposed to control the crowd did little or nothing to stop the protesters from jumping barricades, tramping on automobiles, mobbing the steps of City Hall or taking over the bridge.
In some cases, the on-duty officers encouraged the protesters.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis; Liberalism as Issue: Abrams Prepares to Broaden Image Against D'Amato
Attorney General Robert Abrams, who successfully cast himself as the true liberal in the New York Democratic Senate primary to beat Geraldine A. Ferraro, has less than seven weeks to broaden, if not blur, that image.
In the contest against the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato, Reagan Democrats and other moderate doubters will be pivotal to victory.
Wasting no time, Mr.
D'Amato dismissed Mr.
Abrams yesterday as "hopelessly liberal."


ISRAEL AND SYRIA ADVANCE AT TALKS
Syrian and Israeli negotiators said today that they had reached agreement on several points in what they hope will be a joint document laying out the principles for an Israeli-Syrian peace settlement.
Two weeks ago the two sides submitted their own drafts.
This week, after an adjournment for consultations, they are trying to meld the two drafts into one.


Home Video
A public-service tape about AIDS is released for young people, but some stores are showing reluctance to get involved on a sensitive issue.
This week the video business kicked off an ambitious public-service campaign but not everyone is in step.
On Tuesday Paramount released "Time Out: The Truth About H.I.V., AIDS and You," a 44-minute tape.
In it Magic Johnson, himself infected by H.I.V., Arsenio Hall and more than a dozen film and recording stars have a lively discussion to inform teen-agers and young adults about the disease and the necessity to keep sex safe.


U.S. Sending Officials to Balkans as Monitors
The United States is sending a small contingent of officials to the Balkans to take part in international efforts to end the Yugoslav conflict under an agreement worked out at a peace conference last month in London.
The dozen or so officials, who will stay outside the war zones, represent the first involvement of United States personnel other than diplomats since the fighting in the Balkans broke out in late June 1991.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about fighting in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, omitted part of a paragraph in some copies.
The affected passage, about the Bosnian Serbs, should have read: "They have been backed by the leadership of the Serbian Republic, which dominates the Government of the rump Yugoslavia and its army. Liberally provisioned and reinforced by the Yugoslav Army, the Bosnian Serbs have held Sarajevo under siege since April."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Connecticut; Johnson Begins Uphill Struggle vs. Dodd
Brook Johnson, a Greenwich millionaire, opened his general-election drive for the United States Senate today after a victorious Republican primary campaign built around generous financing and calculated spending on television commercials.
Mr.
Johnson, a political newcomer who reported an income of $2.4 million last year as chairman of a towel and bedding company, spent $900,000, compared with about $500,000 by his rival for the nomination, State Representative Chris Burnham, who had received the party endorsement.
Commercials for Mr.
Johnson crowded the airwaves in this small state, while Mr.
Burnham, who held similar positions on many issues, did not run a single television ad.


Topics of The Times; Hard-Working Grandmother
Millicent Fenwick enriched politics with her staunch uprightness and comfortable charm.
She was first elected to Congress from New Jersey in the post-Watergate class of 1974, at the age of 64.
But she had been a public servant in local and state office since the 1930's.
A lifelong Republican of liberal bent, she cut a figure too rarely seen -- outspoken woman of conscience, defender of individual rights, a model for her times.
Mrs.
Fenwick has already been immortalized as the incorruptible Representative Lacey Davenport in Garry Trudeau's "Doonesbury" cartoon strip.
Congresswoman Davenport, relentlessly scornful of sleaze and posturing, would be the last member of the House to overdraw her account.
Likewise Mrs.
Fenwick.


Furniture Arising From Scrap
STUART KRAFT goes to scrap yards to find the materials for his furniture.
Every two months, he buys things like bridge beams and boiler walls and lugs up to 5,000 pounds of this scrap in a flatbed truck back to his studio in Dallas, where he chops it up in small pieces.
Mr.
Kraft, who has a degree in jewelry making, makes the furniture by drawing a design with chalk on the metal and then cutting the pieces out with an oxyacetylene torch.


Topics of The Times; Selective Service
It was the time, in the midst of New York primary elections, for politicians to hand out campaign literature.
So there seemed nothing unusual about a well-dressed fellow passing out fliers at the subway entrance at Lexington Avenue and 68th Street in Manhattan.
But politicians offer their fliers to everyone; this well-dressed man was selective.
One New Yorker, ignored by the man, scooped up a discarded flier from the sidewalk to see what he was missing.
"WANTED!" it said in big bold print; "77 people to lose up to 30 lbs. in the next 30 days." It was a come-on for a weight-reducing system.


Rocking Chairs to Complement the Atomic Fireplace Perfectly
ONE day about three years ago, when Bernice Steinbaum was at her psychiatrist's, she happened to look down at her feet.
She noticed that they were in motion.
"I was moving back and forth," said Ms.
Steinbaum, an art dealer who has had a gallery in SoHo for 10 years.
It was her breakthrough moment.
"I realized I was sitting in a rocking chair, and so was my therapist," she said.
"And it felt good, very good."


Mitterrand Has Cancer; No Danger Is Seen
President Francois Mitterrand has prostate cancer, his doctors said today, but they said the illness was not life-threatening.
The doctors said they had found cancerous lesions in tissue taken from his prostate in surgery on Friday.
The 75-year-old French leader left Cochin Hospital this afternoon, and a statement issued by Elysee Palace said he was recovering normally.


Aggressive Spitters In Animation
Spike and Mike's Festival of Animation, the stylish potpourri of short animated films at the Cinema Village Third Avenue, bills itself as a survey of the latest achievements in animated film making.
In fact, its centerpiece, "Dimensions in Dialogue," a disturbing 12-minute film by the noted Czechoslovak Surrealist Jan Svankmajer, was completed a decade ago.
In Mr.
Svankmajer's cinematic imagination, a dialogue means much more than a conversation or a debate.
When opposing forces come head to head, they compulsively attempt to devour each other in confrontations that resemble roosters battling in a war for dominance.
After their bouts, they usually emerge transformed, their dimensions re-drawn, ready to go at it again.


Somalis Would Benefit From a Breakup
To the Editor:
Issa A. Nour ("Separate States Aren't Answer in Somalia," letter, Aug. 25) states that Mohammed Siad Barre, Somalia's former dictator, "institutionalized the otherwise informal clan system, which after independence in 1960 was rapidly atrophying into little more than an anthropological curiosity for social scientists." But according to Prof.
I.
M.
Lewis of the London School of Economics and Political Science, tribalism flourished in postcolonial Somalia.
By the general election of March 1969, he writes in "A Modern History of Somalia" (1980), "a record number of 1,002 candidates, representing 62 parties, contested the 123 seats."


In Politics and Finance, A Devaluation Is Costly
Prime Minister John Major faces a crisis that imperils not only his Government's economic and European policies, but possibly his own political future.
In a day of extraordinary financial initiatives and embarrassing reversals, Mr.
Major staked his credibility on a bold effort to rescue the pound from devaluation by raising interest rates once, then twice, by a total of five percentage points.


Cross vs. Crescent; The Battle Lines Are Being Redrawn In Bosnia Along Old Religious Scars
As members of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Serbs increasingly use a religious shorthand for their enemies in the Balkan war: Islam and the Vatican.
And as Serbian attacks on Muslims increase, Muslims themselves appear to be moving toward a more radical identification with their own religion.
The war that has spread in the last year from Croatia to Bosnia and Herzegovina and other parts of the Balkans began by being seen even among participants as essentially a conflict among ethnic groups that have lived in peace, if not friendship, through its recent history.


Helen Findlay Is Dead; Art Gallery Head, 83
Helen Findlay, a prominent figure in the arts in Chicago and the director of the Wally Findlay Galleries there, died on Monday at her home in Chicago.
She was 83 years old.
She died after a long illness, said Bob Ryan, the treasurer of the gallery.


Managed Care Is More of What We Have Now; Costs and Diagnoses
To the Editor:
In "Half Right on Health" (editorial, Aug. 31), you persist in pushing the notion that universal application of predetermined payment limits of the sort espoused by health maintenance organizations or Jackson Hole global budgets would give the country a "potentially splendid health care plan." It will give the country a potentially costly health care plan, which extracts its costs in unnecessary disability, pain and suffering.


Uncertainty Widens Bond Spread
The long end of the American bond market was knocked lower by the turmoil in European currency markets yesterday, but shorter maturities, including two- and three-year notes, rose.
The behavior of the market was a classic reaction to uncertainity and pushed the spread or differential between the two-year note and the 30-year note to a record level.


Mary Wells Ashworth, Historian, Dies at 89
Mary Wells Ashworth, a Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, died on Saturday at the Henrico Doctors' Hospital in Richmond, Va.
She was 89 years old and lived in Richmond.
Mrs.
Ashworth died of a ruptured aorta, said her son, Osbourne Orlando Ashworth Jr. of Alexandria, Va.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  A BLOW TO EUROPEAN UNITY
Britain hurt hopes for a common European currency when it withdrew from the European monetary system after its efforts to arrest the pound's plunge failed.
A1  BEHIND MONETARY TURMOIL
The causes of Europe's monetary turmoil lie in the basic economics of international finance and the even more basic conflicts between domestic and regional politics.
A1
News analysis: The crisis behind the monetary chaos.  A1
A shaky political future for Prime Minister Major of Britain.
D9  ISRAEL AND SYRIA MOVE AHEAD
Negotiators said they had agreed on several points in what they hope will be a joint document laying out principles for a peace settlement between the longtime enemies.
A7  A BIGGER AFRICAN CRISIS
Attention is focused on Somalia, but officials say an even bigger crisis is building across sub-Saharan Africa, which has been plagued by drought and civil war.
A14  KILLING IN THE NAME OF GOD
News analysis: As the war in the Balkans rages on, it has increasingly become a religious conflict marked by brutal extremism and hatred among Eastern Orthodox Serbs, Catholic Croats and Muslims.
A14
American officials will join efforts for peace in the Balkans.
A15  BRUSHING OFF NORTH KOREA
The isolated Pyongyang Government made a quiet bid to the United States for better ties, but was rebuffed, officials said.A10  SUITS, NOT UNIFORMS, IN BANGKOK
United in their call for an end to six decades of political meddling by the Thai military, a coalition of political parties appeared to be on the verge of forming an elected, civilian-controlled Government.
A6  ECHO OF GUNFIRE IN INDONESIA
Ten months after scores of protesters were gunned down in the province of East Timor, the Indonesian Government is haunted by the aftermath as it tries to assert itself as a leader of the developing world.
A8  THE CRADLE IS ROCKED
In Ayacucho, Peru, where the Shining Path revolt was born, the news of the arrest of the movement's leader has produced shock.
A3  ESCOBAR'S LATEST VICTIM
President Gaviria of Colombia is staggering from the political fallout of the drug boss's escape.
A11  HITTING U.S.
ON IRAQ POLICY
The defense lawyer in a huge bank fraud case involving Iraq presented information he said proves the Bush Administration failed to pursue the matter.
A8  Amman Journal: Cultural life in Jordan gets a boost from war.
A4  National A16-23, B9-10  CLOSE RACE IN FLORIDA
After voting Republican in almost every Presidential race in the last 40 years, Florida has become a major political battleground in the race between President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton, new polls show.
A1  FIRST DEBATE CANCELED
The Commission on Presidential Debates canceled the first televised debate after President Bush refused to accept the commission's proposal that he and Gov.
Clinton be questioned by a single moderator.
A1  'JUST A MOM IN TENNIS SHOES'
Patty Murray, running for the United States Senate as a working mother with suburban concerns, outpolled all her rivals in an open primary on Tuesday in Washington State.
A16
The reaction to Marion Barry's victory in a Washington primary.
A16  LIMITS OF ANTI-INCUMBENT FERVOR
Though anti-incumbent attitudes are running higher than a decade ago, only two Representatives lost bids for renomination in primaries on Tuesday: Representatives Chester G. Atkins of Massachusetts and Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn.
A16  COMPLICATIONS OF ADVERTISING
Though there is no campaign tactic more public than advertising, no information is more closely guarded than what the candidates plan to put on television, and where.
A21  POLITICS AND THE ECONOMY
President Bush offered a $500 million tax credit to companies that provide family emergency leaves and Gov.
Clinton outlined a $1.5 billion program to revive the inner cities.
A21  INQUIRY ON RAIL PROJECT
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the General Accounting Office have reportedly opened inquiries into the Los Angeles agency that is building that city's vast new subway and rail system.
A22
Congress is revising spending plans for the "Star Wars" program.
A23  POLLUTION AT YOSEMITE
Soil and water under Yosemite National Park are polluted with toxic chemicals that have long leaked from underground fuel tanks.
B9  NEW LEADS ON A FORMER NAZI
A former lawyer with the Justice Department's Nazi-hunting unit has told the Central Intelligence Agency where he says it can find documents on a Ukrainian fascist leader whom it had reportedly recruited after World War II.
B10  Hispanic dropout rates stayed high, but the rates for others fell.
A19  Metro Digest B1  RACE FOR SENATE SEAT
The general-election campaign for the Senate from New York began in earnest as the Democratic nominee, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, squared off for a bruising battle against the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-13  At home in the garden with Len Marino.C1  When the second child is a third generation.
C1  Obsession is their medium.
C2  Garden Q.&amp; A.  C5  Rocking chairs to complement the atomic fireplace perfectly.
C10  Parent &amp; Child C12  Arts/Entertainment C14-24  Chess: Fischer wins third game in a row.
C15  The making of a Matisse show.
C17  Music: En Vogue at Radio City.
C17  Dance: Spanish celebration.
C17  Word and Image: A new novel by Ken Kesey.
C21  Sports B13-19  Baseball: Expos gain ground on Pirates.
B13  Bonilla promises to come out swinging.
B15  Yankees fall to White Sox.
B15  Column: Anderson on Ray Handley.
B13  Football: Burden likely to fall on O'Brien.
B13  Obituaries D24-25  Paul Martin, Canadian diplomat.
D24  Millicent H. Fenwick, former Congresswoman of New Jersey.
D25  Russell D. Niles, a former chancellor of New York University.
D25  Norman Newton, landscape architect.
D25  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  The sleaze factor, and beyond.
Presidential debates, diminished.
Shortchanging children.
Topics: Millicent Fenwick.
Letters  William Safire: After the storm.
Leslie H. Gelb: Sell now, pay later.
Richard J. Whalen: Blame Kohl for the currency crisis.
Andrew Cherlin: Too young for day care.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; 2 Champs, Bush's Man and Quayle's Man, Quietly Slug It Out
Nothing brings on power plays at the White House like an election year.
The latest word out of the East Wing is that one of the smartest political in-fighters anywhere, James A. Baker 3d, the President's chief of staff, is trying to keep another world-class infighter, William Kristol, the Vice President's chief of staff, out of the decision-making loop.
But before the main event, some perspective:


Amman Journal; In a Foreign Field, Iraqi Art Is Allowed to Flower
Each night one of the most eclectic crowds in Amman files into a theater to watch a play written by an Iraqi playwright and featuring a Jordanian actress.
In the play, "The Straw," the actress, Majd al-Qasas, struggles to come to grips with the knowledge that her husband loves another woman.
In the course of the one-hour production she turns on him and on the entire male power structure of the Arab world, which demands obedience and subjugation.


Fed Action On Europe Not Expected
The turmoil in European's financial markets is primarily a European affair and the United States will not get involved in trying to help steady Europe's jitters, officials of the Bush Administration and the Federal Reserve said today.
In fact, the turbulence could actually help both the American and the European economies, the officials said, because it could lead to lower interest rates and thus spur growth in Europe that would ultimately give the United States a boost as well.


INSIDE
The Thaw Continues For Israel and Syria
Negotiators in Washington said the longtime enemies had agreed on several points for a document laying out principles for a peace settlement.
Both sides gave optimistic assessments, with Israel's chief negotiator saying that even their disagreements were "in a positive spirit." Page A7.
Pollution Clouds Park Future
Soil and water under Yosemite National Park are polluted, taking the luster off the contest to take over the park's services.
Page B9.
Labor Chief Faces Hearings
Barry Feinstein, one of New York's top labor leaders, was accused of taking Teamsters money.
Page B1.
Millicent Fenwick Dies
The former New Jersey Congresswoman renowned for her political independence is dead at 82.
Page D25.


Corrections
An article on Monday about Abimael Guzman Reynoso, leader of the Peruvian rebel group Shining Path, omitted a crucial word in quoting Francisco Eguiguren, assistant director of the Andean Commission of Jurists, a human rights group.
He said of Mr.
Guzman: "To have him in prison shows failure, disaster. It would not be better if he were killed."


Sonics May Be Eyeing Olajuwon Deal
The Seattle SuperSonics may be trying to make a trade for the disgruntled Houston Rockets center HAKEEM OLAJUWON.
Olajuwon, a six-time All-Star who feuded with Houston management last season, has said he doesn't want to play for the Rockets this year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Strong Showing; Sharpton Is Basking In the Glow Of 3d Place
On the streets that he has often marched down, above the subway tracks that he used to sit in on, near the restaurants where he eats, the Rev.
Al Sharpton did something new this week.
He collected votes -- more than 160,000 of them when the tally came in for Tuesday's Democratic Senate primary -- and in the process, many politicians and political analysts say, succeeded in catapulting himself, at least for the moment, to a new level as a serious force in electoral politics, perhaps around the state and certainly in the black neighborhoods of New York City.


White Sox Easily Solve Yankees' Hitchcock
Sterling Hitchcock did not get his first major league victory, but Frank Thomas did get a career-high five hits and the White Sox did sweep three games from the Yankees by streaking to a 9-6 victory last night at Yankee Stadium.
After losing their fourth game in a row, the Yanks assured themselves of finishing no higher than in a first-place tie this season.
Of course, their dreary season remains alive only in the minds of statistics buffs.


Essay; After the Storm
Hurricane Andrew did not rival the Chicago fire or the San Francisco earthquake in loss of life, but in terms of property damage the storm was the most horrific natural catastrophe to afflict our nation in living memory.
What good can we draw from this disaster, other than the satisfaction that the Federal emergency bureaucracy was shocked into a state of readiness for the next storm, which slammed into the other end of our country in Hawaii?


IRAN SAYS CRITICS ARE U.S. PLOTTERS
President Hashemi Rafsanjani today described international condemnation of Iranian attempts to annex three small Persian Gulf islands as "a conspiracy to create nuisance in the region," and he instructed commanders of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards to assume "decisive popular and military readiness," the Iranian radio reported.
"Committed military readiness is the only solution to the obstacles put in our way," Mr.
Rafsanjani said.


The Sleaze Factor, and Beyond
The mud flew in New York's Senate primary -- and stuck.
Why did Democrats choose Robert Abrams over Geraldine Ferraro?
The Election Day exit polls show that three out of five of Mr.
Abrams's supporters cited honesty -- reflecting their discomfort over the charges made against Ms.
Ferraro, fairly and unfairly, late in the campaign.
Voters will likely bring their concern over integrity to the general election campaign as well, considering Senator Alfonse D'Amato's collisions with ethical issues.
But they also have a right, in this year of intense public concern over the economy and social issues, to want a substantive debate.
Will they get it?


Rockers to complement the atomic fireplace. Page C10.


USX AND ARMCO AGREE TO SELL OIL MACHINERY COMPANY
The USX Corporation and Armco Inc. said yesterday that they had agreed to sell their 50-50 partnership in a manufacturer of oil-field equipment to Empresas Lanzagorta, a Mexican company.


Obsession Is Their Medium
TO make a table of bottle caps or a chair of spoons and knives or to weave a cap of folded cigarette packages is to be obsessive.
The results can be folk art of the kind that makes up "Obsessive and Accumulative Art," a show of 100 pieces that opens tomorrow at the American Primitive Gallery in SoHo and runs through Oct. 31.


Tuesday's Primary Results
* Denotes incumbent NEW YORK Democrat
Total
%
U.S. SENATE
Robert Arbrams
411,072
37
Geraldine A. Ferraro
400,084
36
Elizabeth Holtzman
140,884
13
Al Sharption
161,691
15
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE
Nassau
4th District
Philip Schiliro
11,699
51
Joan F. Axinn
11,273
49
Peter T. King
*
QUEENS, NASSAU,
SUFFOLK
5th District
Gary L. Ackerman*
24,816
58
Rita Louise A. Morris
18,238
42
QUEENS
6th District
Floyd H. Flake*
34,914
75
Simeon Golar
11,462
25
BROOKLYN, MANHATTAN
8th District
Arthur R. Block
7,560
12
Ted Weiss+
54,168
88
BROOKLYN
10th District
Susan D. Alter
15,207
28
Franl R. Seddio
5,078
9
Edolphus Towns*
33,490
62
QUEENS, BROOKLYN,
MANHATTAN
12th District
Elizabeth Colon
8,529
26
Ruben Franco
2,568
8
Eric Ruano Melendez
847
3
Rafael Mendez
1,141
3
Stephen J. Solarz*
9,138
27
Nydia M. Velazquez
11,007
33
14th District
Abraham J. Hirschfeld
12,360
23
Charles W. Juntikka
3,476
7
Carolyn B. Maloney
34,935
65
Frederick D. Newman
2,697
5
MANHATTAN, BRONX, QUEENS
15th District
Jessie Fields
4,725
10
Harry C. Fotopoulos
4,355
9
Charles B. Rangel*
38,076
81
BRONX, WESTCHESTER
17th District
Mario Biaggi
12,589
27
Eliot L. Engel*
34,328
73
WESTCHESTER, DUTCHESS,
ORANGE, PUTNAM
19th District
Catherine Portman-Laux
5,312
38
Neil McCarthy
8,666
62
ORANGE, DUTCHESS
26th District
Juanita M. Crabb
13,215
40
Barbara A. Wolfson
1,829
5
Maurice D. Hinchey
18,280
55
STATE SENATE
NASSAU
7th District
Michael J. Siris
6,723
52
John Handler
6,099,
48
BROOKLYN, QUEENS
12th District
Adolphus C. Frazier
8,591
41
Ada L. Smith*
12,614
59
BROOKLYN
17th District
Rafael Esparra
4,339
25
George Gonzalez
3,831
22
Elba Roman
3,515
20
Nellie Santiago
6,007
34
BROOKLYN, MANHATTAN
25th District
Martin Connor*
14,239
61
Luis W. Osorio
8,963
39
BRONX, MANHATTAN
28th District
Richard V. Irizarry
5,114
29
Olga A. Mendez*
12,822
71
BRONX
31st District
Efrain Gonzalez Jr.*
6,734
57
Luis A. Rivera
12,822
71
32d District
Carmen E. Arroyo
5,635
31
Pedro Espada Jr.
7,821
43
Lillian Fernandez
4,527
25
BRONX, WESTCHESTER
33d District
Jeffrey R. Korman*
9,996
39
Joseph L. Galiber*
15,748
61
STATE ASSEMBLY
QUEENS
26th District
Morton C. Hillman*
7,294
68
Lee M. Nigen
3,501
32
31st District
Hulbert H. James Sr.
3,490
41
Gregory W. Meeks
3,661
43
Kevin Pruitt
1,313
16
33d District
Barbara M. Clark*
7,646
66
Anna L. Thompson
3,887
34
34th District
Michael J. Crowley
1,566
31
Ivan C. Lafayette*
3,514
69
36th District
Denis J. Butler*
5,579
57
Archie Mavromatis
4,150
43
38th District
Frank Sansivieri Jr.
2,520
34
Anthony S. Seminerio
4,863
66
BROOKLYN
42d District
Rhoda S. Jacobs*
2,795
50
Ernest N. Foster
*
Edward A. Roberts
1,029
19
Clarence A. Robertson
1,713
31
44th District
James F. Brennan*
6,967
52
Christine La Cerva
612
5
Joni Yoswein*
5,939
44
51st District
Beatrice Boyd
1,227
18
Marilyn Kneeland
909
13
John Kennedy O'Hara
1,704
25
Juan A. Perez
927
14
Javier A. Nieves
2,031
30
53d District
Vito J. Lopez*
+
Isabel Rodriguez
+
54th District
F. Louis Carabello
1,913
29
Thomas F. Catapano*
2,225
34
Darryl C. Towns
2,376
36
55th District
Reginald H. Bowman
1,805
21
William F. Boyland*
5,120
60
Miller
19
56th District
Anthony Monk
1,533
16
Albert Vann*
7,790
84
58th District
Abu Aq Abu
642
8
Everett W. George
1,976
26
N. Nick Perry
3,709
48
Mae West
1,420
18
MANHATTAN
64th District
Richard N. Gottfried*
7,775
68
Daniel Friedman
3,604
32
66th District
Mary Fridley
2,349
15
Deborah J. Glick*
13,805
85
67th District
Harry Kresky
1,788
11
Jerrold Nadler*
14,540
89
68th District
Nelson Antonio Denis
4,178
37
Bethsaida Colon-Diaz
1,268
11
Angelo Del Toro*
5,007
44
Ada I. Vasquez
918
8
69th District
Judith Jorrisch
3,860
28
Edward C. Sullivan*
9,846
72
70th District
Helen Daniels
1,001
7
Eugene R. Daniels 3d
1,539
11
Edward Fields Fordham
815
6
I. Ronnie Holly
521
4
Wilbert Kirby
506
4
Peggy M. Shepard
4,138
29
Barbara R. Taylor
739
5
Keith L. Wright
5,065
35
71st District
Herman D. Farrell Jr.*
7,906
67
Mary J. Sweeting
3,953
33
72d District
William Alicea
1,022
16
Julio C. Hernandez
1,993
32
Doris Kelly
John Brian Murtaugh*
3,196
51
73d District
Trudy L. Mason
4,403
43
Bonny Gildin
1,588
15
Christopher R. Lynn
4,328
42
BRONX
76th District
Sarah Alleyne
1,065
15
Josephine Martinez
1,261
18
Armando Montano Jr.
1,355
19
Peter M. Rivera
2,383
33
George L. Sanchez
1,116
16
77th District
Claude K. Aska
1,198
23
Aurelia Greene*
4,000
77
79th District
Gloria Davis*
5,028
57
Gladys Diaz
2,698
30
Dorothy Randolph
1,120
13
80th District
George Friedman*
5,184
76
Irving A. Gelb
1,642
24
WESTCHESTER
84th District
James Gary Pretlow
3,754
46
Joe L. Farmer
3,749
46
Calville R. Dunnon
609
8
CIVIL COURT
BROOKLYN
2d District
Harold A. Hall
6,600
47
John L. Phillips Jr.
7,531
53
MANHATTAN
2d District
Seymour D. Schorr
4,616
32
Debra Rose Samuels
9,913
68
REPUBLICAN
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE
NASSAU
4th District
David A. Levy
12,575
52
Francis A. Lees
1,759
7
Daniel Frisa
9,690
40
QUEENS, BRONX
7th District
Anna Pfoser Darby
699
18
Dennis C. Shea
3,088
82
STATEN ISLAND, BROOKLYN
13th District
Susan Molinari*
9,110
71
Kathleen M. Murphy
3,731
29
ORANGE, DUTCHESS
26th District
Bob Moppert
17,125
68
Robert R. Rossi
7,895
32
STATE SENATE
WESTCHESTER, DUTCHESS
37th District
Mary B. Goodhue*
7,902
48
George E. Pataki
8,557
52
STATE ASSEMBLY
NASSAU
12th District
Philip B. Healey*
2,790
81
Thomas R. Mullen
637
19
18th District
J. Barrington Jackson
1,663
68
Dan M. Hester Sr.
770
32
BROOKLYN
51st District
Olga Gomez
152
40
Edwin Ramos
228
60
WESTCHESTER
89th District
Peter M. Sullivan
4,288
70
Terence P. Guerriere
1,874
30
*Vote too small to be counted. + Results not provided by The Associated Press.


Unser Is Considering Formula One
AL UNSER Jr.  is looking into a couple of Formula One rides next year, but he will continue with Galles-Kraco Racing if he decides to stay in Indy-Car competition, a Galles-Kraco official said yesterday.
"This will all be resolved in a week or so," said RICK GALLES, managing partner of Galles-Kraco.
"It would have to be one or the other."


N.F.L. Owners Are Ready For Full-Scale Workout
The National Football League owners will meet today in Dallas with a heavy agenda that will open debate on such such topics as the fate of the World League of American Football, expansion, labor issues and probable court actions.
The recent court ruling that the league's Plan B limited free-agency system was illegal under antitrust law will very likely have a bearing on the owners' decisions.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: 8th District; Maneuvering At Funeral For Weiss
Representative Ted Weiss, who died on Monday and was renominated for his House seat by a record margin the next day, was eulogized as the "conscience of Congress" yesterday at a funeral drawing Washington dignitaries, ordinary constituents and a gaggle of fellow politicians -- some of whom mixed mourning with maneuvering to succeed him.
Mr.
Weiss, who was 64, died of heart failure on the eve of the Democratic primary in which he was seeking renomination for a ninth term.
He defeated his lone opponent, Arthur R. Block of the New Alliance Party, with 88 percent of the vote.
As a result, Democratic leaders will choose Mr.
Weiss's successor.


A Revival for Toys That Bridge the Generations
A wave of nostalgia is sweeping toyland, where high-technology video games no longer rule the toy store shelves or children's wish lists.
In their place are favorites of bygone days -- jacks, jump ropes, marbles, trolls.
Retailers are even having a hard time keeping stocked up on plastic lacing, used to make necessities like key chains and bolo ties.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Women; For Feminists, It Wasn't What They Had in Mind
The New York Senate primary, one of the highest visibility races in this political year, turned into a crushing disappointment for the feminist movement yesterday.
There were bitter divisions.
There were wounds to be healed.
And there were questions about the damage to the political careers of two feminist heroines, Geraldine A. Ferraro and Elizabeth Holtzman.
For Ms.
Ferraro, who spent the day in seclusion, her loss after attacks on her family's finances and ethics was a wrenching reprise of the 1984 Vice-Presidential race.
After eight years of obscurity, she made a bid for redemption only to watch a strong lead evaporate once again under a barrage of questions about her husband's business dealings and accusations that he was associated with organized crime figures.


Norman Newton, 94, Architect Of Statue of Liberty Landscaping
Norman Newton, a landscape architect who redesigned the setting for the Statue of Liberty in 1937, died on Saturday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 94 years old and lived in Cambridge.
He died of septicemia, a blood infection, said his wife, the former Lyyli Lamsa.


Democrats on Senate Panel Attack the Free-Trade Pact
Using the conservation provisions of the North American Free Trade Agreement as a political cudgel, Congressional Democrats pressed their attacks on the pact today, accusing the White House of negotiating an accord that could damage the environment and cause thousands of American jobs to be shifted to Mexico.
During the Senate Finance Committee hearing, John Danforth of Missouri was the only Republican lawmaker who strongly defended the agreement, chiding his Democratic colleagues for "using environmental and health standards as a guise for protectionism."


Burden for the Jets Is Likely to Fall On O'Brien Now
With the Jets still staggering from two successive losses, Coach Bruce Coslet made a bold prediction today about Sunday's home opener against the 49ers: "We're going to go out and win."
The weight of that prediction, as heavy as it might turn out to be, may fall on the unlikely shoulder pads of Ken O'Brien, the starting quarterback for the last two years.
O'Brien lost his job to Browning Nagle this year after his extended holdout in a contract dispute.


Accounts
*
QMS Inc., Mobile, Ala., to Greenstone Roberts Advertising/Florida Inc., Coconut Creek, Fla., to handle the print systems manufacturer's account, previously at Donaldson Group, San Francisco.
Greenstone Roberts was awarded the account, with billings estimated to exceed $4 million, without a review. *
Mercer Management Consulting New York, to Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, and Makovsky &amp; Company, New York, to handle the general management and strategic-consulting firm's advertising and public relations accounts.
Billings were not disclosed.


Indonesia Seeks to Atone for a Massacre in Timor
Seeking to assert itself as a leader of the developing world, the Indonesian Government is being haunted by the diplomatic aftermath of a massacre last November in which soldiers gunned down scores of protesters who had gathered at a cemetery in the province of East Timor.
Virtually everything that happened last Nov. 12 remains in dispute, including the number of civilians who died that day at the Santa Cruz graveyard in Dili, the East Timorese capital, when soldiers marched on the protesters and opened fire.


Pop and Jazz in Review
New and Used  Knitting Factory 47 East Houston Street Greenwich Village Mondays through Sept. 28
While Kermit Driscoll replaced a broken bass string in Monday's early set by New and Used, the quintet's violinist, Mark Feldman, described the next piece, "Trifecta." It's about compulsive gambling, he said, and is "programmatic in nature even though it's low on content." At first, the character is winning a little more than he's losing.
"Then, at letter B, he loses his job," Mr.
Feldman continued.
"At measure 49 there's a period of introspection. Around bar 76 he just throws his hands up in the air." Finally, he concluded, "it kind of ends unresolved."


No Headline
"The very existence of the European Monetary System is in doubt." -- WILLIAM LEDWARD, an economist in London.  [ D8:2. ]


BUSINESS DIGEST
Turmoil in Europe
Britain left the European Monetary System, a cornerstone of European unity, after a futile day of trying to defend the value of the pound by raising interest rates.
The move left Europe's program of economic coordination in tatters.  [ Page A1. ]
The causes of Europe's currency crisis lie as much in the conflicts between domestic and regional political priorities as they do in the basic economics of international finance.  [ A1. ]


Public and Private Mix at Columbia
Amid whirling flashing gadgets of the future, political and academic leaders gathered at Columbia University yesterday to dedicate a research center that they hope will help create thousands of new jobs over the decades.
The Morris A. Schapiro Center for Engineering and Physical Science Research, an amalgam of state, Federal and university research programs -- most of whose $115 million cost was financed by the state -- is intended to promote greater cooperation between scientists from academia and corporations by encouraging them to work side-by-side on projects.


TLC in Florida in the Form of a Shelter
IMPROMPTU shelter, be it an Army tent or a sofa bed in a relative's living room, is one disorienting consequence of a hurricane.
In South Florida, where some 200,000 people were left homeless by Hurricane Andrew, a group of young architecture graduates from the University of Miami have joined the Archdiocese of Miami in erecting an experimental shelter.


Official Discerns a Lever In the British-USAir Bid
The Transportation Secretary acknowledged yesterday that an approval of British Airways' proposed $750 million investment in USAir could be a strong lever to extract more liberal terms for the United States in its aviation agreement with Britain.
But the Secretary, Andrew H. Card Jr., said that he had not made up his mind on the approval.
He added that in his coming meeting with the British Transportation Secretary, John McGregor, to discuss the bilateral aviation agreement he would not link formal approval of what he called a private corporate transaction to the overall discussions on how the bilateral agreement should be made less restrictive.


COMPANY NEWS: Smaller Pictures, Too; Polaroid Shows A Smaller Camera
The Polaroid Corporation is going after the pocket market, with a new smaller, automated instant camera that is about 25 percent smaller than its current line of Spectra cameras.
One wrinkle, in addition to the camera's smaller size, is a built-in holder for exposed pictures.
The user has the option of having the self-developing picture ejected from the camera, as with conventional Polaroid cameras.
Or the picture can be held in the camera, with a viewing window for the photographer; the holder will accommodate all 10 pictures in a film pack.


Pollution From Old Tanks Threatens Future of Park Services at Yosemite
Environmentalists have long complained about commercialism and overcrowding in this jewel of the national park system.
But the truth may be worse: Soil and water under the park are polluted with toxic chemicals that have leaked from underground fuel tanks for decades.
The contamination has become a major issue in the bidding to buy the company that provides hotel, restaurant and other visitor services in the 102-year-old park.


Fischer Wins Third Game in a Row
Bobby Fischer showed some of his vintage tactical and positional poison yesterday in crushing Boris Spassky in Game 9 of their exhibition chess match in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
Heading into a classical endgame formation that he had made famous on his way to the world title 20 years ago, he gave notice that in his hands it still has ferocious bite.
Fischer has now won three games in a row and has increased his lead to four victories against Spassky's two.
It takes 10 victories to capture the $3.35 million winner's prize.
Draws do not count.


Mets Begin Trims for Minors
The Mets, citing fiscal concerns as well as standard evaluations of job performance, have begun a significant overhaul of their minor league personnel, a project that includes cutbacks, dismissals and reassignments.
The club, which has dismissed at least two minor league managers, has also effectively decided to end its practice of employing second coaches with each of their seven minor league affiliates, terming it a "luxury" it no longer considered worth the cost.


Review/Music; With Emphasis on the Upbeat, The Philharmonic Turns 150
The cha-cha and the mambo played last night at Avery Fisher Hall left little doubt that one was listening to a great American ensemble.
The music had a sort of natural snap, an easygoing swing, an affable communal energy that became unpredictable and even raucous.
What was surprising was that this youthful, slightly poppish music (the Symphonic Dances from "West Side Story") was being played by the oldest orchestra in the United States -- the New York Philharmonic, opening its gala 150th anniversary season with a gala benefit concert.
The music written by Leonard Bernstein, the orchestra's last (and first) American-born music director, was also being conducted with enthusiastic verve by its German-born music director, Kurt Masur.
This mixture of old and new, of European and American, of type and style, is also what can make a great American orchestra.
And the Philharmonic, with mixed success, wanted to give a composite view of its strengths in this opening event.
Mr.
Masur, just celebrating his first anniversary as music director, chose to make this concert not a grand invocation of the orchestra's achievements (that is, presumably, what this season's programming will be about), but a festive show, an entertainment.


Review/Opera; Red Shadow and His Secret Love
Sigmund Romberg's "Desert Song" makes for an unabashedly witless evening at the theater.
Its plot is "Lawrence of Arabia" filtered through the sensibilities of W. S. Gilbert.
The protagonist is Pierre, a perplexed young man who has grown disillusioned with the Foreign Legion and adopted the persona of the Red Shadow, protector of the persecuted Riff people of Morocco.
His father has now become Morocco's governor; a secret love, Margot, is engaged to the legion's captain.
Revisiting his father's household to monitor Margot, the Shadow conceals his rebel soul and strikes a dandyish, klutzy pose.
Numerous high jinks and pratfalls ensue.
And yet this rickety, tune-ridden grand operetta might have stirrings of social significance around its edges.
The central character is an odd creation, somehow symptomatic of his 1920's context.
In contrast to the Superman and Batman of later decades, this masked man seems to split his sexuality, not his personality.
Margot refers to the inept Pierre as a man with whom she feels safe -- "as if you were my sister," she says.
The effeminate guise is a ploy at first, then an odd compulsion; when the long-delayed resolution arrives, Pierre does not reject one side or another, but simply blends the rakish costumes of both.
Some stage in the evolution of American masculinity is being glimpsed, but the opera provides insufficient data for deeper analysis.


FLEET FINANCIAL MAY SELL NONPERFORMING ASSETS
The Fleet Financial Group, based in Providence, R.I., may sell up to $500 million in nonperforming assets, mostly troubled real estate loans and foreclosed properties, the company said yesterday.


Gold Is the Color of These Screens
LYTLE CORY'S wood paneled screens convey her infatuation with gold leaf.
Her screens look rich enough for any grandee or even a Roman cathedral, not only because of the gold, but also because the backgrounds are painted in dark reds, purples and blues, which were traditionally used in churches.
But her designs are abstract.
"Gold leaf has a floating quality that does catch the light," Ms.
Cory said.
"That quality is fascinating because a screen can change in the passing of an hour."


For a Young Climber, Relief Means Handholds a-Plenty


A $4.5 Million Bid by Seville for Maradona
The Seville soccer team has offered Naples of the Italian league $4.5 million for the rights to the Argentine star DIEGO MARADONA, a Seville official said yesterday.


The Presidential Debates, Diminished
Presidential debates have one basic goal -- enlightening voters about the candidates.
Time after time this noble purpose has been frustrated by a stodgy, stylized format: A pompous panel of interrogators asks random questions that are rarely followed up.
As the questions zig and zag, so do the candidates.
There's little continuity, and almost no robust interplay of ideas.
This year the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates wisely proposed that President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton meet each other in three debates with a single, well-informed moderator who could pursue subjects in depth and force both men to carve beneath the surface.


Sports of The Times; How Long Can Handley Survive?
ON Sept. 26-27, the weekend of the Giants' bye in their National Football League schedule, the "Giants Experience," described as a "fantasy-type fan festival," will be staged at Giants Stadium.
Tour the locker room.
Compete in passing, pass-receiving and field-goal kicking contests.
Two dozen players will be available for conversations, autographs and photos.
Tickets will be $10, with proceeds going to the Giants Foundation and the Tomorrow's Children Fund.
But any Giants fan's real fantasy would be to confront somebody who isn't scheduled to be there: Coach Ray Handley.


D'Amato Begins Attack Against His New Target


Three Newest Athletics Render Twins Obsolete
The bleachers in right field used to belong to Jose Canseco, but he's gone now.
Only a memory remains.
But it's growing faint.
When Ruben Sierra ran to right in the sixth inning today, it seemed as though he had won the fans with one swing of his bat, one acknowledging wave of his hand.
They stood and cheered, and Sierra, the Oakland Athletics' newest right fielder, looked up and smiled.


Foreign Affairs; Sell Now, Pay Later
Few U.S. voices now cry caution over prospective multibillion-dollar sales of fighter aircraft to Saudi Arabia and Taiwan despite considerable risks that the sales will trigger new and dangerous arms races.
No American politician wants to be accused of scuttling the 40,000 jobs that could be at stake.
Few experts dispute that Riyadh needs more air power to defend against Iraq and Iran, or that Taipei's aging air force must be modernized to check China's growing military punch.


Susan Jenkins Kinnear; Garden Club Leader, 94
Susan Jenkins Kinnear, a former director of the Garden Club of America, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Birmingham, Ala.
She was 94 years old and lived in Birmingham.
She died of congestive heart failure, said her daughter, Polly Lincoln.


Iran-Contra Prosecutor Sees No More Indictments
The Iran-contra independent prosecutor said in an interview today that his six-year inquiry into the scandal was unlikely to produce further indictments.
The prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, told The Washington Post, "We are nearly complete."
"It's unlikely that there will be any further presentations to the grand jury," Mr.
Walsh said.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Ted Weiss, liberal Democratic Representative from Manhattan, omitted a survivor.
She is Zelda Weiss, his first wife and the mother of his two children, Thomas and Stephen.


Swedish Davis Cup Player Is Injured
MAGNUS GUSTAFSSON, a member of the Swedish team that will face the United States in the Davis Cup semifinals in Minneapolis, Sept. 25-27, missed yesterday's practice in Bastad after twisting his ankle during an earlier workout.
CHRISTIAN BERGSTROM, who has a higher ranking on the Association of Tennis Professionals computer than Gustafsson, will be the substitute if Gustafsson's condition doesn't improve.
Bergstrom is working out with the team in the absence of STEFAN EDBERG, the world's top-ranked player.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Florida Poll; Florida Emerges As Crucial State In the Campaign
After voting Republican in every Presidential election but one over the last 40 years, Florida has emerged as an unexpected battleground in the race between President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton, according to new polls.
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll, taken Thursday through Monday, gave Mr.
Clinton a slim advantage in Florida, 48 percent to 42 percent, with 10 percent undecided.
Another poll, published today in The Miami Herald, gave Mr.
Bush a slight advantage, 48 percent to 41 percent, with 11 percent undecided.


U.S. Opens Inquiries on Spending for Los Angeles Rail System
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the General Accounting Office have opened inquiries into the Los Angeles agency that is building that city's vast new subway and rail system, the largest public works project under way in the country, Government sources said today.
Investigators and auditors, prompted in part by whistle-blowers, will examine a broad range of activities of the Los Angeles County Transportation Commission and its staff and will focus on reports of fraud, wasteful spending and bribery of public officials, according to the sources, who are familiar with the unfolding investigations.


How Europe's Monetary System Works
The European Monetary System, begun in 1979, was designed to foster currency stability and promote economic policies to reduce inflation throughout Europe.
The currencies of the 11 members (before Britain's decision to suspend participation yesterday)are linked in trading bands.
For Belgium, Luxemburg, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy and the Netherlands, their currencies are allowed to trade 2.25 percent above or below and central rate.
In Britain, Spain and Portugal, the allowed range is 6 percent.


Prosecutor to Depart
John K. Carroll, the lead prosecutor in the securities-fraud trial of Michael R. Milken, plans to leave the United States Attorney's office in November to enter private practice, it was announced yesterday.
Howard E. Heiss, 41 years old and currently chief of the organized crime unit, will replace Mr.
Carroll as chief of the Securities and Commodities Fraud Task Force.
Mr.
Carroll took over the investigation of Mr.
Milken in 1987.
Mr.
Carroll, 37, has been with the United StatesAttorney's office since 1983.
Elizabeth Glazer, 36, an assistant United States attorney, will become chief of the organized crime unit.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Announced a four-year working agreement with Indianapolis of the American Association beginning in 1993.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Recalled Al Martin and William Pennyfeather, outfielders, and Kevin Young, infielder, from Buffalo of the American Association.
Purchased the contract of Tom Prince, catcher, from Buffalo.
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Mike Tomczak, quarterback, to a one-year contract.
Placed Bernie Kosar, quarterback, on injured reserve.
Waived Odie Harris, defensive back.
Signed Bob Dahl, tackle, to the practice squad.
Released Frank Kmet, nose tackle, from the practice squad.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Danny Noonan, defensive lineman.
Waived Don Davey, defensive end.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Joe Staysniak, offensive lineman.
Placed Derrick Graham, offensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Signed Michael Smith, wide receiver, and Ron Goetz, linebacker, to the practice squad.
Released Pellom McDaniels, defensive end, from the practice squad.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Claimed Anthony Thompson, running back, on waivers from the Phoenix Cardinals.
Placed Troy Stradford, running back, on injured reserve.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Acquired Keith Henderson, running back, from the San Francisco 49ers for an undisclosed draft choice.
Waived Ronnie West, running back.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Placed Timm Rosenbach, quarterback, on injured reserve.
Signed Keith Rucker, defensive lineman, from the practice squad.
Signed Alphonso Taylor, defensive lineman, to the practice squad.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Albert Bentley, running back.
Waived Alan Haller, cornerback.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Released Keith Millard, defensive end.
Signed Natu Tuatagaloa, defensive end.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Todd Harrison, tight end.
Signed Kirk Kirkpatrick, tight end, to the practice squad.
Released Mazio Royster, running back, and Willie Culpepper, wide receiver, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Returned Drew Bannister and Andrew Kemper, defensemen; Aaron Gavey, Martin Tanguay and Tom MacDonald, centers; Brantt Mhyres and Marc Tardif, forwards; and Derek Wilkinson, goaltender, to their respective junior teams.
College
COLONIAL ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION -- Named Fred Barakat supervisor of basketball officials.
CAL-POLY POMONA -- Named Kevin Patterson interim men's basketball coach.
DAYTON -- Named Dave Bollwinkel and Ray Springer men's assistant basketball coaches.
DELAWARE -- Named Darryl Hilliard men's assistant basketball coach.
IDAHO -- Named Pete Liske director of athletics.
JAMES MADISON -- Named Ralph Sampson men's part-time assistant basketball coach.
LEHMAN -- Named Ron Carter men's associate basketball coach and Joe Meads men's assistant basketball coach.
MICHIGAN -- Declared Jalen Rose, guard-forward; Chris Webber, forward-center; and Eric Riley, center, ineligible until the NCAA decides whether they violated rules by being paid for some appearances.
SOUTH ALABAMA -- Named Paul Newman trainer.


Paul Martin, Canadian Diplomat And Cabinet Stalwart, Dies at 89
Paul Martin, an enduring Liberal Party politician who for decades served in Canadian Cabinets and represented Ottawa at international gatherings, died on Monday at the Hotel Dieu Hospital in Windsor, Ontario.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Martin, a resident of Windsor, suffered a broken hip in a fall and was recovering from surgery when he died of a heart attack, said Paul Janisse, a funeral director in Windsor.


Events: Latin America, Architecture, Pottery
Latin Culture  Museum of American Folk Art, Feld Gallery at 2 Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at West 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
"Visiones del Pueblo: The Folk Art of Latin America," an exhibition of more than 250 objects, starts today and runs through Jan. 3.
Pieces in the show, from 17 countries, include ceremonial works like statues of saints, puppets, masks and costumes.
Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday.
No charge.


Managed Care Is More of What We Have Now; Rochester's Example
To the Editor:
Yes, Rochester curbed health-care costs (front page, Aug. 25), but it was not just an achievement of civic-minded business leaders.
The real work was done by the Finger Lakes Health Systems Agency.
The Finger Lakes region stretches from Corning in the south through farm country to Rochester in the north.
The agency's task was to approve or hold back Federal funds going to hospitals, which amounted to control over big-ticket items in hospital budgets.


The Making of a Matisse Show: In Itself a Show of Tact and Muscle
The wrath of Hurricane Andrew has been felt as far north as the Museum of Modern Art.
When a nursery in Homestead, Fla., was wiped out, along with it went the dozens of split-leaf philodendrons ordered as decorative room dividers for the huge Matisse retrospective that opens to the public at the museum next Thursday.
The museum was able to obtain last-minute replacements from northern Florida, but not, said Richard E. Oldenburg, the museum's director, the type it originally wanted.
If that's the worst glitch in what has been a three-year undertaking of extensive diplomacy, research and planning, then Mr.
Oldenburg admits he and the Modern will have gotten off lightly.
"This has been like organizing a D-day invasion," he said at the museum the other day.
"But now it's finally coming together."


Halt the Verbal Abuse Of 'Special Interests'
To the Editor:
In this campaign season, everyone -- especially Christoper Georges in "The Clinton Plan (Thanks to Dukakis)" (Op-Ed, Aug. 24) -- talks about special-interest groups, but nobody defines them.


The High Cost of Unity
The currency systems of Western Europe were thrown into disarray today when speculators took hold of exchange markets.
They sold weaker currencies like the British pound, the Italian lira and the Spanish peseta, and bought the strongest currency in Europe, the German mark.
But more fundamentally, the chaos occurred because of an underlying crisis afflicting the economies of Europe.
The crisis is rooted in the high cost of German unification, which is driving up German interest rates at a time when other European countries need lower rates to help them out of their economic slowdown.


Former Mayor's Victory Worries Many in Capital
Former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s resounding victory in the Democratic City Council primary on Tuesday raised concerns today over the complications it may bring to Washington as it presses the case for statehood and struggles with urban problems.
Mr.
Barry won 70 percent of the vote, defeating the incumbent, Wilhelmina Rolark, by a ratio of 3-to-1.
His comeback campaign, which relied heavily on religious and African themes, generated so much interest that turnout in Ward 8, a predominantly black district in southeast Washington, was at a record high.
Because there are few registered Republicans in Ward 8, the Democratic primary winner is virtually assured of election in November.


Calendar: Trees, Shrubs, Rock-Garden Lecture City Shade
City Shade New York City Street Tree Consortium, 44 Worth Street; (212) 227-1887.
A 12-hour course for volunteers on caring for urban trees, including identification, planting and maintenance, will be offered in each borough starting Tuesday.
The course includes four evening sessions and a hands-on class on a Saturday morning.
Call for a schedule.
Fee, including registration and materials, $52.


Matisse's 'Drawings With Scissors'
HENRI MATISSE'S art book "Jazz" is like his paintings: it cuts "to the quick in color," as Matisse wrote.
The close-to-autobiographical book, first published in France in 1947 by Edition Teriade, was reissued this month in an oblong hardback format by George Braziller.
The publication coincides with the Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, which opens on Sept. 24 and runs through Jan. 12.


Farr's Advice to Yankees: Get Cone and a Backup for Tartabull
Steve Farr sits in one corner of the Yankee clubhouse and is usually quiet and inconspicuous.
The only time the reliable reliever finds himself in the forefront is when the Yankees need him to save a game in the ninth inning.
But their 9-6 loss to the White Sox at Yankee Stadium last night was still hours away when Farr candidly expounded on the state of the Yankees.
The 35-year-old veteran said he would like to see the club pursue David Cone, who will be a free agent, and seek a power-hitting outfielder because Danny Tartabull is too injury-prone and the team suffers when he is unable to play.


60,000 Notebook Computers Are Being Recalled by Apple
Apple Computer Inc. said today that it was recalling some of its Macintosh Powerbook 100 notebook computers because of a potential safety problem.
Apple said the malfunction, an electrical short that can cause a small hole to melt in the computer's plastic case, had occurred in only three of the nearly 60,000 Powerbook 100's that could be affected.
No personal injury has occurred, the company said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate; PRIMARY IN HAND, ABRAMS SETS OUT TO OUST D'AMATO
The general-election campaign for the Senate from New York began in earnest yesterday as the Democratic nominee, State Attorney General Robert Abrams, squared off for a bruising battle against the Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Mr.
Abrams claimed victory after defeating former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro by 11,000 votes, or 1 percentage point, in unofficial returns.
Ms.
Ferraro made no public concession, but her aides acknowledged privately that she had lost and that she supported the nominee.


One Sure Thing About Giants: There Is Definitely Room to Move Up
When the Giants play the Bears on Monday night in Chicago, they may take along something from Sunday's odd 34-28 loss to the Dallas Cowboys.
The question is whether it will be the sloppiness that enabled the Cowboys to build a 34-0 lead, or the aggressiveness and efficiency that allowed the Giants to score four second-half touchdowns in 17 minutes.


The Fashionable Meet the Sociable on a Fifth Ave. Sidewalk
Saks Fifth Avenue staged a rousing welcome to the new fashion-cum-social season on Tuesday evening with "SFA-USA," its annual salute to American designers.
The party also raised money for local charities.
The sidewalks around the store were tented over so that guests could examine the clothes of the 16 designers in the windows under a protective covering.
Buffet tables set up at the perimeter of the tents offered regional foods.
The servers signaled the nature of their snacks by their outfits: Day-Glo shorts and Venice Beach T-shirts for the California health salad stand, denim overalls and plaid shirts for the Southern fried chicken brigade.


Economic Scene; Fewer Mandates, Fewer Votes
READ his lips: no new mandated benefits.
President Bush, tarred as a congenital flip-flopper, is making a stand.
The catch, at least from the perspective of his supporters, is that the President is manning the ideological barricades against a very popular piece of legislation passed last week by Congress -- legislation that practically screams family values.
The bill, requiring big companies to grant unpaid leave to full-time employees with newborns or seriously ill family members, has drawn fire from the Republicans' traditional allies in business.
But Mr.
Bush's stance is hardly likely to win votes in the suburbs, where stay-at-home mothers are becoming as rare as wood-paneled station wagons.


In His Own Words
GOV. BILL CLINTON
In a speech at the Maxine Waters Employment Preparation Center in South-Central Los Angeles yesterday
" Unless we have a growing economy, making capital available to business, and educating and training workers will still not create the jobs. We've tried trickle-down for 12 years. I want you to give Al Gore and Bill Clinton a chance to invest, to educate, to cooperate and to compete. We're going to create millions of new jobs in America, and opportunities, so that people we educate and train, people we give the capacity to go into business, can make a living and bring this economy back.
Don't you know we could diminish the racial tensions in this community, don't you know we could diminish the tensions between rich and poor in this community, if everybody thought that if they worked hard and played the rules they could get ahead?


EUROPEANS' CURRENCY SYSTEM SHAKEN AS BRITAIN CUTS FREE
After a futile day of trying to defend the value of the pound, Britain dropped out of the European Monetary System on Wednesday, at least temporarily.
Its departure from the monetary system, a cornerstone of greater European unity, left the program of economic coordination in tatters.
Before taking that unexpected step, which effectively allowed the pound to drop sharply in value, Britain desperately tried to pump up the currency.
First it raised one of its key interest rates to 12 percent from 10 percent.
Only hours later -- after the pound had sunk still further -- it announced another increase, to 15 percent.
By raising rates so sharply, Britain hoped to make the pound more attractive to investors and stop concerted selling by speculators that was pushing it down.


Twice as Many Families Seek Space in City Shelters
The number of homeless families entering New York City's troubled shelter system this summer is almost twice last summer's level, causing a backup that has left more than 100 families a night sleeping on floors and tables in city welfare offices.
Most of the families flooding the system this summer have sought emergency shelter before -- an indication that they are having a tougher time finding permanent housing they can afford or staying doubled up with friends and family in the recession, city officials say.


G.M. and Other Companies Quit Tokyo Stock Market
In a blow to Tokyo's standing as a world financial center, the General Motors Corporation and four other large foreign companies announced separately today that they would stop selling their shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
The decisions seemed to signal a reversal of a trend of the last half of the 1980's, when many global-minded American and European companies rushed to list their shares here in hopes of increasing their international prestige and raising money in Tokyo's generous capital markets.
From 1984 to 1991, the number of foreign companies selling shares on the Tokyo exchange rose to 125 from 11.


Yields on Taxable Funds Drop Under 3%
Yields on taxable money market funds fell below 3 percent for the first time since 1975 in the week ended Tuesday, The IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report said yesterday.
The drop in taxable yields was a continuation of the decline that began last week, when yields fell in response to the Federal Reserve Board's quarter-point cut in the overnight Federal funds rate on Sept. 4.


Civilian-Run Coalition Forming to Rule Thailand
A coalition of political parties appeared today to be on the verge of forming an elected, civilian-controlled Government in Thailand.
The four parties, which won a slim majority of the parliamentary seats in the general election on Sunday, are united in their call for an end to six decades of political meddling by the Thai military.


MITSUBISHI TO SELL DIESEL ENGINES TO DAIMLER-BENZ
The Mitsubishi Motors Corporation of Japan said yesterday that it was negotiating to sell diesel engines for use in small trucks to Daimler-Benz A.G., the German company known for its Mercedes-Benz cars.


Books of The Times; On Final Frontier, Nature Hits Back
Sailor Song  By Ken Kesey  533 pages. Pearson+Viking. $23.50.
Ken Kesey's wildly exuberant new book, "Sailor Song," is the first novel he has published since 1964.
In the 28-year interval, he has brought out a collection of essays, "Demon Box"; several nonfiction works, among them "Kesey's Garage Sale" and "The Further Inquiry," and two children's stories, "Little Tricker the Squirrel Meets Big Double the Bear" and "The Sea Lion."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Musica Maestro
Dance Theater Workshop  219 West 19th Street  Chelsea
Revisiones, an extensive series of Latin American performances, opened Monday night with a modest, amiable concert by Musica Maestro, a group from Monterrey, Mexico.
The group's repertory stretches back to the mid-19th century and includes political and satirical songs.
But history couldn't compete with romance; a handful of historical nuggets and a few songs about the land gave way to love songs.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE 15-year-old boy felt that his 17-year-old sister was clearly his parents' favorite.
She received lots of praise at home for getting good grades and going out with the right crowd.
He felt that no matter how well he did in school or how nicely he behaved, he couldn't compete.
"So he decided, on an unconscious level, that his special talent and way of getting attention was by failing," said Dr.
Sandra J. Eller, a psychologist and a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Rochester, who counseled the family.
"Boy, did his parents sit up and take notice when he started flunking out of school and being truant. At least he was no longer a piece of furniture."


Car Dealer's Projects Face Challenges
A group of environmental lawyers and a state legislator, frustrated by the Brookhaven Town Board's approval of projects proposed by John McNamara during the last decade, plans to challenge those approvals in light of Mr.
McNamara's admission last week that he bribed town officials for their support.
Mr.
McNamara, a car dealer and developer, has also admitted swindling General Motors out of $436 million by borrowing money for vehicles that did not exist.
He is cooperating in a sweeping Federal investigation of corruption in Brookhaven.
Lawsuit Not Ruled Out
"We feel that all those permits that McNamara was involved with should be null and void, or at least opened up for examination again," said Joel R. Kupferman of the Huntington-based Environmental Law Project.
Mr.
Kupferman said he would not rule out asking the courts to review the Town Board's decisions, but would prefer to avoid a lawsuit.


Lufthansa in a Bid for Continental
Lufthansa Airlines and the financier Marvin Davis submitted a $400 million bid yesterday for troubled Continental Airlines.
The so-called qualifying bid, which must be reviewed by Continental before it can be formally accepted, represents the fourth offer on the table for the airline, which has been operating under Chapter 11 protection from creditors since December 1990.


U.S. Aides Propose $500,000 Fine for State Power Authority
Federal authorities yesterday proposed fining the New York State Power Authority $500,000, saying it had suffered "a significant breakdown in management and administrative control" at one of its nuclear reactors, the James A. Fitzpatrick plant in Scriba.
The Power Authority said it had already addressed some of the deficiencies but had not decided whether to pay the fine, which is large by Nuclear Regulatory Commission standards.
The Power Authority could appeal the fine to the commission.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
Fifth Avenue between 61st and 86th Streets will be closed beginning at noon for the Steuben Day parade.
Amsterdam Avenue between 96th and 106th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for a street fair.
SUNDAY
Fifth Avenue between 48th and 57th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. for New York Is Book Country.
Columbus Avenue between 66th and 96th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for a street fair.
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard between 111th and 142d Streets will be closed beginning at 1 P.M. for the African-American Day parade.
In Queens, 37th Avenue between 70th and 94th Streets will be closed beginning at 1:30 P.M. for the Queens Hispanic Day parade.


Drying Out After Iowa Flooding


Touring Book Country on 5th Avenue, Block by Block
This year the annual New York Is Book Country celebration is expanding to two days, with an array of literary events scheduled for tomorrow throughout the city.
The activities range from prose and poetry readings to book sales and street fairs.
The main event of the celebration, the 14th annual New York Is Book Country fair, is to take place on Sunday on Fifth Avenue in mid-Manhattan, from 48th to 57th Street.
The fair's theme this year is New York.


Fearing Lead, Dinkins Opposes Sandblasting
The Dinkins administration has asked New York State's Department of Transportation to halt sandblasting on the Gowanus Expressway in Brooklyn after residents expressed worries that the work might have spewed grit and dust tainted with lead into the air or soil beneath the elevated highway.
The request came as New York City continues to try to grapple with growing public concern about lead in the environment.
In the last month, high levels of lead have been found in the soil near three bridges and in a Greenwich Village elementary school, and the city announced that tests in some older buildings had found lead levels that exceeded new Federal guidelines.


Art in Review
Manual  Jayne H. Baum Gallery 588 Broadway (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Oct. 17
Nature and culture face off yet again in the large color photographs of Suzanne Bloom and Ed Hill, two photographers from Houston who collaborate under the name Manual.
Ms.
Bloom and Mr.
Hill specialize in pictures that have been heavily reworked by computers, giving the age-old confrontation a fresh twist.


What if They Held a League and No One Watched? Here's the Answer
World League football is dead for 1993. Now can we trot out I Told You So Cam?
The brutal truth in halting the World League next season (before C.P.R. ostensibly revives it with more European teams in 1994) is that death-by-television was assured when ratings reeked the first year and grew more foul the second.
They were 1.9 on ABC and 1.2 on the USA Network in 1991 and 1.5 on ABC and 1.0 on USA in 1992.


D'Amato Ad Puts Abrams On Defensive
Still catching his breath after a brutal Democratic primary, State Attorney General Robert Abrams found himself on the defensive yesterday against his Republican opponent, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who unleashed a radio commercial branding him as "mudslide Bob Abrams" and accusing him of a "fund-raising shakedown."
That was a paradoxical description coming from Mr.
D'Amato -- who takes some pride in his reputation as the Peck's Bad Boy of New York politics and has faced repeated inquiries into whether he has done favors for contributors.
It was also a not-so-gentle hint of the tone of the seven-week campaign to come.


Sports of The Times; Baseball And the Hypothetical
LOTS of questions are being asked around baseball these days and, not surprisingly, few have to do with which team has the best chance of winning the World Series.
For instance, in baseball's new world order, certain things have to be hashed out, from the mundane, as in whose signature will appear on the World Series baseball, to which owners will have the right or the intestinal fortitude to enforce, reprimand or impede one of their fellows in the best interests of baseball.


Ernest Wuliger, Bedding Maker, Is Dead at 71
Ernest M. Wuliger, who expanded his family's mattress company into the nation's largest manufacturer of bedding, died on Sept. 5 at his home in Cleveland.
He was 71 years old.
He died of brain cancer, his family said.


Art in Review
Beverly Semmes  Sculpture Center 167 East 69th Street Upper East Side Through Oct. 8
As with a lot of other emerging younger artists, Beverly Semmes's work tends to look better in group shows than on its own.
Still, this exhibition of seven sculptures -- all involving eerily enlarged or altered articles of clothing that possess a strong Surrealist charge -- is impressive for its leanness and focus.


John Beaufort Is Dead; Theater Critic Was 79
John Beaufort, the longtime theater critic for The Christian Science Monitor, died on Wednesday at High Ridge House, a sanitarium in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Beaufort died after a brief illness, said his wife, Francesca.


Major Rejects Pressure To Oust Finance Chief
Prime Minister John Major today rejected demands for the resignation of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and said his Government had no reason to apologize after being forced to devalue the pound Wednesday against other European currencies.
Facing growing political pressure over the Government's handling of the currency crisis, a senior official insisted that the Prime Minister's economic and political strategies remained unaffected by Wednesday's financial fiasco.
The Government twice raised interest rates in a desperate bid to save the pound, before retreating in failure and dropping out of European monetary system, allowing the pound to fall in value.


Gretzky Hospitalized
WAYNE GRETZKY of the Los Angeles Kings, hampered by a back problem for the last two years, spent last night in an Inglewood, Calif., hospital with a new back injury.
Gretzky was scheduled to return to the Kings' training camp yesterday, but instead checked into Centinela Hospital Medical Center, where he was to undergo tests for a strained upper back.


A First Step in Haiti
A promising step toward ending the lawlessness and violence that have afflicted Haiti for the past year has just been taken.
With the agreement of representatives of both the ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and the military regime that succeeded him, 18 international monitors are now being deployed in Haiti.
That's not nearly enough, but if Washington adds its own strong support to the monitoring effort, this small beachhead can be expanded to speed a return to democratic rule.


Senate Conviction of U.S. Judge Is Set Aside as Unfairly Reached
In an unprecedented ruling in a highly unusual case, a Federal judge tonight overturned the Senate's 1989 conviction of former Federal Judge Alcee L. Hastings, who had been impeached on bribery charges.
The Federal District Judge, Stanley Sporkin, said the procedures used by the Senate to strip Judge Hastings of his seat on the Federal bench in Miami were unfair and violated his constitutional rights.


Switch, Don't Fight, Mr. Perot
What is Ross Perot up to?
As a former leader of his volunteer petition drive in New York, I'm asked that question just about every day.
The question is legitimate because, after announcing in July that he would not run for President, Mr.
Perot is now filing official affidavits swearing he is a candidate.
Since his "withdrawal," he has spent hundreds of thousands of dollars seeking signatures to place himself on the New York ballot: $200,000 for newspaper advertising, $50,000 for direct mail, $30,000 to reprint his petitions and larger sums not yet disclosed for radio, office space, staff, paid petition carriers and election lawyers.


The Spoken Word
LECTURE, Feld Gallery at the Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue and 66th Street, Upper West Side.
A lecture by Dr.
Marion Oettinger, guest curator, to accompany the museum's exhibition, "Visiones del Pueblo: The Folk Art of Latin America." Tomorrow at 10 A.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 977-7170.
READING, East West Books, 78 Fifth Avenue, at 13th Street, Greenwich Village.
Lex Hixon will read from his work.
Today from 5 to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 243-5994.
DISCUSSION, 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, at 92d Street, Upper East Side.
The authors Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan will discuss with Charlie Rose the origins of human life on earth.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Information and reservations: (212) 996-1100.
READING, the Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
The artists Helen Mayer Harrison and Newton Harrison read from "Breathing Space for the Sava River, Yugoslavia," a work in the museum's exhibition "Fragile Ecologies." Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $3.
Information: (718) 592-5555.
STAGED READING, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
Cast members Ed Dixon, Lydia Ooghe and others will perform Mel Mandel and Stan Applebaum's new musical, "Bright Lights." Today at 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 870-1630
POETRY READING, West Side Arts Coalition, Broadway Mall at 96th Street, Upper West Side.
The poet Jane Madson will read from her work.
Monday at 7 P.M.
Suggested admission: $2.
Information: (212) 316-6024.
GENEALOGICAL LECTURE, Central Synagogue Community House, 123 East 55th Street, midtown.
"Tracing Brooklyn Ancestors," by Joseph M. Silinonte, a genealogist.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 557-1164 or (212) 330-8257.
READING, Cleveland Editions Gallery, 195 Plymouth Street, at Jay Street, Downtown Brooklyn.
The writers Patricia Eakins and Mark Soloman will read from their work.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5.
Information: (718) 965-1541.
WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a walking tour of the Lower East Side at noon and "Renting, Ranting and Reform," a walking tour highlighting tenement life, at 2 P.M.
Separate admission is required for each event.
Lecture tickets: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street, Upper East Side.
All free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, midtown.
"Abstraction," by Wendy Belser, today at 1 P.M.; "Abstract Expressionism," by Ms.
Belser, today at 3 P.M.; "Sacred Themes in 'La Danse' and 'La Musique,' " by Jill Snyder, tomorrow at 11 A.M.; "Themes in Variations in Matisse's Sculpture," by Ms.
Snyder, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "Matisse: The Nice Years," by Lisa Panzera, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "Henri Matisse: A Retrospective," by Ms.
Panzera, tomorrow at 5 P.M., and Sunday at 3 P.M. by Ms.
Snyder; "Matisse: Painter, Sculptor, Draftsman," by Susan Cooke, Sunday at 11 A.M.; "Matisse: Nature and Art," by Ms.
Cooke, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Matisse: Art and Subject Matter," by Ms.
Snyder, Sunday at 5 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free under 16.
Information: (212) 708-9480.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Upper East Side.
"Recent Acquisitions," by Leslie Heiner, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Homecoming: William H. Johnson and Afro-America," by Ms.
Heiner, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; "Figurative Works From the Permanent Collection," by Ms.
Heiner, Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Psychiatrist in Sex Abuse Case Offers Her License
Dr.
Margaret Bean-Bayog, the Harvard psychiatrist who has been accused of sexually abusing one of her patients and contributing to his suicide, offered to resign her medical license today.
The offer was made four days before the state Board of Registration in Medicine was scheduled to present evidence against Dr.
Bean-Bayog that could have led to the loss of her license.


Clinton Talks Softer As Bush Lashes Out
Gov.
Bill Clinton, who once offered stern talk on the need for sacrifice by Americans, now gives speeches with a softer edge, as he did yesterday in Colorado.
In Jonesboro, Ga., President Bush unleased some of the most pointed language of his campaign to attack Mr.
Clinton's economic policies.
Articles, pages A20 and A21.


Art in Review
Elmer Bischoff  Salander-O'Reilly Galleries 20 East 79th Street Through Sept. 26
With David Park and Richard Diebenkorn, Elmer Bischoff was one of the founders of Bay Area Figuration, the coarse-grained, intensely colored figurative style that emerged in San Francisco in the early 1950's.
Of the three, Bischoff, who died last year at the age of 75, is the least known in New York City, a condition that this exhibition should help remedy.


Finally, Stamford Arts Center to Open
After more than a decade of grand plans and false starts, cost overruns and acrimonious disputes, the Stamford Center for the Arts next week will open the performing-arts complex that its creators have called, with a good bit of hyperbole, the Lincoln Center of Fairfield County.
The Rich Forum -- a $15.3 million concrete-and-glass structure named for the center's president and Stamford's master builder, Frank D. Rich Jr. -- makes its official debut with a $1,000-a-ticket gala next Friday, although its first season will be a thin patchwork of performances interspersed with corporate meetings.


Got Horse Right Here, And Here, and Here
Thirty-six of the premier horses in the country were entered yesterday in the four Grade I stakes that will bedeck Belmont Park tomorrow and open the countdown to the Breeders' Cup six weeks later.
Eight of the horses were entered in the main event, the $500,000 Woodward Stakes, which was a landmark race decades before other stakes were clustered around it to form this fall's Super Saturday I. All eight seem headed for the Breeders' Cup championships, and all eight might even meet again in the foremost race of that day, the $3 million Classic, the richest horse race in the world.


TV Weekend; Bob Newhart as Bob Newhart, but With an Edge
Bob Newhart's marathon run on CBS began in the 1970's with "The Bob Newhart Show." He played Dr.
Bob Hartley, a Chicago psychologist.
Then for most of the 1980's, in "Newhart," he was Dick Loudon, a Vermont innkeeper.
Now, beginning tonight at 8:30, there's "Bob" and he turns up as Bob McKay, a Chicago comic-book artist.
Mr.
Newhart jokes that his next series will probably be titled just plain "B." No need to worry about that right now.
This new series should keep him busy for much of this decade.
Created by Cheri Steinkellner, Bill Steinkellner and Phoef Sutton, formerly executive producers for "Cheers," "Bob" promises to put the familiar button-down Newhart persona on more of what television folk like to call a cutting edge.
At one point tonight, he even gets to blurt, "Go to hell!" But there are obvious limits to tinkering with a comedy institution.
Among the best bits in the show is a telephone routine, which except for the addition of call waiting could have been recorded in Mr.
Newhart's first comedy album, in 1959.


Review/Film; Torture And Hope In a Clash
"Sarafina!" would seem to be a musical exceptionally well suited to the screen, where its subject can be depicted rather than merely imagined.
It's clear from the opening number of this energetic, impassioned film version that Soweto -- presented ironically with its name spelled out across the landscape, as in the "Hollywood" sign -- is the essence of the story, not merely its background.
It's also clear that a tougher, more realistic "Sarafina!" means a film at war with itself, as it tries to reconcile "Fame"-style high spirits with the misery of its characters' lives.
It's no small accomplishment on the part of Darrell James Roodt, the director of this vibrant film adaptation, that "Sarafina!" remains a forceful mixture of celebration and fury much of the way through.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With American Voters; Underdog in Wisconsin Slips the Blade, Nicely
Grace Walsh, the local debating teacher, waited on a sun-drenched day for her old student and new political primary victor to arrive here amid the breezy charm of clapboard houses and church steeples poking through the leafy canopy of provincial American politics.
She offered a Mom-swallows-apple-pie grin as Russell D. Feingold, the conquering underdog, stepped up at a claque-laced news conference and recalled Ms.
Walsh's summary of the fine art of competitive oratory: "Slip them the blade nicely, Russell."


Sounds Around Town
Watson at the Vanguard
Bobby Watson and Horizon, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
From his time with Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers, Bobby Watson, an alto saxophonist, learned how to turn fast tunes into fireballs and ballads into whispered confidences.
His quintet, Horizon, includes a canny, incisive trumpeter, Terell Stafford, and the harmonically daring Stephen Scott on piano.
Tonight and tomorrow, sets begin at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is a $15 cover and a $7.50 minimum.
On Sunday, sets begin at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M., with a $15 cover and a $7.50 minimum.
Rock From Zimbabwe
Thomas Mapfumo and the Blacks Unlimited, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
In Zimbabwe, Thomas Mapfumo helped create two revolutions.
His songs defied the minority regime of what used to be Rhodesia; at the same time, they helped reinvent his country's rock to draw on local traditions.
Amid plinking, interlocking guitar patterns based on mbira (thumb-piano) music, Mr.
Mapfumo's deep, knowing voice conveys a sage authority.
Shows are tonight at 10:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; admission is $16.


Feeling the Pinch
To millions of Europeans, the mystifying money markets crisis means simply: find ways to spend less money.
Business Day, page D5.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"GIFTS AND ACQUISITIONS IN CONTEXT," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Upper East Side.
More than 70 items commemorating the museum's 60th anniversary.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Infor mation: (212) 570-3676.
"PARTY TIME: PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGNS SINCE 1832," New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, Upper West Side.
Buttons, posters, bumper stickers and other campaign memorabilia.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed tomorrow.
Admission: $4.50 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 873-3400.
Closing Next Week
"CONTEMPORARY EUROPEAN PRINTS," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, midtown.
Through Tuesday.
A collection of works from 1960 to the present by Miro, Picasso and others.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Admission: $7.50 ($4.50 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
Closing Next Weekend
"AL-ANDALUS: THE ART OF ISLAMIC SPAIN," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, Manhattan.
Through Sept. 27.
Hours: Friday and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 535-7710.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Turmoil in Europe
Europe's currency markets stabilized one day after the system of economic cooperation nearly collapsed.
But few ideas emerged to solve the problem of Germany's high interest rates.  [ Page A1. ]
U.S. policies contributed little to the crisis in Europe and there is not much Washington can do to alleviate it, economists say.  [ A1. ]


Clio Awards
Omnicom Group's DDB Needham Worldwide took top honors, winning eight awards, at the Clio Awards ceremony Tuesday night at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York.
Doyle Advertising and Design Group, Boston, and Young &amp; Rubicam were runners-up, each winning seven Clios.
The ceremony was the first since June of last year, when the Clios collapsed as one ceremony was disrupted and a second was canceled.
This year, the two ceremonies were combined.


D'Amato Casts the First Stone
THE RADIO SCRIPT:
NARRATOR: "Bob Abrams still doesn't get it. After running the nastiest negative campaign in New York history, Bob Abrams started in again. Primary night, he began pouring the mud on Al D'Amato.
"Bob Abrams narrowly defeated Geraldine Ferraro by running a classic smear campaign, and that's wrong. Decent people were repulsed by it.


Zuckerman Seems Clear Choice to Buy Daily News
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the New York real-estate developer and owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, yesterday became all but assured of acquiring the bankrupt Daily News.
Mr.
Zuckerman has still not reached agreement with the paper's creditors or with the Newspaper Guild, which represents news, advertising and clerical workers.
But the paper's board endorsed his proposal late Wednesday night and, as dawn broke yesterday, the negotiating logjam with the guild was cleared away.
A final understanding will probably not be reached until next week.


Niners Not Digesting Locker-Room Fodder
Bruce Coslet spoke, but the San Francisco 49ers apparently weren't paying attention.
The victory Coslet predicted for the Jets this week did little more than raise a few eyebrows here.
"He said that?" asked 49er safety David Whitmore.
"That's a pretty bold statement for the guy to make. I can't understand his basis for making it. The Jets have a good team, but we've got a good team, too. For him to say something like that, he must know something we don't."


Intel to Pay A Dividend, Its First Ever
In a statement of confidence, the Intel Corporation said today that it would distribute the first cash dividend in its history.
The payout of 10 cents a share will be made on Dec. 1 to stockholders of record on Nov. 1 and marks the beginning of a regular quarterly program, the company said.
Intel shares closed up 75 cents today, at $64.50, in over-the-counter trading.
Analysts welcomed the dividend, which they said should make Intel shares less volatile and broaden the company's investor base, because some mutual funds will only invest in stocks that pay dividends.
Intel, like many volatile technology companies, no longer provides guidance to the Street on earnings because of their unpredictable nature; some analysts interpreted the dividend announcement as a veiled indicator that the company expects record earnings in the current quarter.


Money Funds' Assets Decline
The total assets of the nation's 610 retail money market mutual funds sank $1.74 billion, to $384.83 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 377 taxable retail money funds dropped $1.11 billion, to $307.59 billion, while the assets of the 233 retail tax-exempt funds declined $637.9 million, to $77.24 billion.


Celebrating The First Arts Week
New York City's first celebration of National Arts Week begins Sunday and runs through Sept. 26.
Here is a sampling of events, compiled by the Department of Cultural Affairs.
Information is available 24 hours a day by calling (212) 765-2787.
Sunday


Hugo's 3-Year Wake: Lessons of a Hurricane
Three years after Hurricane Hugo's screaming winds and 17-foot storm surge left this town torn to pieces and buried under five feet of water and mud, life here seems almost back to normal, right down to the regrown Spanish moss hanging from the oak trees on Pinkney Street.
But for hurricane-ravaged residents of South Florida, Louisiana and Hawaii starting to rebuild their lives, a journey along the South Carolina coast and into the rural hamlets ravaged by Hugo provides a complicated picture of equal parts loss and renewal.
Like McClellanville, South Carolina has recovered sooner than many thought possible, but its experience is a vivid lesson both in how much man can and cannot do to repair a world that nature blew apart.


Reaching for The News; Mortimer B. Zuckerman: Power, Wealth, Controversy
On Aug. 16, just about the time that Mortimer B. Zuckerman became the front-runner in the derby to purchase The Daily News, he gave a wedding at his estate in East Hampton, L.I., for the son of a longtime friend who died in February.
By the accounts of several guests it was a terrific time, a warm and sunny event, even though it rained.
Mr.
Zuckerman toasted the young couple "almost as a father would," one guest said.
Warm and fuzzy is not the image most people have of the 55-year-old Mr.
Zuckerman, now on the threshold of an opportunity to reverse the sliding fortunes of the 73-year-old tabloid.
Indeed, it is fair to say that over the last two decades and up and down the Northeast Corridor, Mort Zuckerman has made more than a few people mad while making himself rich.


I.M.F. Chief Defends Central Bankers
The head of the International Monetary Fund went to bat today for central bankers humiliated by this week's crisis in European currency markets, asserting that the underlying reason for the chaos was less-than-stellar policy making by elected officials.
In a news conference, Michel Camdessus, the fund's managing director, singled out Germany's Government, saying its failure to rein in its huge budget deficit had virtually forced its central bank to raise interest rates.


The Art Market
Selling in a Store
Anna and Brian Houghton, the formidable English couple who first brought the International Art and Antiques Dealers Show to the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan three years ago, are about to make public what has been a well-kept secret.
It's another international show, but this one has a particularly commercial edge: rather than staging it in a traditional venue like an armory or large hotel, the Houghtons have teamed up with Harrods in London.


Surgery for Drexler
CLYDE DREXLER of the Portland Trail Blazers will undergo arthroscopic surgery today on his right knee, which he injured last season.
The Blazers' physician, Dr.
Robert Cook, said he and Drexler had agreed to have the surgery performed if the guard's knee showed any adverse reaction to a series of difficult workouts last week.
The knee, which Drexler first injured March 29 against the Knicks, swelled up after the workouts and displayed the same symptoms it did when Drexler was forced to miss five of Portland's last six regular-season games in April.


Tenement Tells a Tale Of Toil and Its Reward
To the Editor:
May I add to "Tenement Testament" (editorial, Sept. 6), about the Lower East Side brick structure that is the Tenement Museum, now designated a historic place?
The building was my first home in America after I passed through Ellis Island as a boy of 9 in 1921.
From the fire escape of our dark and dank three-room flat, I could see Orchard Street carpeted with pushcarts.
The cacophony of human voices hawking their wares was incessant and did not abate until darkness finally displaced daylight.


Citrus Hill's Closing To Be Costly to Ayer
A decision announced yesterday by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company to close its unit that markets juices under the Citrus Hill name will cost Ayer Inc. in New York a valued account.
Wendy Jacques, a P.&amp; G. spokeswoman in Cincinnati, said the decision would not affect Ayer's other P.&amp; G. accounts: Bain de Soleil, Duncan Hines, Folgers, Hawaiian Punch, Ivory shampoo and Puffs.
Citrus Hill came to Ayer in 1986 when Ayer acquired Cunningham &amp; Walsh, which had handled the account since 1983.


Giants' Roberts in the Hospital Again
William Roberts, the Giants' 30-year-old starting left guard, suffered an irregular heartbeat during practice this afternoon.
It was the second time in seven weeks that this had happened to Roberts, and he was admitted to New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Coach Ray Handley said he would be hospitalized for a few days.
"The doctor was uncertain when he would return," Handley reported, "but he was certain he will return. He was almost certain he won't play Monday night."


U.S. Initials Import Pact On Uranium
The United States has tentatively agreed to drop the punitive 116 percent duties imposed on uranium imports from Russia and four other former Soviet republics in exchange for pledges that these countries would limit uranium sales in the United States, people involved in the case said today.
The pact, initialed at the Commerce Department on Wednesday night, is politically and commercially linked with the Energy Department's recent deal to buy weapons-grade uranium from Russia and dilute it for use in commercial nuclear reactors providing electricity to American homes.
The Commerce Department has been scheduled to decide by Oct. 16 whether weapons-grade uranium would be included under the duties, which were imposed in May on a preliminary basis only on imports of uranium with clear commercial uses.


OPEC to Freeze Production; Markets Show Skepticism
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries agreed today to freeze production at the current level of about 24.5 million barrels a day in hopes that increased demand as winter approaches will lift the price of its oil closer to $21 a barrel, from a range of $18 to $19 now.
But the agreement failed to impress world oil markets, and prices slipped immediately after the announcement.


Small but Telling Maneuver in Antifighting Fight
Neil Smith of the Rangers and Don Maloney of the Islanders are two of the bright young men in hockey management.
They are the general managers of two New York teams that enjoy a long and sometimes bitter rivalry.
As Smith's Rangers and Maloney's Islanders met in a pair of rookie games this week, the two executives accomplished a bit of common-sense legislation that the entire National Hockey League Board of Governors failed to achieve after a summer of debate: They banned fighting, at least for these two games.


5 Possible Rivals Emerge as Race To Succeed Rep. Weiss Sharpens
The race to succeed Representative Ted Weiss, who died on the eve of his victory in the Democratic primary on the Upper West Side this week, took on sharper focus yesterday as State Senator Franz S. Leichter said he would formally announce his candidacy today for the post.
The Manhattan Democratic leader, Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr., said former Representative Bella S. Abzug, Assemblymen Richard N. Gottfried and Jerrold Nadler, and City Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge had also expressed interest.
The post is to be filled at a meeting of party leaders next week.


Paris Warns That Franc Hinges on Treaty Vote
A day after European currency markets plunged into turmoil, the French Government warned voters that a no vote Sunday in the referendum on the European union treaty would provoke even more monetary instability, affecting the franc in the future.
Opponents of the treaty, which commits the 12-nation European Community to create a single currency by 1999, responded by accusing the Government of scare tactics to win over an electorate thought to be almost evenly divided on how to vote.


Night of Soap Opera At Yankee Stadium
It is night in Yankee Stadium, the House that George Deconstructed, at the butt-end of a sorry season.
The young pitching hope Sterling Hitchcock is getting shelled by the White Sox, an old club going nowhere, and the el rumbles ominously beyond the white bric-a-brac that rims the ball park, reminding us that the South Bronx squats beyond.
But I am happy.
I was born near here and I am sitting beside my son in $14.50 box seats behind third base, perhaps in the very same seats in which I sat with my father forty-some years ago in the first major league baseball game for us both.
Of course, Joe DiMaggio was in center field then and now it's Bernie Williams, who in the first inning nonchalants two fly balls into base hits and throws home too casually to nail a runner.


Over 900 in Pakistan Dead in Severe Floods
More than three million people have been evacuated and nearly 1,000 have died in Pakistan's worst floods in decades, officials said today.
The death toll passed 950 as officials reported more deaths after breaches in embankments flooded much of central Punjab province.


Dinkins Denounces Police Protest As Furthering an Image of Racism
Mayor David N. Dinkins openly criticized the New York City police union and some of its members yesterday, arguing in an emotional appearance that their rowdy demonstration at City Hall on Wednesday showed why minority communities lack confidence in some officers.
Using his lead-off role at a City Council hearing, he said the demonstration proved the need for an independent, all-civilian agency to investigate police misconduct.


Art in Review
John Coplans  Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 17
John Coplans continues to stake his claim as a photographic Formalist.
His work here seems almost spartan in its simplicity, after the gigantic, multi-paneled panoramas of his naked body that he has offered in recent shows.
He presents a selection of large, two-panel vertical images of his own back, seen from close-up.
The two pictures in each work don't quite line up, but instead suggest the glance of a viewer who looks first at the upper back, then the lower.
Using this simple device Mr.
Coplans is able to break down the single point of view imposed by the camera lens, and to engage his audience in a perceptual game that recalls the powerful disjunctions in the paintings of Ellsworth Kelly.


COUNSEL IS ENDING ARMS-SALE INQUIRY
More than five years after he began, the independent prosecutor investigating the Iran-contra affair said today that he was ending his inquiry into the worst scandal of Ronald Reagan's Presidency and had no plans to seek further indictments.
The announcement by the prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, ended speculation about whether he would try to make a criminal case against several senior officials in the Reagan Administration, including former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and former Secretary of State George P. Shultz.
Unanswered Question


Stop This Carping at Working Women
To the Editor:
I resent the implication in your Sept. 2 article on women's choices between careers and motherhood that mothers who hold jobs outside the home somehow give their children less.


Pirates Get Past The Expos In 13th
The pestiferous Montreal Expos met the resourceful Pittsburgh Pirates tonight and learned why the Pirates remain on target for their third successive division championship.
Five outs and one good throw from a sweep of the two-game series, the Expos stumbled, and the Pirates quickly capitalized, first tying the game in the eighth inning on a wild throw by shortstop Spike Owen, then winning in the 13th, 3-2, on a leadoff triple by Cecil Espy and Jay Bell's single.


Review/Art; A Dreamlike Reality, Open to the East but Grounded in the West
The terms usually applied to describe Morris Graves's work -- poetic, eccentric, intimate, otherworldly -- are all accurate, which may account for the fact that he is a decidedly peripheral figure in the competitive arena of postwar American art.
Yet as the small traveling survey "Morris Graves: Reconciling Inner and Outer Realities, 1932-1983" demonstrates, he remains one of our most distinctive artists.
There is no other major figure who resembles him, and he has inspired no followers.
Although much has been made of the strong connection of his work to Asian art, this show, at the Schmidt Bingham Gallery, also clearly indicates his Western roots.
These are particularly evident in the work from the 1930's.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Given a Good Lead, Clinton Is No Longer Talking Tough
The other night, the Democratic Presidential nominee entertained a group of reporters on his campaign plane with a run-down of Bill Clinton's Laws of Politics.
Mr.
Clinton's laws speak of a deep and somewhat cynical understanding of the line of work he is in: "When you're starting to have a good time, you're supposed to be someplace else," and "Nearly everyone will lie to you, given the right circumstances." There was one well-known political law, along the same lines, that the candidate did not mention: Give the people what they want.


Neely Undergoes Surgery
CAM NEELY, who played only nine games for the Boston Bruins last season after undergoing knee surgery last Feb. 3, had an arthroscopy on his left knee yesterday.


The Paper That Won't Drop Dead
Few newspapers have endured more reversals than The Daily News of New York.
Few have shown greater resilience.
First came a bitter five-month strike, which destroyed circulation and advertising.
Then came Robert Maxwell, whose image as a savior unraveled when, after his apparent suicide, his empire was exposed as a hollow shell.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DENVER NUGGETS -- Announced the retirement of Walter Davis, guard.
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Announced that the World League would suspend play for the 1993 season.
Fined Winston Moss, Los Angeles Raiders linebacker, $2,500 for a flagrant foul in a game on Sept. 6.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Sidney Johnson, cornerback. Canadian Football League
CFL -- Fined Raghib Ismail, Toronto Argonauts kick-returner, $10,000; Adam Rita, Toronto Argonauts coach, $500; Darrell Smith, Toronto Argonauts receiver, $500; Dave Van Belleghem, Toronto Argonauts safety, $350; David Williams, Toronto Argonauts receiver, $250; and Andy McVey, Calgary Stampeders fullback, $250 for fighting during a game on Sept. 13.
Soccer
U.S. SOCCER -- Named Jay Hoffman and Glenn Myernick coaching coordinators. College
NCAA -- Announced that Corie Blount, Cincinnati basketball center, has used up his college elibility.
ALLEGHENY -- Named Kimberly Wells women's assistant basketball coach.
DARTMOUTH -- Named Brian Cleary assistant baseball coach.


Hurricane Andrew Is Termed Third Worst in This Century
In its first official report on Hurricane Andrew, the National Hurricane Center said today that it was the third most intense storm to hit land in the United States in this century.
"I have looked at damage from every major hurricane since 1965, and I've never seen anything like this in terms of the magnitude of destruction," said the director of the center, Bob Sheets.
"It was like a 25- to 30-mile-wide tornado."


Pirates Defeat the Expos


Art in Review
Larry Clark  Luhring Augustine Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 12
The dark side of teen-age life continues to preoccupy Larry Clark.
Best known as a photographer, Mr.
Clark uses a multi-media installation here to present horrific stories of sex and violence.


Review/Film; Religious Bigotry At a 1950's Prep School
In "School Ties," a tale of anti-Semitism geared to the "Dead Poets Society" crowd, the film's Jewish hero quietly removes the gold Star of David that he wears around his neck and hides it in a box of Band-Aids.
In a drama like this, the worst-case scenario would have a classmate later skinning his knee and reaching for the Band-Aids, thus letting the cat out of the bag.
At least that doesn't happen.
Though much of "School Ties" follows a predictable path, this film does manage a few surprises, particularly those surrounding David Greene (Brendan Fraser), the story's exemplary hero.
David is smart, handsome and the star of the school's football team.
This means he is not the sort to behave philosophically once he experiences religious discrimination at a prestigious New England prep school during the mid-1950's.
Indeed, David's habit of grabbing, berating or otherwise challenging anyone who insults him gives "School Ties" a muscular quality not usually found in films about this subject.
It hardly hurts that the director, Robert Mandel, stages one of David's most significant brawls with his classmates in a communal shower.


Credit Markets; Seeking Opportunities in Europe's Woes
The rupture of the European Monetary System is causing chaos in Europe.
But for Stephen C. Bartow, who manages foreign bond funds, it is creating opportunities.
"It doesn't make any difference to me as a portfolio manager," said Mr.
Bartow, who is the chief investment officer for the global fixed-income group at the Putnam Companies in Boston.
"There is an opportunity in every situation."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; PBS Trims Clinton From Program Bush Refused to Address
One day after the first Presidential debate was canceled because President Bush would not participate, Gov.
Bill Clinton has been cut out of a public television special because Mr.
Bush would not appear.
The television special, scheduled for broadcast next week, is a two-part program entitled "Voices of the Electorate," focusing on the concerns of black and Hispanic voters.
Last spring, the independent producers who put together the special sponsored a series of town meetings to identify these concerns and invited both Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Bush to address them.


Events To Browse
Throughout the city tomorrow there are events planned to coincide with the New York Is Book Country fair, which will take place on Sunday on Fifth Avenue in mid-Manhattan.
For more information about all New York Is Book Country activities, the number is (212) 522-3043.
Here is a sampling of tomorrow's events.
Manhattan
AMERICAN FESTIVAL CAFE, 20 West 50th Street, midtown.
A brunch to honor New York-area cookbook authors: Tom Bernardin ("The Ellis Island Immigrant Cookbook"); Ed Levine ("New York Eats"); Molly O'Neill ("The New York Cookbook"); Arthur Schwartz ("What to Cook When You Think There's Nothing Left in the House to Eat"), and Lyn Stallworth ("The Brooklyn Cookbook"), 11 A.M.
Tickets, $18.95.
Reservations: (212) 246-6699.
BRENTANO'S BOOKSTORE, 597 Fifth Avenue, at 48th Street, midtown.
Hilary Knight, illustrator of Kay Thompson's "Eloise" will autograph copies of her books, noon.
Information: (212) 826-2450.
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, Fifth Avenue, at 64th Street.
A celebration of wildlife books for young children, including storytelling and games; 10:30 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Free for children; adults, $2.50; elderly, $1.25.
Information: (212) 861-6030.
CHATHAM SQUARE LIBRARY, 33 East Broadway, lower Manhattan.
The illustrator Ying-Wa Hu draws for children, ages 7 to 12. 2:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 964-6598.
THE HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY OF NEW YORK, 128 West 58th Street, midtown.
A worm exhibition for children and a how-to demonstration on house plants, 11 A.M. to 12:30 P.M., followed by an herbal tea with the authors Ken Druse, Tovah Martin, Laurence Sombke and Katherine Whiteside, 1 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 757-0915.
JEFFERSON MARKET LIBRARY, 425 Avenue of the Americas, at 10th Street, Greenwich Village.
A workshop on how to find meaning and pleasure in work, by Rima Tamar, based on the work of a Tibetan scholar, Tarthans Tulku. 2:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 340-0913.
LOGOS BOOKSTORE, 342 Madison Avenue, at 43d Street, midtown.
A team block-building competition led by the author Diane Townsend-Butterworth, noon to 2:30 P.M.
A reading by the author Don Wallace, from 3 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 697-4888.
NEW YORK ASTROLOGY CENTER, 545 Eighth Avenue, at 37th Street, West Side.
Astrology talks by the authors Eleanor Bach, noon, Henry Weingarten, 3 P.M., and M. J. Abadie, 5:15 P.M.
Free.
Reservations: (212) 947-3603.
NEW YORK BOUND BOOK SHOP, 50 Rockefeller Plaza, at 50th Street, midtown.
A tribute to the New York City subway system, featuring the authors Philip Copp, Jim Dwyer, Stan Fischler and John Tauranac. 2 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 245-8503.
96th STREET LIBRARY, 112 East 96th Street, Upper East Side.
Readings of works by Dickens, Shakespeare and Dylan Thomas by Raymond Dutch, a professional narrator. 2:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 340-0913.
SCIENCE-FICTION, MYSTERIES AND MORE, 140 Chambers Street, at West Broadway, lower Manhattan.
Readings by the authors Margaret Wander Bonanno, 2 P.M., and Josepha Sherman, 2:30 P.M., followed by a discussion with an Omni Magazine editor, Ellen Datlow.
Information: (212) 385-8798.
Queens
BROADWAY BRANCH LIBRARY, 40-20 Broadway, Long Island City.
A old-book sale of material on Queens culture. 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 721-2462.
ELMHURST BRANCH LIBRARY, 86-01 Broadway.
A multi-cultural street fair featuring a foreign-book sale, readings by the Fresh Meadows Poets and performances of Andean music and ethnic craft demonstrations, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 271-1020.
LAURELTON BRANCH LIBRARY, 134-26 225th Street.
A multi-cultural street fair beginning at noon, featuring music, a quilt demonstration, a sale of African-American and Haitian books and a talk by the author Faith Ringgold, 1:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 528-2822.
The Bronx
BAYCHESTER LIBRARY, 2049 Asch Loop North, Co-op City.
A slide show by the cookbook author Tom Bernardin. 2:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 340-0913.
PARKCHESTER LIBRARY, 1985 Westchester Avenue.
A slide show about dinosaurs with games and drawings by Bruce Laird, a dinosaur expert. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information and reservations: (212) 829-7830.
Brooklyn
BROOKLYN PUBLIC LIBRARY, Grand Army Plaza, Prospect Heights.
A performance by the calypso singer and songwriter Irving Burgess. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 780-7839.
Staten Island
ST.
GEORGE LIBRARY CENTER, 5 Central Avenue, at Hyatt Street.
A presentation of magic and illusion by Philip Jennings, 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 442-8560.


Oppenheimer Broker Offers Guilty Plea to Perjury Count
A senior broker at Oppenheimer &amp; Company pleaded guilty yesterday to one count of perjury in the insider-trading case that has swirled for much of the summer around the Southampton socialite Edward R. Downe Jr.
Milton Weigner, 62 years old, entered his plea before Judge Kevin Duffy in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


Charges Could Hurt Him, Teamsters Head Concedes
Administrative law charges filed this week against Barry Feinstein, one of New York City's most powerful union leaders, are considered so potent that Mr.
Feinstein himself says they threaten his long reign as head of a powerful teamsters' local.
Mr.
Feinstein, president of Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters for a quarter century and one of the most visible municipal union leaders, dismissed the charges yesterday as "scurrilous" and proclaimed his innocence to more than 40 local officials.
But, in an interview in which he vowed an all-out defense against the charges, he added that "they are serious and I don't make light of this."


Cable TV Regulation Advances
Armed with the powerful support of television broadcasters, the House of Representatives today approved by a wide margin a measure to regulate cable television prices.
The size of the vote, 280 to 128, means the House can probably muster the two-thirds majority needed to override a veto by President Bush, who immediately attacked today's measure as full of "costly, burdensome and unnecessary requirements."


Suffolk's Budget to Have Tax Rise and Added Cuts
The Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, will propose a property-tax increase on Friday when he formally presents an "honest but ugly" budget for 1993, an aide said.
Planned cuts have already led to the sudden resignation of his Police Commissioner.
The tax increase, which is expected to be in the low double digits, is needed to close a projected $99 million budget gap.
In addition, Mr.
Gaffney is proposing budget cuts of 26 percent for most county departments.
Last year's budget totaled $1.36 billion.


Top Officers In New Posts At Times Co.
The New York Times Company said yesterday that Lance R. Primis had been promoted to president and chief operating officer and that Walter E. Mattson, who had held those positions since 1979, had been named vice chairman.
The two men will join Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the chairman and chief executive, in a newly created office of the chairman, Mr.
Sulzberger said.
Mr.
Mattson's main job will be to work with Mr.
Sulzberger on strategic planning.


World League and Expansion Are Put on Pause
The World League was suspended for one year by the National Football League owners here today.
And when the World League returns in 1994, it will offer a decidedly more European flavor.
In other N.F.L. business, the owners' squashed their original timetable for expansion -- the final two sites will not be named next month, and the expansion teams will not begin play in the 1994 season.
That decision was reached largely because of labor unrest, which the league said it hoped to resolve by emphasizing more negotiation with the players than more court action.
It was the first time the owners have met since a court ruling last week declared the league's Plan B free agency illegal under antitrust law.


Regulation Needed in AIDS Insurance Scheme
To the Editor:
Re "Now, AIDS Patients' Lives Are Drawing Speculators" (front page, Aug. 20): Two years ago, the New York State Assembly Insurance Committee held a public hearing on living benefits in life insurance.
One of the subjects we examined was the proliferation of companies formed to purchase life insurance policies from the terminally ill.
We believed the companies could be useful in some cases, but were concerned that unregulated operators might take advantage of the terminally ill by paying a pittance for the policies.
We proposed regulating these companies to prevent such practices in New York.


Morris Ratner, 86, Real Estate Executive
Morris Ratner, a retired real-estate executive and a philanthropist, died on Wednesday at the Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 86 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J., and Hollywood, Fla.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Broadway Flea Market
The sixth annual Broadway flea market will take place tomorrow in Shubert Alley, between 44th and 45th Streets west of Broadway.
Proceeds will benefit Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS.
Among the items and services for sale will be tap-dance lessons from Gregory Hines and walk-on appearances in several Broadway productions, as well as theatrical artifacts ranging from a Champagne bottle used in "Phantom of the Opera" to the original score from "Nick and Nora." There will also be a pie-throw, with celebrities as the targets.
The market will be open from 10 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. and from 4 to 7 P.M., with bidding scheduled for 5 o'clock.


Trade Gap Grew in July; Imports Are Still Rising
Acting a bit defiantly, the nation's merchandise trade deficit surged in July to $7.8 billion, the highest level in nearly two years, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
Imports rose, though exports remained at a robust level.
"It does not make sense that imports are rising," said Edward S. Hyman, president and chief economist of ISI Group, a Wall Street firm.
"The weak dollar should make imported goods more expensive. The explanation is either that the American economy is stronger than it looks, or we don't make the goods that even a weak economy needs and we have to import them."





Walter Davis Retires
WALTER DAVIS, one of the best pure shooters ever to play basketball, announced his retirement yesterday after 15 National Basketball Association seasons.
Davis, 38 years old, ended his career as the No. 18 scorer in league history with 19,521 points in 1,033 regular-season games, an average of 18.9.
The N.B.A.'s rookie of the year in 1978, Davis played in six All-Star Games.


Executive Changes
CYCNA GROUP INC., Oakland, Calif., an enviromental and professional services concern and unit of ICF International Inc., named Ray Fortney president.
EQUITABLE COMPANIES, New York, gave Joseph J. Melone, 61, president of its the Equitable Life Assurance Society, the additional title of chief executive.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday showing changes in European currency exchange rates included an erroneous label.
The scale for Italy showed German marks per 1,000 lire, not for 1 lira.


INSIDE
House Backs Cable TV Bill
With the strong support of broadcasters, the House by a wide margin approved a measure to regulate cable television prices.
Page D1.
Trimming Goals in Congress
As fears of voters' resentment grow, Democrats have decided to scale back their legislative agenda and try to return home soon.
Page A12.
U.S.
Plan for Somalia


Historian Asserts Soviet Soldiers Found Hitler's Charred Remains
A Russian historian said today that the charred remains of Adolf Hitler had been found by Soviet troops soon after the German leader's suicide in 1945, and that his jaw and parts of his skull were still stored in the Soviet archives in Moscow.
But the historian, Lev A. Bezymensky, said a piece of Soviet archive film supposedly showing Hitler's intact corpse, shown Tuesday night on Russian television, was known not to show the body of Hitler at all.


Corrections
An article yesterday about attempts to find a new owner for The Daily News appeared in some copies with an unrelated headline duplicated from another article.
The headline should have read, "Nine Unions Seek Accord on Owner; Deadline Looms at Daily News."


Authors of Study Cited By Bush Criticize Him
The authors of a widely cited study that ranked Arkansas last in conservation policy and nearly last in environmental conditions criticized President Bush on Wednesday for misusing the data to attack Gov.
Bill Clinton.
"It's the height of hypocrisy," said Bob Hall, a co-author of the study, which was conducted by the Institute for Southern Studies in Durham, N.C.
"George Bush has done a terrible job and has a dismal record on the environment. That is what is so cynical about his use of the report to slam Arkansas."


Books of The Times; Mixing Radical Politics With TV in a Thriller
The Murder of Albert Einstein  By Todd Gitlin 297 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Eugene H. Zagat, 82, Real-Estate Executive
Eugene H. Zagat, a retired New York real-estate executive, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Zagat died of throat cancer, said his son, Eugene H. Zagat Jr., a publisher of the Zagat New York City Restaurant Survey.


Sounds Around Town
Bennett at Radio City
Tony Bennett, the Count Basie Orchestra and the Ralph Sharon Trio, Radio City Music Hall, Avenue of the Americas and 50th Street, mid-Manhattan, (212) 247-4777.
Mr.
Bennett, at 66, is still in prime vocal condition.
He combines a pop singer's emotionality with a jazz singer's sense of rhythm, and he stamps everything he touches with a bursting enthusiasm.
The singer has just released "Perfectly Frank," a superb new album of songs associated with Frank Sinatra.
The record shows just how much his own man (and not a Sinatra imitator) Mr.
Bennett really is.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M., and tickets are $25 to $40.  8 From Ireland


Defendant in Iraq Fraud Tries to Drop Guilty Plea
The defense lawyer in a multibillion-dollar fraud case moved today to withdraw the guilty plea of his client, setting the stage for a trial featuring allegations that the Bush Administration knew about the fraud but ignored it because of its close relationship with Iraq.
The defendant, Christopher P. Drogoul, pleaded guilty in June to charges that he had masterminded a scheme to provide more than $5 billion in loans illegally to Iraq and other countries and companies from the Atlanta bank he managed without the knowledge or approval of the bank's headquarters in Rome.
Mr.
Drogoul has also admitted to other charges, including the failure to pay Federal income taxes.


Review/Film; The Skipper Runs More Than a Boat
"Captain Ron" looks like the pilot film for an unsold sitcom.
It is about an average yuppie family from Chicago, the broken-down boat they inherit in the Caribbean, and the colorful, one-eyed skipper who takes command of their boat and their lives.
They have adventures that could possibly fill two 30-minute episodes with the help of a laugh-track.
The cast is headed by Kurt Russell as the skipper, who talks like Long John Silver; Martin Short and Mary Kay Place, who play the dad and mom (he's a harried business executive, she's an interior decorator), and Meadow Sisto and Benjamin Salisbury, who appear as their wise-cracking children.
Thom Eberhardt directed the screenplay he wrote with John Dwyer.
Though the film could not have been too inexpensive to produce on its Puerto Rican locations, it manages to seem threadbare, mostly because of the lack of a comic imagination.


It Seems Israelis and Syrians Don't Agree Much After All
The roller-coaster Arab-Israeli peace talks took another wild turn today when Syria, one day after declaring progress with Israel, announced that the negotiations were deadlocked and that only urgent American intervention could save them.
What appears to have happened is that the talks have strayed into the Byzantine alleyways of inter-Arab and intra-Israeli politics.


People
*
Paul D. Levine was named to the new position of director of business development at Welch &amp; Nehlen Advertising, Garden City, L.I.
He was previously publisher of the New Business News newsletter, Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Early Injuries for 6 Islanders
Injuries will force six Islanders to miss the team's exhibition opener on Friday night against the Boston Bruins in Albany.
One of the injuries, to defenseman Wayne McBean, could be serious.
McBean left practice today with an injury to cartilage in his left knee that he suffered when he became entangled with Dean Chynoweth.
He was to be given a magnetic-resonance-imaging scan today in New York.
McBean suffered a similar injury last Dec. 31 and missed the rest of the season with knee surgery.
If surgery is needed again, the Islanders announced, it will take place Friday in New York.


Restaurants
The resurrection of West Broadway, a SoHo establishment that succumbed in January after four months of gastronomic wheezing, is nothing short of the restaurant miracle of 1992.
In its first incarnation, it had more flaws than an amateur counterfeit bill.
Its death was hardly a surprise; its rebirth in the spring was.
The force behind this success story is a new chef, John Schenk, who came from Gotham Bar and Grill.
His resourceful American menu is extremely well focused, and virtually all of his dishes detonate with flavor.
And with only one main course more than $20, this is one of the better bargains in town.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile; Captain of the Gore Team, Go-Between to Clinton
A year ago, Bill Clinton was putting together a staff he hoped would carry him to the White House.
What role would he have for a man whose talents included the ability to play "Jingle Bells" and the "Hallelujah Chorus" on a touch-tone telephone?
If that had been his only skill the man might have been named court jester.
But because he was Mark Gearan, Mr.
Clinton made him a strategic adviser and, later on, campaign manager for his running mate, Senator Al Gore.


Lifting the Veil on Executive Pay
The head of the Gerber Products Company has overhauled the baby-food maker's executive-pay system so that the bosses will get big increases in compensation only if the company prospers.
In addition, stockholders will get a much clearer picture of what management salaries will be.
Shareholders got their first glimpse of the new philosophy in the proxy statement that Gerber's chairman, Alfred A. Piergallini, distributed before last month's annual meeting.
The document detailed precisely how much he and his team earned last year -- down to the last penny of the estimated value of their stock options; it is already being viewed by shareholder groups and others as a model of corporate candor.


Ismail Ordered to Pay Penalty
RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL yesterday chose a $10,000 charity donation as his penalty for kicking an opponent during a Canadian Football League game.
Commissioner LARRY SMITH gave Ismail, who plays for the Toronto Argonauts, the choice of a $1,000 fine and one-game suspension, or the $10,000 donation.
Ismail will give the $10,000 to the Special Olympics chapter in Ontario.


Amsterdam Journal; Women Jump Into Politics, Making Quite a Splash
They keep a modest office above a women's cafe on an Amsterdam canal and things there are buzzing like the 60's: volunteers working long hours, newsletters being typed, the coffeepot puffing in the corner.
The slogans on the walls are political.
But this is no neighborhood branch of one of the Netherlands' myriad parties and movements.
The workers here are building the country's first women's political party.


Germans Deny Blame for the Currency Upheaval
The Bundesbank, Germany's powerful central bank, did not cut interest rates further today, as officials of other European countries had hoped, in effect rejecting charges that its policy was harming the European economy.
Once again, it stood by its longstanding commitment to make fighting German inflation its highest priority, even if that might adversely affect the economies of its neighbors..
Bundesbank officials issued no statement after their meeting this morning.
But other Germans defended the central bank, suggesting that other nations were seeking scapegoats to deflect attention from their own economic failures.


Review/Film -- Husbands and Wives; Fact? Fiction? It Doesn't Matter
WELL, then, what about the movie?
Woody Allen's "Husbands and Wives" is a very fine, sometimes brutal comedy about a small group of contemporary New Yorkers, each an edgy, self-analyzing achiever who goes through life without much joy, but who finds a certain number of cracked satisfactions along the way.


Raiders' Moss Is Fined
Los Angeles Raider linebacker WINSTON MOSS was fined $2,500 yesterday for a flagrant foul on Denver Broncos quarterback JOHN ELWAY in the Sept. 6 opening game, the National Football League's communications director confirmed yesterday.
"We determined that the play could have resulted in serious injury to an opposing player," the director, GREG AIELLO, said.


Pakistan Provides Legal Safeguards
To the Editor:
I share Asia Watch's concern for women in Pakistan and agree with Dorothy Q. Thomas and Patricia Grossman ("Pakistan's Women Suffer Special Abuse," letter, Aug. 20) that if there is any case of brutality against women, it must not go unpunished.
Nor must police brutality against men be condoned either, and I wonder why the writers restrict their sympathy to women in detention.


Motorman Sobs at Start Of His Trial
On the opening day of his murder trial, Robert E. Ray broke down sobbing after seeing grisly photographs of the five people who were killed when the subway train he was operating derailed last year.
Mr.
Ray, who was a motorman for the New York City Transit Authority, is charged with second-degree murder, on the ground that he showed "a depraved indifference to human life" by operating the train while intoxicated.


Crisis Hits Europeans In Their Pocketbooks
After the week's high drama and big talk, millions of Europeans faced the icy realization today that the mystifying crisis on their money markets had come down to something alarmingly simple: cancel the dinner reservation, forget the theater tickets, postpone the vacation and don't even begin to think about the new compact sedan in the dealership.
With some obvious exceptions -- Germans shielded by their invincible marks and tour operators and exporters praying for a slice of them -- many sense that this week's devaluation of the British pound, the Italian lira and the Spanish peseta will push up their inflation rates, make imports and foreign travel more expensive and bring them up short against tough options.


Pop/Jazz; At 51, a Guru Of the Free And Funky
He has declared, "Uncle Jam wants you." He has called for "one nation under a groove." And at 51 years old, he has been described as an elder statesman.
But the only party affiliation for the Clinton entourage that comes to New York City this weekend is one big dance party.
George Clinton, leader and mastermind of the P-Funk All-Stars, will bring his long-running band to the Ritz tomorrow and Sunday nights.
If past shows are any guide, the show will be a free-form jam session that strings together two decades' worth of crafty, multi-leveled, hugely influential songs.


Corrections
A map in The Metro Section yesterday and in some copies on Wednesday about the vote for the Senate nomination in individual New York counties misstated the Clinton County result.
The county supported Geraldine Ferraro.


No Headline
"In journalism, the second world in which I live, there is no better opportunity to focus on city life -- and the city that I love -- than The Daily News." -- MORTIMER B. ZUCKERMAN.  [ B4:1. ]


Taking the Pulse of the Major Economies
Like a disease that strikes those already weak with other illnesses, the turmoil in the world's currency markets afflicts nations struggling with huge budget deficits, high interest rates, shaky banking systems and lingering recessions.
Not one of the world's major industrialized economies now enjoys good health and a bright prognosis.
Diplomacy and political leadership often involve recommending tough measures only for the other nations' economic ailments.
Here, country by country, are the challenges that economists and business leaders say these nationsl face.
BRITAIN
When Harold Wilson reneged on his pledge to maintain the pound's value 25 years ago, his Government toppled.
Now John Major faces a continuing recession, high interest rates and a currency crisis that forced him to go back on his word.
GERMANY
No end in sight to the fallout from the takeover of eastern Germany, the largest leveraged buyout in history.
With expenses of $100 billion a year, Germans borrow what they refuse to pay in higher taxes.
They and their fellow Europeans pay up anyway in higher interest rates, slower growth and monetary turmoil.
FRANCE
Savvy, competitive industries and continuing growth fail to relieve high unemployment.
Still, it's politics, not economics, that dominates the agenda.
The nation's role in a unified Europe, and its sufferance of President Mitterrand, turn on a referendum this Sunday.
ITALY
Coalition governments prove incapable of clinging to office or bringing huge budget deficits under control.
State-owned industries are no more efficient than the tax collectors.
Currency traders, doubting the fight against inflation willever turn serious, continue to profit by betting against the lira.
SPAIN
Marrying into the European Community in 1986 meant marrying for better (at first) or for worse (right now).
Foreign investors and builders have backed off, production costs have risen, and jobs are harder to find.
Budget and trade deficits show the strain.
UNITED STATES
It's the morning after in America - a joyless, jobless recovery.
Government, bowed under its debts, continues to spend.
Consumers, ruling their borrowing binge and fearing for their jobs, practice austerity.
Both presidential candidates vow to reduce the budget deficit; neither dares offer a credible plan.
JAPAN
The stock market off more than 50 percent, the banks wobbling, real estate in decline - and this the healthiest among the world's major industrial economies.
A recession Japanese-style just means slow, 1 to 2 percent growth.
With help from a new, $86 billion public spending plan, Japan can recharge by next year.


The Adman Behind Every Iacocca Ad
RON DELUCA does a pretty good impersonation of Lee A. Iacocca.
"Car prices today are like a yo-yo -- up one day, down the next," he says, echoing a line from a Chrysler commercial from the early 1980's.
"America is taking a beating at the pump," he adds, leaning into the consonants as if sharpening a blade on a grindstone.
There is little mystery to Mr.
DeLuca's talent.
The former vice chairman of Bozell Inc., who is now a part-time consultant to the agency, has been on the set of all but one commercial by Mr.
Iacocca, helping the Chrysler Corporation's chairman hone the lines that have made him one of the nation's best-known corporate pitchmen.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Dr.
Pepper/Seven-Up Cos. registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission a public offering of about $375 million of senior subordinated discount notes, through BT Securities Corp. *
New York State Electric and Gas Corp. filed a shelf registration with the S.E.C. for as much as $300 million of first-mortgage bonds.
Underwriters may include Merrill Lynch and Goldman, Sachs.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a group that called for cuts in the budget deficit misidentified the group.
It is the Committee for Economic Development.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CURRENCY MARKETS STEADY
A day after Europe's system of economic coordination nearly collapsed, currency markets stabilized.
But few ideas emerged to address the roots of the crisis.
A1  THE U.S.
CAN DO LITTLE
News analysis: American policies and actions contributed relatively little to the monetary crisis, and there is little Washington can do to alleviate it, economists said.
A1


Little League Strips Title From Team In Philippines
Little League baseball stripped the Philippines of this year's world series title last night and awarded the championship to Long Beach, Calif., saying the Asian team used ineligible players.
According to a report in The Syracuse Post-Standard, the league's tournament committee decided yesterday to declare the final game of the world series to be a forfeit by Zamboanga, the team that was representing the Philippines.
Under Little League rules, a forfeit by the Philippine team ends up as a 6-0 victory for Long Beach, which was beaten, 15-4, by Zamboanga on Aug. 29 in the final game at Williamsport, Pa.


Review/Art; Looking Beneath the Surfaces of Eugene Leroy
Fame seems about to overtake Eugene Leroy.
The 82-year-old painter, who has lived most of his life in northern France near the Belgian border, has pursued his distinctive if somewhat conservative painting style for at least three decades, working for months and sometimes years on canvases whose paint surfaces are so obsessively thick that their images -- mostly nudes, heads and still lifes -- are virtually obliterated.
But it was only in the 1980's, when contemporary painting was both dominant and pluralist and figuration made its comeback, that Mr.
Leroy began to receive attention outside France and Belgium.
Since 1983, he has had several solo shows in Germany (where his work has been admired by Neo-Expressionists like Georg Baselitz and Markus Lupertz) and, since 1985, in the United States.
Last year, he was included in the Sao Paulo Bienal in Brazil.
Last summer, his paintings were given their own gallery at the ninth "Documenta" in Kassel, Germany, putting him on a par with artists like Ellsworth Kelly and Francis Bacon.


Rebel's Capture Gives Big Push To Fujimori's Political Fortunes
The political fortunes of President Alberto K. Fujimori have soared since the capture of the leader of the Shining Path rebels, pollsters and politicians here say.
The arrest of the guerrilla leader, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, appears to have rallied public support for Mr.
Fujimori, which had lagged considerably in recent weeks from the lofty levels he enjoyed immediately after seizing near-dictatorial powers in April.


For Children
'Medieval Festival at Fort Tryon Park'  Fort Washington Avenue and 191st Street Washington Heights Manhattan (212) 795-1600 Recommended for all ages Sunday
Fort Tryon Park, once home to the Wiechquaesgeck Indians, will be taken over by medieval characters on Sunday.
Jesters, jousters, tilters, maidens, minstrels, troubadours and a queen, dressed in velvet, armor and chain mail, will use the park's 67 acres for a daylong festival.
What's in it for children?
How about a joust with 24 knights (professional stuntmen) on galloping white steeds?
Milder forms of entertainment will include morris dancers, a Merlin the magician, a contortionist acrobatic show, puppets, sorcerers, jugglers and storytellers.
The festival is meant to emulate a market fair in Western Europe in the 1100's and there will be vendors selling everything from period-style leather clothes to hair decorations, along with food stalls where one can find such fare as turkey legs.
The event is sponsored by the City Department of Parks and Recreation, whose commissioner, Betsy Gotbaum, is giving up some vacation time to play the medieval queen who drops her scarf for the joust, and the Washington Heights and Inwood Development Corporation, a nonprofit community group.
Even the Cloisters, which is on the grounds of the park, will participate, with ringing bells.
No rock will be left unturned, promised Jonathan Miller, the festival's director.
"We'll have troubadours jumping out of the bushes and running after children," he said.
"We're making a special effort to encourage the fantasies of children."
The festival will be from noon to 6 P.M.; performances for children will be given every half-hour on four stages.
At 4 P.M., the 24 knights on horseback are to perform.
The festival is free, but admission of $1 a person is suggested.
The rain date is Sept. 27.
The park is accessible by taking the A train to 190th Street, or the M4 bus.
No parking is available.  'The Little Fugitive'  El Bohio Community and Cultural Center 605 East Ninth Street Lower East Side (212) 533-6835 Recommended ages: 4 and up Sunday
ZuZu, a new tabloid for children published every two months that suggests a sort of Village Voice for the 12-and-under set, is presenting "The Little Fugitive" at a family screening on Sunday.
The 1953 black-and-white film is considered a minor classic; Francois Truffaut credited it with giving momentum to French New Wave cinema.
Directed by Ray Ashley, Morris Engel and Ruth Orkin, the bittersweet story follows a 7-year-old boy named Joey around Coney Island as he plays a fugitive, more or less.
The movie made innovative use of a newly developed hand-held 35-millimeter camera, which enabled Mr.
Engel, the cameraman, to rove along with Joey and the other characters.
Indeed, the camera casts a steady artful eye on the freckled Joey's loopy forays among the Coney Island amusements.
He's a fugitive because a prank arranged by his brother, Lennie, and Lennie's friends leads Joey to believe that he shot and killed his brother. (Ketchup plays a big role in this scene.)
Joey is naive, not foolish.
With his holster slung on his small hips, he jumps on the BMT to Coney Island to escape the scene of the crime (and the electric chair, his brother's friends warn him).
Once at Coney Island, he rides the carousel, the Ferris wheel, the boats and the roller coaster and takes potshots in a shooting gallery, living out his cowboy dream.
Richie Andrusco, who played Joey, was discovered at Coney Island by the film makers.
Mr.
Engel will attend the screening to answer children's questions and a selection of vintage shorts will be shown after the 80-minute film.
Children are encouraged to bring their artwork, stories or photographs for submission to ZuZu.
Clovis Noches, a country-swing band, is to perform.
The fee for the 3 P.M. event is $2.50; children are admitted free.
Refreshments will be available; strollers are welcome.
Boat Building Workshop Y.W.C.A. of the City of New York 610 Lexington Avenue (at 53d Street) East Side (212) 735-9731 Recommended ages: 5 and up Tomorrow
At the Y.W.C.A., the boating season is not yet over, so children (accompanied by adults) have a chance to make boats tomorrow.
But not necessarily seafaring ones, even for a bathtub.
Eva Goetz-Alderstein, an art teacher, will help students make artistic boats from such materials as seashells, nutshells, pebbles, ice-cream sticks, milk cartons and fabric (with some nuts, bolts and screws thrown in).
The boats will be decorated with the kind of glitter awash on "Love Boat": sequins, rhinestones and feathers.
The 90-minute workshop, which starts at 10 A.M., is $6 a child (adults attend free).
No preregistration is required.
Children are asked to bring a secret object, like a ring or a note, to hide in their boats.


U.S. OFFERING PLAN FOR SOMALI RELIEF
Responding to complaints about the ineffectiveness of relief efforts in famine-stricken Somalia, the United States has proposed a six-point strategy for combating hunger there to the United Nations, other major aid-giving nations and private relief organizations.
The American plan, which will be discussed by these governments and relief agencies in Nairobi, Kenya, around Oct. 10, is creating tension at the United Nations, where there are fears that Washington is undercutting the new relief coordinator's office.
The General Assembly set up the office last year to insure that the organization's response to future disasters is quicker, more efficient and better coordinated.


A.T.&amp; T. SAYS IT HAS 10 MILLION UNIVERSAL CARD ACCOUNTS
A.T.&amp; T. said its Universal credit card now had more than 10 million accounts.
The company also announced that it was cutting the interest rate on the card to 14.9 percent from 15.4 percent.
The announcements, on Wednesday, held little surprise for industry analysts, who had expected some breast beating from A.T.&amp; T. to counter the widespread news coverage in the last two weeks of new credit cards from General Electric and General Motors.


Ex-R.O.T.C. Chief Accuses Clinton of Lying
A retired colonel who used to head the University of Arkansas R.O.T.C. program released a statement today saying he believed Gov.
Bill Clinton deceived him in 1969 to avoid being drafted.
The affidavit by Col.
Eugene L. Holmes of Fayetteville seemed to contradict statements made in 1978, when Mr.
Clinton was making his first bid for governor and was accused of applying to the Reserve Officer Training Corps in 1969 to obtain a draft deferment.
The colonel said then that he did not remember the case but that Mr.
Clinton had been a good attorney general and would have made a fine Army officer.


An Asterisk For Bonilla: Surgeon Finds Extra Damage
Arthroscopic surgery yesterday afternoon on Bobby Bonilla revealed more extensive damage than expected to his right-shoulder area, suggesting that Bonilla played with a considerable handicap through much of this bitter season.
Bonilla underwent the operation several hours before a Met reliever blew yet another game last night, 3-2, to St.
Louis.
Anthony Young gave up a two-run home run to Bernard Gilkey on a hanging slider with one out in the ninth inning, losing his 13th straight decision.
He wasted both a five-hit effort by starter Pete Schourek over eight-plus innings, and a two-run home run by rookie Jeff Kent in the seventh.


Democrats Scale Back Aims In Congress to Win at Polls
Eager to return to their districts to soothe angry voters, Democratic lawmakers have decided to scale back their legislative agenda.
Party leaders are plotting a strategic retreat on seven appropriation bills to forestall a new flurry of vetoes by President Bush, which would probably have forced Congress to stay in Washington through most of October.
They have also jettisoned plans to press health-care legislation and a bill guaranteeing abortion rights because Democratic members have been unable to agree on which version to support.


A German Redoubt in Chile Is Still a Charity, Court Says
The Chilean Supreme Court ruled on Wednesday that a secretive German settlement in the country's south, which has been linked to torture and exploitation of child labor, can retain its status as a charity.


Robert Briggs Bass, 39
Robert Briggs, a bass who won the Luciano Pavarotti International Vocal Competition in 1985, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old and lived in New York City.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


Grbac to Miss Game
Michigan quarterback ELVIS GRBAC, hobbled with a sprained left ankle, won't play in Saturday's game against Oklahoma State, and will be replaced by a sophomore, TODD COLLINS, Coach GARY MOELLER said yesterday.
Grbac hurt the ankle in the Wolverines' 17-17 tie at Notre Dame last week.
He has been in a cast and walking with crutches ever since. (AP)


Europe, One Way or Another
The chaos that struck European financial markets this week was inevitable.
European Community countries have linked their currencies in a system of fixed exchange rates.
But they have also jealously protected their right to pursue irreconcilable domestic policies.
Germany borrowed huge sums to pay for unification, driving up interest rates.
Britain, fighting off recession, desperately wanted to keep interest rates low.
Money flowed into marks and out of pounds, driving the pound below permissible levels.
That inherent instability invited crisis.


Walters Draws Prison Sentence
The sports agent NORBY WALTERS, accused of using cash and threats of violence to recruit college athletes as clients, was sentenced yesterday to 18 months in prison for mail fraud. (AP)


Abroad at Home; When Reality Strikes
Reality has a way of catching up with illusionist governments.
That has just happened in Britain.
Americans may look at the British story with foreboding.
Back in the 1960's Britain had a master illusionist in charge: Harold Wilson, Prime Minister in a Labor Government.
I was there, and I remember his talk about "the smack of firm government" and "the white-hot technological revolution" that would make the British economy boom.


For Rutgers, an Evening and a Victory to Remember
It was an evening of signficant firsts for Rutgers football.
For the first time in the history of their series, the Scarlet Knights tonight managed to beat Pittsburgh and the occasion was the first night game at 58-year-old Rutgers Stadium.
The final score was 21-16.
A portable lighting system illuminated the grass field and the stadium, which was almost filled by a crowd of 26,017 for a Big East Conference game televised nationally by ESPN.


Report Says Carbon Dioxide Rise May Hurt Plants
Experiments in Switzerland on a simulated rain forest suggest that the rising carbon dioxide content of the earth's atmosphere may eventually be even more damaging to plant life and crops than many scientists had believed.
In a report being published today by the journal Science, Dr.
Christian Korner and Dr.
John A. Arnone 3d of the University of Basel, Switzerland, say that although carbon dioxide is essential to the growth of plants, their experiments suggest that excessive amounts of it may actually impair plant health.


Art in Review
Hugh Steers  Richard Anderson Fine Arts 63 Thompson Street SoHo Through Oct. 3
In his second New York show, Hugh Steers infuses images of gay life with a combination of domestic tenderness and militancy that the subject has, up to now, rarely invited in figurative painting.


Review/Art; Scenes of Cruelty, Faces of Dignity
"SPAGNOLETTO tainted/ His brush with all the blood of all the sainted," wrote Byron about Jusepe de Ribera, the Spanish-born artist of the 17th century who is the subject of an absolutely stunning exhibition of about 120 works opening today at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Ribera indeed seemed to relish scenarios of mayhem and torture.
One of the most unnerving images around must be that of the executioner in the grisly "Martyrdom of St. Bartholomew," from the Pitti Palace in Florence, coddling the glistening blade with which he is about to flay his aged victim and looking out from the picture with a sadistic smile on his face.
You can feel guilty just looking back at him.


Crisis There, But Not Here  Little Impact Is Seen On Presidential Race
During the 40 years of the cold war, foreign crises often helped American Presidents win re-election, beginning with Harry S. Truman, the designated role model of the 1992 campaign.
The striking success of the Berlin airlift played a significant part in Mr.
Truman's upset victory in 1948.
Sometimes a President's failure to satisfy the nation that he was moving effectively enough to defuse a crisis abroad contributed to his defeat.
That was the case with Jimmy Carter and the hostages in Iran in 1980.


A Possible Preview of '93 Appears in Yank Outfield
The left fielder is an athletic 27-year-old.
The center fielder is a graceful 24-year-old.
The right fielder is an aggressive 26-year-old.
Together, they make up what could be the Yankee outfield for the 90's.
Roberto Kelly, Bernie Williams and Gerald Williams roamed the Yankee Stadium outfield together for the first time Wednesday night, and this latest alignment could be a harbinger of next season and beyond.


E. P. Henderson, 93, Smithsonian Curator
Edward P. Henderson, a retired curator at the Smithsonian Institution who was a leading authority on meteorites and precious metals, died Sept. 12 at Sibley Hospital in Washington.
He was 93 years old and lived in Washington.
Mr.
Henderson died of complications from a heart attack, said Thomas Harney, a spokesman for the Smithsonian.


CHRONICLE
When Congress passed a bill in 1990 prohibiting the Immigration and Naturalization Service from keeping people out of the country because of their ideology, GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ assumed that he could enter without difficulty.
After all, he had finally been granted a visa after trying to get one for 30 years.
On Sunday, Mr.
Garcia Marquez, the Nobel laureate novelist, who lives in Colombia and Mexico, learned differently.
He and his wife, MERCEDES, landed at Kennedy International Airport on an Air France flight from Paris and were hustled off to an immigration office, and then to another one.
They were detained for almost two hours without explanation.


Market Place; Woes at Telmex Not of Its Making
ON paper at least, Telefonos de Mexico ought to trade among American investors the way well-regarded companies like Pacific Telesis or BellSouth do.
Of publicly traded Latin American telephone companies, Telmex has managers who stand head and shoulders above the rest, analysts say.
The United States is the most frequently telephoned country from Mexico, and Mexico is the second most frequently telephoned country, after Canada, from the United States.
And as Congress debates the North American Free Trade Agreement, chatter on telephone lines between Mexico and the United States is bound to rise to a din.
This year, Mexico-to-United States phone conversation is expected to total some 1.5 billion minutes, or more than 2,850 years.


U.S. Hasn't Given Up Linking Genes to Crime
To the Editor:
"Faced with complaints of veiled racism, the National Institutes of Health," you report (front page, Sept. 5), "withdrew financing of an academic conference on the search for a genetic basis for criminal behavior, forcing its indefinite postponement." However, you overlook the main thrust and context of the criticism of the "Genetic Factors in Crime" conference, which was scheduled for October at the University of Maryland.
The conference was the tip of a much larger and more dangerous iceberg, the Federal "violence initiative," which remains largely untouched.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH  In a speech yesterday at a campaign rally in Enid, Okla.
"Look at the differences. My opponent and his advisers propose something quite different. Their writings refer to European models and industrial policy. And that's an academic term for letting the government pick economic winners and losers.


The Jets and 49ers Need Kicks Out of 2
Although they will be on opposite sides of the field this Sunday at Giants Stadium, Jets kicker Jason Staurovsky and 49ers kicker Mike Cofer will share the same spot when they're resting on the bench.
It's called the hot seat.
Staurovsky hit only two of six field-goal attempts as the Jets dropped their first two games.
In the opener, he had one attempt against the Falcons hit the left upright, and last week one of his attempts against the Steelers was blocked by cornerback Rod Woodson.
Cofer has made two of five attempts, and he missed a 47-yarder against the Bills last week with 54 seconds to play that could have tied the game.
Buffalo won, 34-31, dropping the 49ers to 1-1 on the season.


In Hawaii, Salvaging What the Hurricane Didn't Take
Creeping gingerly through their devastated bedroom today, the Shea children, survivors of Hurricane Iniki, came upon a familiar sight in an unfamiliar setting: their mother's hand-lettered house rules, buried among the debris of their collapsed ceiling.
They read them aloud as if discovering evidence of a long-lost era:


2 California Agencies Win in Reviews
Two Los Angeles-based agencies have been awarded large accounts after reviews.
The Hilton Hotels Corporation in Beverly Hills, Calif., named Dailey &amp; Associates to handle advertising for its Hilton and Conrad hotels, after 25 years at McCann-Erickson in Los Angeles, which, like Dailey, is owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Billings are estimated to exceed $16 million.
The review also included the incumbent; Chiat/Day/Mojo in Venice, Calif., and Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING No Antidote Against Jones  Undefeated Junior (Poison) Jones of Brooklyn retained his United States Boxing Association bantamweight title last night when he stopped Eddie Rangel of San Antonio 14 seconds into the seventh round of a scheduled 12-round bout at the Paramount.
It was a strong performance by Jones, who used Rangel for target practice, ripping combinations to the head and body from the opening bell.


Diner's Journal
Luxe, New for Fall
As the weather begins to cool, big-league restaurant competition begins to heat up in Manhattan.
One of the first major entries in the fall stakes is Luxe, at 24 East 21st Street, which opened a month ago.
The chef is Rick Laakkonen, formerly of River Cafe in Brooklyn and Petrossian in midtown Manhattan.
Luxe is a spacious, spare space done in gold tones with blue-green banquettes, votive candles on every table and soft jazz.
It's just as well that the setting does not distract, for Mr.
Laakkonen's lusty, sophisticated food requires concentration.
Among the best starters are a ragout of delicious grilled octopus and Manila clams with saffron pastina and a wonderful broth scented with lemon thyme ($9).
Oxtail and tongue terrine, lightly bound with a beefy gelatin, is a winner, too ($7).
Among the more conventional starters are tasty grilled duck sausage and confit of duck over yellow lentils ($8), and a sprightly tartar of smoked and fresh salmon ($9).
Main courses are equally gutsy.
Roasted guinea hen is served with a terrific potato cake and hen confit ($23), roasted loin of lamb is embellished with buckwheat polenta topped with fresh corn ($25), and crisply sauteed red snapper is accompanied by whipped potatoes and parsley root and a meat jus thickened with whole-grain mustard ($24).
Luxe serves lunch from 11:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Mondays through Fridays; dinner from 6:30 to 11 P.M.
Mondays through Saturdays.
Closed Sundays.
Mastercard, Visa and American Express are accepted.
Telephone: (212) 674-7900.
The Changing Scene
OPEN: Follonico, an Italian restaurant at 6 West 24th Street, Chelsea, (212) 691-6359.
The chef is Alan Tardi, who worked at Le Madri and Chanterelle. . . .
Mediterraneo, a Florentine restaurant at 1260 Second Avenue, at 66th Street, (212) 734-7407.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ethnic Voters; Cold War's End Opens Battle on Domestic Issues
The end of the cold war has provoked a new competition for the allegiance of urban ethnic voters who have supported Republicans in the last three Presidential elections.
For the last decade these conservative, fervently anti-Communist, blue-collar populations of Polish, Lithuanian, Ukrainian, Armenian, Serbian and Croatian extraction, many of whom live in the crucial swing states of the Midwest, have been among the staunchest "Reagan Democrats." With the passing of the cold war, both the Bush and Clinton camps agree that these constituencies are up for grabs.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
4.48
5.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.87
2.88
5.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.90
5.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.90
5.88
7.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.32
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.40
8.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.35
6.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about plans by International Flavors and Fragrances Inc. to buy back 2.5 million shares of its stock misstated the company's annual spending.
The company says it spends at least $60 million a year.


F.C.C. ACTS TO SPUR LOCAL COMPETITION IN PHONE SERVICES
The Federal Communications Commission voted today to expand competition in local telephone service by permitting smaller communications companies to sharply expand their use of the networks operated by the regional Bell companies and other local phone carriers.
The action is the first step toward a day when businesses and consumers will be able to choose the company that provides them local telephone service, just as they now can decide which company provides long-distance service.
For residential customers, however, such competition may lie well into the future, analysts say.


Corrections
A chart yesterday and on Tuesday listing primary election candidates misstated the party and Congressional district of Peter T. King.
He is a Republican who ran in the Third District in Nassau County.


MONETARY ACCORD SOUGHT IN EUROPE BUT CRISIS REMAINS
A day after the near-collapse of Europe's system of economic coordination, the currency markets stabilized today and European officials reiterated their pledges to seek closer monetary cooperation.
But as these officials wait uneasily for France's vote on the European unification treaty on Sunday, few ideas have emerged to solve the problem that pushed the system into crisis in the first place: By keeping its interest rates high to hold down inflation as it borrows huge sums to pay for its own unification, Germany has made it increasingly difficult for other nations to stimulate their economies out of prolonged slumps.
Limits to Coordination


COMPANY NEWS
CHARTER ONE FINANCIAL INC., Cleveland, the holding company for the First Federal Savings Bank, announced the completion of the merger of First American Bancorp, the holding company for First American Savings Bank, into a wholly owned subsidiary of Charter One Financial Inc.
MCDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP., St.
Louis, changed its retirement plan to allow nonunion salaried employees who have been laid off since Jan. 1, 1990, to receive a substantially larger pension benefit when they turn 55.


James Glanville, General Partner In Lazard Freres, Is Dead at 69
James W. Glanville, a Wall Street investment banker and general partner in the firm of Lazard Freres &amp; Company, died on Wednesday at Methodist Hospital in Houston.
A former resident of Darien, Conn., he was 69 years old and lived in Houston.
He died of injuries suffered in a recent automobile accident, his family said.


Inflation Isn't Down
To the Editor:
President Bush's repeated statement that inflation is down is especially irritating to those of us who live on retirement incomes.
He means to say, of course, that the rate of inflation is down.
"Inflation is down" is an oxymoron, a contradiction in terms.
Inflation is ever present and continues to erode the purchasing power of the dollar for all of us.


Whoppers by Candlelight: Fast Food Slows Down a Bit
In a break with its fast-food past, the Burger King Corporation said yesterday that it would begin using waiters to serve dinner at tables bedecked with tablecloths and napkin rings.
And a new menu will feature higher-priced items other than burgers.
The company, a unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. of Britain, said some of its 5,700 restaurants in the United States would also feature dinner music and soft lighting.


Zenith Data's Air Force Pact Is Challenged by Compuadd
The Compuadd Corporation filed a protest today that seeks to halt a $740 million Air Force computer contract awarded last week to the Zenith Data Systems Corporation.
The contract, known as Desktop IV, was originally awarded in November to Compuadd, a private company based here, and Sysorex Information Systems Inc. of Falls Church, Va.
But the initial award was rescinded after Zenith Data and other losing bidders protested that the Air Force had disqualified all but the two eventual winners on technical grounds.


TV Weekend; Boy Sues for the Right to Pick His Own Parents
If you've been wondering what Patrick J. Buchanan was talking about last month when he told the Republican National Convention that Hillary Clinton believes that 12-year-olds should have the right to sue their parents, you can get the details tonight in an affecting report that takes up most of "20/20."
The issue, as Barbara Walters phrases it, is a novel one: "If a child claims he's been abused, abandoned or neglected by his parents, can he take matters into his own hands?" She goes on to interview all the principals in a case that has already set legal precedent: a Florida boy is seeking a divorce from his parents so that he can be adopted by his foster parents.
The trial starts in Florida next week.


Hoping to Run With a Younger Crowd at OTB
A long way from the thundering hooves of the thoroughbreds they love, Mario and Helen Maurizio regularly make do with the next best thing: two seats and a table strategically placed between betting windows and closed-circuit television sets wired to the action.
After years of playing the horses, the sport of kings still races the Maurizios' hearts as it confounds their horse sense.
On almost every morning, Monday through Friday, the 58-year-old bookstore security guard and his 49-year-old wife travel the 40 blocks by city bus from their Yorkville home to Inside Track, a betting parlor one floor above the hustle of midtown Manhattan.
A Graying Foundation
Situated on Second Avenue between 53d and 54th streets, Inside Track is the most profitable of the New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation's 95 branches, taking in more than $113,000 in government-sanctioned wagers each day.
Much of that take, which is at least twice the average of most of the city's other legal betting parlors, is built on a graying foundation of regular patrons like the Maurizios.
A recent survey conducted by OTB found that in the majority of the city's betting branches in 1991, 68.5 percent of the patrons were over 45.
That so many of OTB's best customers are older worries its top executives, especially since OTB had its smallest annual profit in history this year.
"We are spending energy now working to get a new age bracket of people coming in our branches," said David L. Vaughn, executive vice president of the corporation.
"Right now we don't gear our ads and promotions for those folks between the ages of 25 and 44."
That, Mr. Vaughn promised, will soon change.
Current plans, he said, include upbeat campaigns to attract younger people to betting branches.
The parlors themselves are being renovated with brighter and more spacious interiors, seating, snack foods and an essential feature missing in many of the city's betting establishments: bathrooms.
Other plans include charity parties organized around offtrack betting, celebrity appearances in parlors and seminars intended to teach a new generation how to handicap horses.
As it is, Inside Track on Second Avenue is compact, with a capacity of 150.
It has a small restaurant in the front and a glass-roofed lounge in the rear.
Between those areas is a narrow section dominated by four bulletproof betting windows.
Everywhere there is wood paneling and walls painted the deep green of Las Vegas felt.
At a glance, with its dozens of television sets mounted high and angled down, Inside Track has the look and feel of a retro-fitted disco, track lights and all. 'A Millionaires' Club'
Many of the customers don't like to talk to strangers.
Most that would talk to a reporter did so only on the condition that their names not be used.
A regular, an 80-year-old man whose thin gray mustache appeared even thinner with the aid of black eyeliner, said he prefers to go to Inside Track rather than to an actual race track.
"When you get a certain age, it's a hassle to get there," he said.
But for the regulars, "it's like a millionaires' club around here," said Mrs.
Maurizio, a large-framed woman who wears her hair pulled and tied on top of her head like a bright, blond mushroom cloud.
"It's a very social atmosphere."
Unlike her husband, who must leave the parlor for his job at 4 P.M., Mrs.
Maurizio usually stays, drinks coffee, smokes cigarettes and places their bets until the last race is over, at about 5 P.M.
She does not stay for the harness racing that usually begins an hour later.
"It's a different crowd," she said, without looking up from her racing forms.
Nearly everyone else in the branch during the day seems to know the Maurizios, and the regulars pass by their table to pay them regards.
The group ranges from those favoring jeans and sneakers to the elegantly dressed elderly in well-tailored suits, handmade silk ties and spit-polished, expensive leather shoes.
House rules at Inside Track, one of two of OTB's showcase branches, require men to wear jackets and everyone to pay a $5 admission.
The regulars say they like it because it keeps "the element" out, the homeless, alcoholics and pickpockets they say spoil many of the regular branches.
Aging customers are not OTB's only problem.
The recession has also served to dampen the the gaming industry.
OTB officials say that all types of gambling have been hurt by people with less discretionary income to wager, on horses or at blackjack tables.
Overall, the agency took in $886.5 million in the fiscal year 1992, which ended on June 30.
That was down from the previous take, or handle, of $920.8 million in 1991 and $959.2 million in 1990.
"That is a fact of life," Mr.
Vaughn said.
"What we have to do is concentrate on getting new dollars, new people, new interests."
Jerry McKeon, president of the New York Racing Association, a private nonprofit corporation that owns and operates horse-racing tracks in New York State, agreed that gambling has been hurt by the poor economy.
But he placed more of the blame for OTB's tumbling revenues on the surcharges the agency puts on betting.
"The main reason is not the recession, it's the cost of wagering at offtrack operations," he said, noting that 18 cents out of every dollar wagered at the track is taken out for taxes, expenses and the racing industry, while 23 cents is taken out of every dollar wagered in an offtrack parlor.
A City Surcharge
The additional 5 cents goes for a surcharge to the city from offtrack betting, said Marjorie W. Longley, a spokeswoman.
"That is money that goes directly to the city," she said.
"It cannot be touched by OTB."
Last fiscal year the surchange raised $25.7 million that went into the city's general fund, Ms.
Longley said.
Inside Track, one of two branches that charge admission and are thus permitted to forgo the surcharge, is among the betting parlors that OTB plans to upgrade.
Plans are to move Inside Track by the first of next year to a more spacious location a block south on Second Avenue, Ms.
Longley said.
"Construction is going to begin in about three weeks," she said.
In the meantime, the patrons of Inside Track continue to pack the place every day.
On each of those days they bet an average of $600 and yell every 30 minutes for their horses in an atonal chorus of English, Spanish, Chinese, Italian, Greek and Polish.
Losers whisper curses as they rip and discard their losing betting tickets.
"Nobody wins at horses," said Mr.
Maurizio, who began betting on horses when he was 14 years old, growing up in Queens.
"Nobody has ever beaten the horses."
While she always aims to win, Mrs.
Maurizio said, she also strives to be a gracious loser.
The Action at Belmont
Earlier this week, the Maurizios joined the action at Belmont at Inside Track through closed-circuit "simulcasting."
Also there was Bob Lassaw, who looked like a tall Bob Costas dressed in a straw-colored sports coat, neatly pressed jeans and an open-collar cotton shirt.
Said by many to be the best handicapper in the house, he was flanked by bettors who hung on his every word.
Cool and professional, he talked quietly while studying the stream of racing information on the parlor's various screens and in newspapers piled in his lap.
Once the bets were made, he returned to his seat, chatting quietly until the parlor's shades were automatically drawn and the house lights dimmed, seconds before each race.
With the sound of the starting gate and the sight of horses charging for the rail shown on the lounge's oversize projection television, the opening seconds of the race drew Mr.
Lassaw slowly to his feet.
A few more seconds into the race and he was rocking on the soles of his expensive sneakers.
By the time the horses nosed their way to the finish wire, pockets of otherwise calm and civilized people like Mr.
Lassaw were bouncing, pacing, pleading and snapping their fingers at the screens in loud incantations of hope mixed with luck.
"It's an interesting crew that comes here," said Mr.
Lassaw, 40 years old, who says he tries to make a living by betting the horses.
"There's a bunch of wound-up cookies here."
As he spoke, the winners collected their money.
The losers sharpened their pencils and the parlor suddenly fell as silent as a college library.
Heads well versed in the physics of horse flesh on track sod concentrated once again.
"I can pick the best horse in every race," Mario Maurizio said philosophically.
"But that doesn't mean it's going to win."


Review/Film; Youth, Love and a Place of One's Own
"Does everybody go through this?" asks a voice heard at the end of "Singles," Cameron Crowe's buoyant, utterly charming look at a small sample of Seattle's young, unmarried population.
"Nah," comes the answer.
"I think just us."
Since that is so patently untrue, and since "Singles" speaks so wryly to all the fun and trouble of being newly independent in one's early 20's, Mr.
Crowe has a lot to work with.
He also has an uncanny ear for the ways in which hip, humorous, vastly likable young characters might express themselves, with a jokey casualness that's a lot more substantial than it sounds.


Gary Clark Exonerated
Prosecutors yesterday dropped auto theft and other charges against Washington Redskins wide receiver GARY CLARK.
The Montgomery County (Md.) State's Attorney's Office released a statement saying it believed that if the case went to trial, Clark would be acquitted of the charges against him.
Montgomery County Circuit Court Judge C. J. VAUGHEY JR.  then granted the prosecutor's request to drop the charges.


Steelers Waive Lipps
LOUIS LIPPS, a Pro Bowl selection in his first two National Football League seasons and the second-leading receiver in Pittsburgh Steelers history, was waived yesterday, ending his two-month contract impasse.
TOM DONAHOE, the Steelers' director of football operations, refused to confirm Lipps's departure, but Lipps said the team told him he was released.


U.N. Gains Pact to Fly Relief to Sudan
As concern grows about the plight of civilians cut off from food and medicine in the war-ravaged southern Sudan, a senior United Nations official said today that he had won agreement from both sides in the civil war for relief flights to 20 places in the region.
The official, Jan Eliasson, said Government officials and rebel representatives had promised not to interfere with flights of food, medicine and other relief supplies into 9 rebel-held towns and 11 Government-held towns, including the regional centers of Malakal and Wau.


Victim's Past Is at Issue In Rape Case
Opposing lawyers in the trial of four Glen Ridge, N.J., men charged with sexually assaulting a mildly retarded friend in early 1989 argued today over what elements in the woman's sexual history and gynecology records are admissible as evidence.
The presiding judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, reserved judgment on the controversial issue after a three-hour closed hearing in State Superior Court here.
His ruling is expected tomorrow or early Monday.
Jury selection is scheduled to start Monday afternoon.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  ZUCKERMAN NEAR DAILY NEWS DEAL
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, a real estate developer and owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, became the all-but-assured new owner of the bankrupt Daily News, as the paper's board endorsed his proposal and a negotiating logjam was broken with the Newspaper Guild, the only union that had yet to endorse his bid to acquire the paper.
A1.
Zuckerman's controversial career.
B4.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Paints Clinton as 'Social Engineer'
President Bush delivered a slashing assault on Gov.
Bill Clinton's economic policies today, painting his rival as a "social engineer" whose proposed tax and spending increases threaten the life styles and freedoms of Middle America.
Unleashing some of the most pointed language of his campaign, Mr.
Bush cast the Democratic Presidential nominee as an Oxford-educated liberal bent on reviving big-government theories that have failed in capitals "from Warsaw to Prague to Moscow."


U.S. Hasn't Given Up Linking Genes to Crime; How We Inspired Nazis
To the Editor:
Whatever the merits of the National Institutes of Health decision to withdraw funds for an academic conference on the genetic basis of crime (front page, Sept. 5), the havoc wrought by "criminal genes" theories in 20th-century United States history is worth recalling.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Fordham
The Rams' first Patriot League victory will be within reach tomorrow in a home game at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx against Colgate, provided Conrad Olear does not fall on his face.
Fordham's new quarterback passed his first test in the last-minute 2-point loss to Lehigh and earned an accolade from Coach Larry Glueck, who said, "Conrad proved he's a real leader, and he did a lot of good things."
He had 17 completions in 25 attempts for 173 yards, one touchdown and no interceptions.
Tailback Scott Helverson carried 32 times for 90 yards.


At the Bar; When a Convict Says His Lawyer Was Too Sick, a Federal Appeal Panel Replies, in Effect, Too Bad.
On one level, this is a story about a man implicated in a mob rub-out, about a lawyer who is elderly and unsteady on his feet, and about 13 Federal judges of differing political provenance.
On another, it is about whether a lawyer who is too sick to defend himself can defend another man accused of murder.
It is also about how, for all the talk about strict constructionism, judges who construe some things narrowly can construe others very broadly, sometimes in the same case.


CHRONICLE
Barbara Seaman took her sister Jeri Drucker; Barb Burg went with her brother, Harry Burg; Julia Knickerbocker invited her sisters, Miranda de Kay and Suzanne Colt, and Arthur Kramer met up with his brother, Larry Kramer.
Through it all, there was nary a hint of sibling rivalry.
The occasion was a cocktail party on Tuesday for FRANCINE KLAGSBRUN to celebrate the publication by Bantam of her new book, "Mixed Feelings: Love, Hate, Rivalry and Reconciliation Among Brothers and Sisters."


No Inquiry in Heights Case
The United States Attorney in Manhattan has declined to investigate whether grand-jury secrecy laws were violated after a panel cleared a police officer in the killing of Jose Garcia, whose death touched off several nights of disturbances in Washington Heights.
United States Attorney Otto G. Obermaier told Santo Alessi, the lawyer representing Mr.
Garcia's family, that the charge did not fall under his jurisdiction.
Mr.
Alessi had asked Mr.
Obermaier to determine whether a leak last week of the grand jury decision several days before public announcement violated secrecy laws.


Art in Review
Lucy Barber  First Street Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Sept. 26
The kind of brushy, academic landscape painting that Lucy Barber offers in her first solo show gets relatively little attention these days, though when deftly executed and imaginatively inflected, as it is sometimes here, it can give much pleasure.


Review/Film; Two Brothers in the Bronx On a Round of Emptiness
"Jumpin' at the Boneyard," Jeff Stanzler's first feature, is a small, grim, sometimes brutal drama about two brothers from the Bronx, each of whom is equally dispossessed but in different ways.
Manny (Tim Roth) is divorced, out of work and in deep depression.
The only thing that keeps him going is hatred for his recently deceased father and adoration of his mother.
Danny (Alexis Arquette), the younger brother, is a crack addict.
He's sick and fearful of everything and everybody, sustained at life's edge by his girlfriend, Jeanette (Danitra Vance), who supplies their two habits by working as a hooker.


Peter C. Schmeisser Journalist, 27
Peter Christian Schmeisser, a freelance journalist, died Aug. 10 at his home in Potomac, Md.
He was 27 years old.
Mr.
Schmeisser died of complications from the H.I.V. virus, which he received during a blood transfusion related to his hemophilia, said Kim Herron, a family friend.


South African to Run
The New York City Marathon, long considered one of the world's leading international marathons, will include its first South African runner in this year's race on Nov. 1.
The New York Road Runners Club, which sponsors the race, said that WILLIE MTOLO has entered as his country's lone representative in the race.


On My Mind; The Drug Papers
On my table are two documents that tell more about a critical American problem than the speeches of the Presidential candidates do.
And they tell something, too much, about how Americans deal with the problem.
One paper is another of those appeals for contributions to help fight addiction, from an infested neighborhood.
Seventy-five percent of local crime is drug- or alcohol-connected.
Suicides, arrests, a mother prostituting her children for drug money -- that kind of thing you've heard a hundred times.


Review/Theater; Remembering Home as the Present Gets Bleaker
Any list of America's living literary wonders must include Horton Foote, whose "Roads to Home" opened the Lamb's Theater Company season last night.
Mr.
Foote's prolific playwriting career stretches back to the halcyon Broadway of half a century ago.
His parallel service to Hollywood has earned him a couple of Oscars ("To Kill a Mockingbird," "Tender Mercies") as well as a latter-day sideline in hard-scrabble independent film making ("1918," "On Valentine's Day").
And here Mr.
Foote is now, in a small playhouse in the shadows of the Broadway behemoths, directing his own script, meticulously tending to a vision that has deepened but not wavered throughout his long career.
"The Roads to Home," a trilogy of related one-act plays first seen briefly Off Off Broadway a decade ago, is modest Foote but echt Foote.
The setting is Texas.
The time is long ago (the 1920's).
The lives on display are unexceptional, undramatic.
And just when the audience is set to relax into an elegiac reverie that might resemble nostalgia, the playwright finds a way to make his characters' inner turmoil so ferociously vivid it leaps beyond their specific time and place to become our own.


Paul Taylor, 35, Dies; Australian Art Critic
Paul Taylor, an Australian art critic, journalist and editor known for his championing of popular culture and his critical profiles of art world personalities, died yesterday at the Royal Melbourne Hospital in Melbourne, Australia.
He was 35 years old and had lived in Manhattan from 1984 until this month, when he returned to Melbourne.
Mr.
Taylor died of AIDS-related lymphoma, said his companion, David E. Johnson of Manhattan.


Slaney to Face Budd-Pieterse
MARY DECKER-SLANEY of the United States will race against ZOLA BUDD-PIETERSE of South Africa on Oct. 16 in the Sydney Mile in Australia, the first meeting between the two in a major international event since the 1984 Olympics. (AP)


New York's Finest Mob
The New York City police union members who rioted at City Hall on Wednesday disgraced themselves and gravely abused the trust of the public they are sworn to serve.
The demonstrators carried posters attacking Mayor David Dinkins in crudely racial, sometimes obscene terms.
Some of them plunged through barricades to rush the doors of City Hall; others massed to block traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge.
As alcohol increased the rowdiness, angry cops roughed up reporters and trampled parked cars.


Herbal Ambassadors Discuss Natural Medicine
Hortense Robinson, a midwife and healer from Belize, stood beneath a banana tree in the Enid Haupt Conservatory of the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx this week, explaining that its root staunches the hemorrhaging that can sometimes take the life of a woman who has just given birth.
Just wash the root, grate it and squeeze out the juice, she said.
Give the woman one tablespoon.
If the bleeding doesn't stop in a few minutes -- hemorrhaging can be fatal -- give her another tablespoon.


Bronx Ex-Prosecutor Charged With Bribing Witnesses to Help a Drug Gang
A former Bronx prosecutor was arrested yesterday on charges of using bribery and intimidation to turn his private law practice into a criminal enterprise.
According to state and Federal charges, he bribed and threatened witnesses, tried to bribe a court official and once gave the name of a prosecution witness to a drug gang.
That witness, who had seen four men killed, was subsequently beaten and had a shotgun placed in his mouth and later refused to testify, the charges said.


Crazed Brutality: A Scene From Bosnia's Dirty War
Even by the standards of a dirty war, the scene here is one of horror.
Four bodies, charred and putrid, lie sprawled beside overturned cars, scraps of clothing and broken glass.
The blackened skull from another burned corpse has fallen from a vehicle onto the road.
The attack on a convoy of Serbian civilians happened almost three weeks ago.
But because it took place in a still fiercely contested no-man's land between the Muslim-dominated town of Gorazde and the Serbian-held town of Rogatica, it has previously proved impossible for reporters to reach the area or for the road to be cleared.


PROSECUTOR SEES HOUSE VIOLATIONS
A Federal grand jury investigating the House post office has been told that a member of Congress cashed at least one campaign check worth hundreds of dollars there in violation of Federal laws and House rules, a person involved in the case said today.
A Federal prosecutor also revealed today that a manager at the post office had cashed 130 large personal and campaign checks totaling $20,654.
Another person involved in the case, who insisted on not being identified, said that most of those checks had been written by the post office's former chief of staff, Joanna G. O'Rourke, but that at least one check for several hundred dollars had been written by a member of Congress and drawn on a campaign account.
The member was not identified.


North Korea's A-Bomb Plans Seem Less Perilous
President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea said today that while he remained suspicious of North Korea's nuclear intentions, he had become convinced that its "determination to develop nuclear weapons has become weaker."
Mr.
Roh's comments marked a reversal from predictions only five months ago by the Director of Central Intelligence, Robert M. Gates, and other United States and Korean officials that North Korea could be only months way from building an atomic weapon.


Hartmarx Rids Itself Of Retail Unit
The Hartmarx Corporation yesterday announced the sale of its battered retail operations, ridding itself of a business that was strangling its healthy manufacturing operations.
Hartmarx Specialty Stores Inc., which operated 185 specialty stores like Wallachs, Raleighs and Leopold Price &amp; Rolle, among others, was sold for a $43 million note to HSSA Group Ltd., a company formed to purchase the stores.
HSSA Group is affiliated with Maurice L. Rothschild &amp; Company, a Chicago investment firm.


Hunt for Police Commissioner Is Down to 4 Names
With tensions high between City Hall and rank-and-file police officers, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he has narrowed the list of candidates for Police Commissioner to four people and plans to begin interviewing them next week.
Mr.
Dinkins would not say who was on the list of finalists, although he said one is a woman.
"We're very close," Mr.
Dinkins said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Turmoil in Europe
Germany's Chancellor exchanged sharp criticisms with British leaders over whether high German rates had caused this week's chaos in the currency markets.
But Mr.
Kohl also renewed his pledge to work for European economic and political unity.  [ Page 1. ]  The crisis has brought Chancellor Kohl harsh criticism from abroad while putting new pressure on him at home.  [ 36. ]
American and British officials teamed up to put pressure on Germany's central bank to cut rates.
Finance ministers of the leading industrial nations are set to meet in Washington today.  [ 1. ]


French Leaders Pitch Unity
Saying their companies' prosperity rests on approval of a european unification treaty, executives are vigorously promoting a yes vote.


Magna International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Penguins Re-sign Jagr
The Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins signed right wing JAROMIR JAGRto a long-term contract yesterday.
Terms were not announced, but Jagr was said to be seeking $1 million a season -- about twice what he made under his old contract, which still had three years remaining.


3 Indicted In Georgia B.C.C.I. Case
A Federal grand jury in Atlanta has indicted three former top executives of the National Bank of Georgia, charging that they conspired to hand control of the bank over to a Middle Eastern financial empire that had secretly sought a foothold in the United States.
The indictment, handed up on Thursday, accused the bank's former controller, William W. Batastini, of receiving an illegal $95,000 payment from the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which has been accused of using bribery, fraud and political influence to seize control of American financial institutions.
In exchange for the money, the indictment charges, Mr.
Batistini helped pave the way for First American Bankshares Inc., a Washington company secretly controlled by B.C.C.I., to buy the National Bank of Georgia.


Managua Journal; After Hurricanes and Fighting, a Cathedral Is Born
Some Nicaraguans complain that it looks like a mosque, others say a giant egg carton, but its defenders say it will be a cathedral for the 21st century, something to help this deeply wounded nation begin to recover both spiritually and physically.
The new Roman Catholic sanctuary, rising on 26 acres several miles south of what used to be downtown Managua, will be by far the most impressive building in a country regularly devastated by earthquakes, hurricanes and war.


Clinton Keeping Lead in the Polls
Gov.
Bill Clinton continues to lead President Bush in the first round of polls that have been taken after Labor Day, the traditional start of the fall campaign.
The polls show greater uniformity than those taken after the Republican Convention in late August and early September.


Arum Cancels Bout
The promoter BOB ARUM said an elbow injury to IRAN BARKLEY, the International Boxing Federation supermiddleweight champion, has forced the cancellation of the Oct. 16 title bout against DOUG DeWITT in Beijing.
Arum denied that the cancellation had anything to do with reports that a Chinese firm was charging that it had been swindled out of millions of dollars in a joint venture with the Government and Arum to stage the fight.


KOHL URGES EUROPE TO MEET IN EFFORT TO PRESERVE UNITY
Chancellor Helmut Kohl exchanged sharp criticisms with British leaders today over whether high German interest rates caused the turmoil in currency markets this week.
But Mr.
Kohl renewed his pledge to work with Britain and other European nations for economic and political unity.
After a week in which the European system of monetary coordination seemed headed toward collapse, Mr.
Kohl met Prime Minister Giuliano Amato of Italy and called for a summit meeting of European leaders to assess the prospects for cooperation.


LTX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


At Woody Allen Opening, Devotees and the Curious
Deep in the heart of Woody country, at the Beekman Theater on the Upper East Side, the line for "Husbands and Wives" formed early.
The first showing of the film's opening day, yesterday, was scheduled for 11 A.M.
Charles Jukovsky of Brooklyn got there first, at 9:30.
That was no surprise.
He has made a virtual profession of buying the first ticket on opening day for films and Broadway plays.
Thirty minutes later Mr.
Jukovsky was joined by Carole Hahn and Nickie Van Winkle, die-hard Woody Allen fans, who sat down on the sidewalk and proceeded to wait as the line began to lengthen, snaking around the corner of 66th Street.


Executive Changes
ARCS MORTGAGE INC., Calabasas, Calif., a banking affiliate of Bank of New York, named Glenn J. Ohl vice president and chief financial officer.
BROTHER INTERNATIONAL CORP., Somerset, N.J., a manufacturer of electronic typewriters and word processors and distributor of automated office, industrial and home electronics products, named Patrick T. Gilmore president.


Iona Appliances reports earnings for Year to June 30


IPS Health Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Theater; Irish Reminiscences: Church, Bog and Pub
Celt and Saxon have been at war off and on for more than 1,500 years now, but never have the sporadic outbreaks of bloodshed so riven the peoples of Ireland and Britain as the two of this century: the one that began with the Easter Rebellion of 1916 and led to the creation of the Irish Free State, and the one that is still going on today in Ulster, London and points in between.
In a riveting account of one young man's turn at the patriot games, Chris O'Neill ends his one-man show "Frankly Brendan" by transforming a reading of Frank O'Connor's short story "Guests of the Nation" into a fully realized one-act play that is at once powerful and poignant.


Turf Battles Are Beginning Over Atlanta Olympics
The Olympic flag arrived in the heart of the South today, two years to the day after Atlanta was designated as the surprise host for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games.
But even before the flag got here something else did: a recognition that having sold the world a vision of itself as an amicable, multiracial, civil rights capital in a world increasingly racked by racial and ethnic strife, Atlanta now has to live up to it.


The Solarz Difference
It is difficult to believe that Stephen Solarz, New York City's most high-profile Representative, is through with politics after his loss in the Democratic primary to Nydia Velazquez.
With his old Brooklyn district carved up by redistricting, Mr.
Solarz sought a 10th term in a new district designed to empower Hispanic voters.
But ethnicity, anti-incumbency and the House Bank scandal -- Mr.
Solarz wrote 743 overdrafts -- combined to bring down a legislator with exceptional abilities who at 50 has yet to achieve his potential.
In a time when some Congressmen complain they can do nothing, Mr.
Solarz showed what a single energetic lawmaker can accomplish.
Foreign policy was his main interest, so he became a member or chairman of key subcommittees.
Using this leverage, he played a catalytic role in ending wars in Cambodia and Central America, and hurrying the end of apartheid in South Africa and of the Marcos dictatorship in the Philippines.
He took on causes of high importance but little visibility, like halting the spread of nuclear weapons to Pakistan.


Bradlees Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15


Adding an Extra Pair of Eyes on School Buses, to Help Insure Safety
In one of her first mornings as a school bus monitor, Peggy Brady retrieved a lost backpack, tended to a bloody nose and comforted a little girl who wasn't yet sold on this kindergarten business.
But her real purpose was saving lives.


Ferraro Talks to Abrams. That's About It for Now.
More than 48 hours after he claimed victory in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate, Attorney General Robert Abrams finally spoke yesterday with the woman he says he defeated, Geraldine A. Ferraro.
But by accounts from both sides, Ms.
Ferraro mainly listened -- and continued to decline to concede the race.
The best the Abrams campaign could do was release word that Mr.
Abrams had telephoned Ms.
Ferraro and that she had said she would take his request for her help in his campaign against Alfonse M. D'Amato "under advisement."


Roger Wagner, 78, Founder and Leader Of 2 Choral Groups
Roger Wagner, the founder of the Roger Wagner Chorale and the Los Angeles Master Chorale, died on Thursday while traveling in France.
He was 78 years old and lived in Westlake, Calif.
He died of cancer, said Libby Huebner, a publicity agent for the Master Chorale.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; In Bid for Attention, Weather Wins
It was George and Bill versus Andrew and Iniki. The real windstorms won.
The Presidential candidates have been having a hard time competing against a couple of hurricanes for news time in recent days.
Indeed, only Bill Clinton's draft record and George Bush's refusal to attend the first scheduled Presidential debate have prevented the contest from turning into a total rout.


U.S. Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year May 31


Editorial Notebook; Three Women
"The new Woody Allen movie," the stranger standing next to me in the elevator replied when asked if she'd seen any good movies lately.
"God, but it made me laugh."
"Strange," I thought to myself. "It made me cry."
Seeing "Husbands and Wives" at its first New York screening brought with it the kind of attention accorded witnesses at a high-profile execution.
But then "Husbands and Wives" has been perceived as a kind of high-profile execution: the movie in which Mia Farrow gets the ax.


Casino America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore TODAY: 1:30 P.M., CNN "News Maker Saturday"  Vice President Quayle SUNDAY: 10:30 A.M., NBC (Channel 4) "Meet The Press."


Iran Kurdish Leader Among 4 Killed in Berlin
Masked gunmen burst into a Berlin restaurant late Thursday night and killed four men, including a leading Kurdish politician from Iran.
Among the victims was Sadegh Sharafkandi, 54 years old, secretary general of the Iranian Democratic Party of Kurdistan.
He took over the leadership of the party after his predecessor was slain in Vienna in 1989.


Jets Keep On Adding To List of Problems
One more question mark was cast over the Jets' kicking game today when punter Louie Aguiar missed practice and stayed home with a virus, raising the possibility that Jason Staurovsky -- already struggling with his place-kicking -- would be called on to do double duty in the game against the 49ers on Sunday.
Staurovsky, who beat out Raul Allegre for the place-kicking job in the preseason, has converted only two of six field-goal attempts since the regular season began.
If necessary, he said today, he will do the punting and the place-kicking in the home opener in the Meadowlands.


Dairy Mart Convenience reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Winds of Change Blow, and Europe's Governments Feel the Chill
The storm buffeting Europe is a strong one, but it has not yet uprooted a government or tossed a leader aside.
The leaders on the Continent all are buttoning up, however, as the vote on European union approaches.
Helmut Kohl
Chancellor of Germany
Helmut Kohl was already on the defensive before the European currency crisis.
Attacks on foreigners in Germany had raised the specter of Nazism and forced Mr.
Kohl to defend his country's commitment to democracy.
Many Germans believe he botched the unification process, promising too much and failing to grasp the depth of anger in the east.
And his drive for a fully united Europe, his cherished goal, seems to be stumbling.


In Trading Cards, A New Ball Game
For years, both children and adults have eagerly swapped trading cards featuring their favorite baseball or football stars.
But now, collectors are puzzling over some different types of trades.
Is the Incredible Hulk worth two or three Spider-Man cards?
Or which are more valuable, cards about the Little Mermaid, Toxic Crusaders or Operation Desert Storm?


Geac Computer reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Religion Notes
Jewry and Wounded Knee
One never knows where a sermon will lead.
Sometimes it can be the beginning of a nap and sometimes it can be the beginning of a journey.


Pier 1 Imports reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Hunt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Hope Is Quiet in Small Haitian Town
In the narrow, unpaved streets of this small oceanside town, people don't dare openly express hope for the return of the overthrown President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In fact, after a yearlong spree of violence and intimidation by soldiers in the wake of Father Aristide's overthrow last September, most people seem to have decided that it is best to express as little of anything to outsiders as possible.


American Building Maintenance reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


TriCare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Frost Leads by 3
David Frost shot a two-under-par 68 in the wind yesterday and extended his lead to three strokes after two rounds of the Hardee's Golf Classic in Coal Valley, Ill.
Frost had a 10-under 130 total, and three were at 133: Paul Azinger (68), Loren Roberts (66) and Tom Lehman (69). (AP) Morgan Shoots 63: Senior golfer Walter Morgan had seven birdies and an eagle for a tournament-record nine-under-par 63 and took a two-shot lead after one rainy round of the GTE North Classic in Indianapolis.
Kermit Zarley was at 65, one shot ahead of Raymond Floyd and Dave Hill. (AP) Rookie Tied for Lead: Helen Alfredsson, an L.P.G.A. rookie, shot a four-under-par 68 and shared the second-round lead of the Safeco Classic in Kent, Wash.
Michelle McGann (66) and Colleen Walker (67) joined the Swede at five-under 139. (AP) TENNIS Lendl and Costa Upset
Ivan Lendl and Carlos Costa, the top-seeded players, yesterday lost in the quarterfinals of the Bordeaux Passing Shot in France.
Cedric Pioline upset No. 1 Lendl, 7-5, 6-4, by breaking his serve in the final game of each set.
Andrei Medvedev won the last three points of each tie breaker to beat No. 2 Costa, 7-6 (8-6), 7-6 (8-6). (AP)


HRE Properties reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Microlog Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.00
5.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.86
2.87
5.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.91
5.24
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.92
5.90
7.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.32
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.38
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.34
6.92
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Dinkins Account Of Slurs by Police
Mayor Dinkins said yesterday that the acts of rowdy officers at a demonstration reminded him of times he was verbally abused in racial terms by the police as a young man.


Out at Home


First Guardian Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After the Police Riot, a Subway Fight
According to witnesses on the subway train, the first young man tripped on the second young man's foot.
They exchanged words, then blows.
The second man suffered a deep razor wound to his face.
His friends jumped on the first man and beat him severely, fracturing his jaw.
Sadly enough, such a confrontation would not normally attract more than passing notice in New York these days.
But in this case it engages powerful forces that threaten the whole city.
Only a swift and fair conclusion to the investigations now under way can reassure the public.


Los Angeles Prosecutor Bows Out of the Spotlight
Los Angeles County's District Attorney, Ira Reiner, who failed to win convictions in the beating of Rodney G. King and other high-profile cases and who faced long odds in his bid for a third term, pulled out of the race today, saying he did not have the stomach for a negative campaign.
Mr.
Reiner, a 56-year-old Democrat, said he had called today to congratulate his opponent, Gilbert L. Garcetti, a former top aide who is now a bitter personal rival and who defeated him in a nonpartisan primary last June by 34 percent to 26 percent.


Solectron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Candidate for Judge Is Pursued for Taxes
A Democratic candidate for a judgeship on the Brooklyn branch of the city's civil court is being pursued by the state tax department for nearly $84,000 in delinquent income taxes and penalties.
Karen B. Yellen, whose nomination by the Kings County Democratic Committee makes her election as a judge a virtual certainty, has four outstanding tax warrants filed against her and her husband, David Egan, for $83,683.17 covering a period from 1985 to 1991, said Karl E. Felsen, a spokesman for the State Department of Taxation and Finance.


Israel's Rabbis Also Squabble Over Idea of Yielding Golan
As Israeli and Syrian negotiators argue in Washington over the political future of the Golan Heights, rabbis in Israel have become embroiled in their own public debate over whether Israel, from a religious standpoint, can even entertain the idea of handing back territory.
Some Israelis question whether it makes a difference what the rabbis think.
But religion and politics are often so tightly intertwined here that rabbinical opinions cannot be cavalierly disregarded, especially since the new Labor-led Government, like its predecessors, depends on a coalition with a religious party for its parliamentary majority.


Getting Teen-Agers Off Nighttime Streets
For years, Jesse Griffin has spent weekend nights playing basketball in a park illuminated only by the glow of headlights from passing cars on the Harlem River Drive.
But he and friends had a monthlong break this summer when they played until 2 A.M. in the secure and bright gymnasium of the Harlem Y.M.C.A.
"It's better for us to play basketball inside where we know it's safe," said Jesse, a 10th-grader at Julia Richman High School.
"A lot of things can happen on the courts when there are no lights -- you could get hit by a stray bullet."


Standard Microsystems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Montclair Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Roberts Is Cleared to Play
William Roberts's heartbeat returned to normal Thursday night after electrical stimulation of the heart, Coach Ray Handley of the Giants said today.
Handley added that the doctors caring for Roberts, the team's 30-year-old starting offensive guard, told the player he could take part Monday night in the game against the Bears in Chicago.
Roberts underwent a stress test today and received medication to control his heartbeat.
He will remain under observation at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center until Sunday morning, then will join the other Giants on their afternoon flight to Chicago.
He will be tested in Chicago to be sure the heartbeat has remained regular.


Bali Jewelry Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Winds of Change Blow, and Europe's Governments Feel the Chill
The storm buffeting Europe is a strong one, but it has not yet uprooted a government or tossed a leader aside.
The leaders on the Continent all are buttoning up, however, as the vote on European union approaches.
Jacques Delors
European Community Leader
Jacques Delors, the head of the European Community's executive commission, is often referred to as Mr.
Europe.
After taking office in 1985, he breathed life into the flagging community, committing it to create a single regional market by Jan. 1, 1992, then promoting the idea of a single currency.


Vice President Bush's Vice
What did George Bush know about the Iran-contra affair and when did he know it?
The answers turn out to be: a lot, and early.
The President plausibly denies being "in the loop" of the arms-for-hostage Iranian operation or the illicit supply of rebels in Nicaragua.
But at least in general, he knew about those colossal follies and, it appears, did nothing to stop them.


Capucino's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


After the Police Riot, a Subway Fight
According to witnesses on the subway train, the first young man tripped on the second young man's foot.
They exchanged words, then blows.
The second man suffered a deep razor wound to his face.
His friends jumped on the first man and beat him severely, fracturing his jaw.
Sadly enough, such a confrontation would not normally attract more than passing notice in New York these days.
But in this case it engages powerful forces that threaten the whole city.
Only a swift and fair conclusion to the investigations now under way can reassure the public.


Burnup &amp; Sims Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Big Board Contends Company Is Hong Kong, Not Chinese
If the International Monetary Fund and its equally staid sister, the World Bank, can embrace former Soviet republics, what is to prevent the New York Stock Exchange from drawing a Chinese company to its capitalist bosom?
Nothing, apparently, except that Big Board officials say Brilliance China Automotive Holdings Ltd., a Bermuda-based holding company whose sole business is the manufacture and sale of mini-vans in China, is really based in Hong Kong.


Weicker Names Young Judge To Top Court
Joette Katz, a 39-year-old Superior Court judge with only three and a half years on the bench, was nominated today by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. to fill a vacant seat on the Connecticut Supreme Court.
If approved by the General Assembly next year, Judge Katz would be one of the youngest appointees ever to the state's highest court, and only the second woman.
Chief Justice Ellen A. Peters, the first female justice, was appointed by Gov.
Ella T. Grasso in 1978.


Jaclyn Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Audio/Video Affiliates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Offshore Pipelines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


From U.S. to Russia, a Feast of Modern Dance
"Now listen up," said Bernard Johnson.
"Now we're going to do what we call the 'bootie green,' and that means your behind. So don't be stingy, now, and swing your bootie wide. It's not to give you cramps, but you got to know what you're using!"
Mr.
Johnson's translator tried to turn all this into Russian, with limited success.
But the language of the body translates even here, and some 60 Russian dance students had eyes only for their jivey American teacher of jazz dance, in his white sweats with a green-and-white bandanna tied over his hair.


Limits Sought On Shelters For Homeless
In a move to pressure New York City to create more permanent housing for the homeless, state officials said yesterday that they would limit the city's ability to keep expanding its shelter system.
The officials said homeless families have gotten stuck in shelters for a year or more at a time, much longer than the temporary stays originally planned, in large part because the city has cut the number of units of permanent housing it offers them.


Intelligent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  KOHL CLASHES WITH BRITISH
Chancellor Kohl exchanged sharp criticism with British leaders over whether high German interest rates had caused the turmoil in currency markets.
He said it was urgent that leaders meet to assess prospects for European cooperation.  1  PRESSING BONN ON RATES
American and British officials pressed Germany's central bank to cut interest rates, saying that such a move would spur economic growth and ease the currency crisis.  1  Germans celebrate what amounts to a victory for the mark.36  European unity appeals to France's young bureaucrats-in-training.  37  GERMANY PLANS TO EXPEL GYPSIES
Germany has quietly concluded an agreement with Romania that is expected to lead to the deportation of thousands of Romanian asylum seekers, most of them gypsies.  1  SERBS STRETCHED THIN IN BOSNIA
The tide of battle that swept Serbian and Croatian forces into control of all but a few isolated patches of Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun to recede a bit, analysts say, as fighters are stretched thin.  4  Bosnian Serbs promote a deal with Croats at peace talks.  4  IRANIAN KURD SLAIN IN BERLIN
Masked gunmen burst into a Berlin restaurant and killed four men, including a leading Kurdish politician from Iran.
The Iranian Embassy in Bonn rejected charges that Teheran had sponsored the killers.  4  RABBIS DEBATE GOLAN'S STATUS
Israeli rabbis have become embroiled in debate over whether Israel, from a religious standpoint, can consider returning territory.  3  FRAGILE HIMALAYAN HILLS
Floods have killed more than 2,500 people and destroyed villages, crops, and roads in northern Pakistan and India over the last 10 days.
Some officials blame road building and deforestation for the flooding.  3  A Haitian town fears to speak of the army's wrath.  3  Managua Journal: A new cathedral to dazzle a wounded nation.  2  National 5-9  PEROT GIVES A BIG MAYBE
Ross Perot again hinted that he might resume his on-again, off-again dance toward the White House.
He said he might restart his campaign to make it easier to buy broadcast time for commercials touting his prescription for the economy.  1  CLINTON DRAFT STORY, CHAPTER 5
The Clinton campaign organization acknowledged that the Democratic Presidential nominee asked for help from Senator J. W. Fulbright's office in 1969, when he was trying to win a spot in the University of Arkansas Reserve Officers Training Corps to avoid being drafted.  1  Clinton suggested Bush lacked the courage to debate.  6  Bush sought to cast himself as a free-market feminist.  7  In the bid to make news, Bush and Clinton lost to the weather.  7  ATLANTA'S OLYMPIC CHALLENGE
The Olympic flag arrived in Atlanta, stirring excitement about being host of the 1996 Games but raising anxiety over the larger goal: to bring human and urban revitalization to a city that symbolizes much of the pain and promise of race in America.  1  VINDICATION FOR HASTINGS
Judge Alcee Hastings said he felt new confidence in his Congressional bid after a Federal district judge overturned the verdict of his 1989 impeachment by the Senate.  5  SHAKING THE POWER STRUCTURE
News analysis: By rejecting the impeachment of Alcee Hastings, a Federal district judge here has sought to throw into turmoil some fundamental notions about the constitutional relationship between Congress and the courts.  5  THERAPIST GIVES UP LICENSE
Dr.
Margaret Bean-Bayog, the Harvard psychiatrist accused of improperly treating a patient and contributing to his suicide, gave up her medical license.
The hearing that was scheduled for Monday has been canceled.  5  LOS ANGELES D.A.
GIVES UP BID
Ira Reiner, the Los Angeles County District Attorney who failed to win convictions in the beating of Rodney G. King and other high-profile cases, dropped his bid for a third term.  5  The Agriculture Department approved irradiation of poultry.  9  Religion Notes: Sioux holy men and angry letters from 'God.' 9  Metro Digest 21  POLICE RESENTMENT
U.S.C. is like old times.  31  Jets add kicking to question areas. 31  Hockey: Devils' MacLean tests knee.  29  Horse Racing: Missed the Storm misses Matron.  31  Sports People 29  Consumer's World 48  Checking whether a policy provides enough coverage against disasters.
In trading cards, it's a new ball game.
Closet space: The final frontier.
A big reel for those big fish.
Finding an overseas phone number.
Arts/Entertainment 11-14, 46  American dance in Russia.  11  Allen film's audiences.  11  Theater: "Frankly Brendan." 12  "An Old Actress in the Role of Dostoyevsky's Wife." 14  Music: The Philharmonic.  11  Brooklyn Lyric Opera.  12  Barbara Cook at the Carlyle.  12  Obituaries 26  David H. Jacobs, a developer and a Major League club owner.
William A. Swanberg, a biographer.
Roger Wagner, founder of Chorales and a conductor.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Vice President Bush's vice.
After the police riot, a fight.
The Solarz difference.
Mary Cantwell: Three women.
Letters  Russell Baker: About the size of it.
A.
H.
Raskin: The words I lost.
Karl Jaspers and Hannah Arendt: The idea of the "chosen people."


Stamp to Honor Louis
The United States Postal Service yesterday unveiled a commemorative stamp honoring Joe Louis.
The Louis stamp will be issued on June 11 at the induction ceremonies for the International Boxing Hall of Fame, located in Canastota, N.Y.
It is the first time the Postal Service has issued a postage stamp honoring a professional boxer.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Clinton Asked Senator's Help On Draft, His Aides Confirm
Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign organization acknowledged today that the candidate sought help from Senator J. W.  Fulbright's office in 1969, when he was trying to win a spot in the University of Arkansas Reserve Officers Training Corps to avoid being drafted.
The question of what constitutes help is murky and illustrates the subjective nature of what has become a long and tortured debate on just what Mr.
Clinton did or did not do to escape the draft during the Vietnam War.


Majors Back This Year?
Tennessee Coach JOHNNY MAJORS said yesterday that he felt good and planned to return to coaching this season, but he wouldn't say when.
Majors, 57, had heart bypass surgery on Aug. 25 and has been recuperating at home in Knoxville, Tenn.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY RESENTMENT FROM THE POLICE
From officers on the beat to commanders in precincts and detective squads, a pervasive anger at Mayor David N. Dinkins, spawned by months of smoldering resentments over his handling of street disturbances and other police matters, has swept large segments of the New York City Police Department.
Interviews with many officers -- white, black and Hispanic, men and women at all ranks from the street to Commissioner -- also showed profound racial divisions in a department that is 74 percent white.
Page 1.
DINKINS RECALLS RACISM
Mayor Dinkins said yesterday that the behavior of some police officers at a raucous demonstration in front of City Hall this week had reminded him of his own painful encounters with the police as a young man, and reflected bitter racial overtones he had not personally faced in "a long time." Page 22.
LIST FOR COMMISSIONER NARROWS
With tensions high between City Hall and rank-and-file police officers, the Mayor said he has narrowed the list of candidates for police commissioner to four people and plans to begin interviewing them next week.
Page 22.
WOMAN HURT BY SLAB THROWN FROM ROOF
A young woman sitting on the stoop of her Bronx apartment building was struck and left partly paralyzed by a 75-pound slab of slate that apparently was thrown from the roof, the police said.
Neighbors said local youths throw objects off roofs in the area every day, apparently just for the fun of it.
Page 23.
A SAFER PLACE TO PLAY BALL
For years, Jesse Griffin has spent weekend nights playing basketball in a park illuminated only by the glow of headlights from passing cars on the Harlem River Drive.
But he and friends had a monthlong break this summer when they played until 2 A.M. in the secure and bright gymnasium of the Harlem Y.M.C.A.
Page 23.
ABRAMS AND FERRARO TALK, A BIT
Attorney General Robert Abrams, who has claimed victory in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate, spoke yesterday with the woman he says he defeated, Geraldine A. Ferraro.
She said she would take his request for support "under advisement." Page 24.
JUDICIAL CANDIDATE'S TAX WOES
A Democratic candidate for a judgeship on the Brooklyn branch of the city's civil court is being pursued by the state tax department for nearly $84,000 in delinquent income taxes and penalties.
Page 23.
REGION CRUISER RAMMED IN NEWARK
A Newark man was charged with attempted murder after the police said he rammed a stolen car into a police cruiser then fired two shots at pursuing officers before he was arrested.
The Acting Essex County Prosecutor, James F. Mulvihill, said the suspect had been driving a 1988 Honda Accord that had been stolen at gunpoint two days earlier.
Page 24.
A NEW JUSTICE IN HARTFORD
Joette Katz, a 39-year-old Superior Court judge with only three and a half years on the bench, was nominated by Governor Weicker Jr. to fill a vacant seat on the Connecticut Supreme Court.
If approved, Judge Katz would be one of the youngest appointees ever to the state's highest court, and only the second woman.
Page 24.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 23


3 Indicted In Georgia B.C.C.I. Case
A Federal grand jury in Atlanta has indicted three former top executives of the National Bank of Georgia, charging that they conspired to hand control of the bank over to a Middle Eastern financial empire that had secretly sought a foothold in the United States.
The indictment, handed up on Thursday, accused the bank's former controller, William W. Batastini, of receiving an illegal $95,000 payment from the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which has been accused of using bribery, fraud and political influence to seize control of American financial institutions.
In exchange for the money, the indictment charges, Mr.
Batistini helped pave the way for First American Bankshares Inc., a Washington company secretly controlled by B.C.C.I., to buy the National Bank of Georgia.


National Technical Sys. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Hunt for Police Commissioner Is Down to 4 Names
With tensions high between City Hall and rank-and-file police officers, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he has narrowed the list of candidates for Police Commissioner to four people and plans to begin interviewing them next week.
Mr.
Dinkins would not say who was on the list of finalists, although he said one is a woman.
"We're very close," Mr.
Dinkins said.


RCM Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Northbay Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Corrections
A map in Business Day yesterday showing the relative sizes of nations based on their economies described the figures incompletely.
They were in 1985 dollars.


Management Tech. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


National Beverage reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


A Gunman Opens Fire at His Son's Elementary School in Houston


Slab of Slate Hits Woman In the Bronx
A young woman sitting on the stoop of her Bronx apartment building was struck and left partly paralyzed Thursday night by a 75-pound slab of slate that apparently was thrown from the roof, the police said.
Neighbors said local youths throw large objects off roofs in the area every day, apparently just for the fun of it.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Says Bush Is Afraid Of Debating 'Man to Man'
In a sharply personal effort to pressure George Bush to debate him on the terms he wants, Gov.
Bill Clinton today accused his opponent of posturing behind "macho talk" but running away when it came time to "go man to man."
The Democratic Presidential candidate's attack was the beginning of a third phase in the jockeying over proposed Presidential debates.
It all began several weeks ago with sniping from the press secretaries on each side and moved on this week to a public exchange of lawyerly threatening letters from the two campaign chairmen.


ERC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Federal Express Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Slurs From Police Are Not New to Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that the behavior of some police officers at a raucous demonstration in front of City Hall this week had reminded him of his own painful encounters with the police as a young man, and reflected bitter racial overtones he had not personally faced in "a long time."
In a wide-ranging interview, the Mayor said that while he had never been physically assaulted by a police officer, he had been verbally abused and that "you'd probably have trouble finding somebody who hasn't."


Joseph Friedman, 76, A Retired Professor
Joseph Friedman, a retired professor of English at Long Island University, died on Tuesday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 76 years old.
He died of heart failure, said a son, Eric.


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Manor Care Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Frequency Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Acqua Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A French 'Yes?' 'Golden Youth' Say Life Is Good
The young men and women studying at the elite Institute for Political Studies have already started up the ladder of France's political establishment, so when it comes to Sunday's referendum on a new treaty on European union, they have a special interest in the outcome.
If the recent past is any guide, a good number of them will be in key positions in government, opposition, civil service and journalism within a decade or two.
And they know that ratification or rejection of the union treaty will help shape the 21st century France over which some of them may preside.


Patents; Big Setback For Inventor In Toy Case
JEROME H. LEMELSON, an inventor, this week lost what is almost certainly the last round in his $80 million patent battle with the Mattel Corporation over its hugely successful Hot Wheels toy.
The case attracted widespread attention in 1989 when a Federal jury in Illinois handed Mr.
Lemelson one of the biggest victories ever awarded to a lone inventor.
Ruling that the bright orange plastic tracks for Hot Wheels cars infringed his patent, the jury ordered Mattel to pay him $25 million.
That figure was later more than tripled because of interest.


School Bus Monitor Program Is Aimed at Saving Lives


Review/Theater; Realism Isn't That Hard. Knowing What's Real Is.
Dostoyevsky, bridling against being called a psychological writer, responded in one of his notebooks: "They call me a psychologist. This is not true. I am merely a realist in the higher sense of the word." The problem, of course, as Dostoyevsky and Edvard Radzinsky would point out, is agreeing on what is real.
Take, for example, Mr.
Radzinsky's intriguing play "An Old Actress in the Role of Dostoyevsky's Wife," which is being given its English-language premiere at the Jean Cocteau Repertory.
Is the old woman in the institution really a famous actress?
Or is she just the actress's makeup woman?
Is the man she encounters a lunatic, a film director or Dostoyevsky reincarnate?
Is the institution itself an asylum, an old folks' home or a sound stage?


What of Students Not in Special Schools?
To the Editor:
As the mother of a second grader in a New York City public school, I read with mixed feelings your Sept. 8 article on the impressive and costly renovation of Stuyvesant High School.
To those of us who still believe in the social value of a public school education (and experience severe sticker shock at the prospect of private school at $10,000 to $12,000 a year for two children), it is encouraging to see so much money and confidence being invested in the system.


Maiden Lane Recalls Jefferson as Well
To the Editor:
Does the Repohistory sign on New York City's Maiden Lane, illustrated with an intimate part of female anatomy (news article, Aug. 27), serve history better than the plaque across the street marking the site of a house once occupied by Thomas Jefferson?


Your Taxes; Senate Fight Set On Top Brackets
AFTER a hiatus for the Republican Convention and Labor Day recess, the Senate next week will revive its debate on a tax bill.
The tax bill would provide enterprise zone incentives for businesses to locate in economically depressed neighborhoods, and has been considered one of Congress's most urgent priorities since the riots in Los Angeles.
It would also contain many provisions that are not particularly controversial, like extension of several expiring tax breaks.


Akorn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Big Reel For Those Big Fish
Swedish engineers have designed a new high-performance fishing reel that looks more like a piece of jewelry than a tool.
Yet the reel is likely to attract the most avid of fishermen.
The reel's frame is made in one piece of solid aluminum and then plated with nickel.
Its maker, ABU Garcia of Svangsta, Sweden, maintains that the reel is built to last a lifetime.


Winds of Change Blow, and Europe's Governments Feel the Chill
The storm buffeting Europe is a strong one, but it has not yet uprooted a government or tossed a leader aside.
The leaders on the Continent all are buttoning up, however, as the vote on European union approaches.
Francois Mitterrand
President of France
Francois Mitterrand never intended to put his political career on the line when he called a referendum on the treaty on European union.
But a "no" vote tomorrow could set the stage for his early retirement.


Tektronix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


2,500 Dead in Heavy Flooding Across North Pakistan and India
Devastating floods have killed more than 2,500 people, destroyed villages, property and crops and washed away roads and bridges in north Pakistan and India.
The authorities in Pakistan described the floods in Kashmir, the hardest-hit area, as the worst in decades and some reports have partly attributed the destruction to faulty development policies.


Judith N. Shklar, 63, Professor at Harvard
Judith N. Shklar, a professor of government at Harvard University, died Wednesday at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She was 63 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
She died of a heart attack, said Ariadne Valsamis, a Harvard University spokeswoman.


Serb Asks Pact With the Croats, Not the Muslims
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs said today that Serbs and Croats could reach a peaceful division of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but that no peaceful solution was possible with the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government.
"The Muslim side has the unrealistic objective to have the whole of Bosnia-Herzegovina only for them," said the Serbian leader, Radovan Karadzic.
He was speaking at a news conference after the first session of a new round of talks here involving the three factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Giants Are Hoping Howard Will Come to the Rescue
The Giants' defensive line is in horrible shape heading into Monday night's game against the Bears in Chicago.
Only three linemen are healthy, and they will start.
But there was some positive news today.
The status of Erik Howard, who is usually the starting nose tackle, was upgraded from doubtful to questionable because his injured left knee is improving.
And Keith Hamilton, a rookie defensive end who sprained his right ankle in Thursday's practice, was limited in practice today, but said he could play Monday.


Dress Barn reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


GenCorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Farrel reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 2


Foundation Is Giving $10 Million To Help South Florida to Rebuild
The Knight Foundation announced today that it was giving $10 million in grants to help rebuild Dade County in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew.
The money was committed by trustees this week after a tour of areas in the southern part of the county that were most devastated by the hurricane.
Of the $10 million, $3.6 million has already been granted, including $1 million to the American Red Cross for disaster relief.


Hyman Bravin, 79, Former Civic Leader
Hyman Bravin, a lawyer and former Liberal Party official and civic leader, died on Wednesday at his home in Queens.
He was 79 years old.
He died of heart disease, his family said.


IMPEACHED JUDGE FEELS VINDICATED
On Thursday, before learning that his impeachment conviction had been overturned, former Federal District Judge Alcee L. Hastings admitted that his busy schedule was taking a toll.
He was feeling the fatigue, he said.
Since he was impeached in 1989 and ousted from the bench in Miami, where he had served as this state's first black Federal judge, Mr.
Hastings has established a law practice and sought public office.
Most recently he has been a contender in a new Congressional district, where he faces a runoff on Oct. 1.


Another Cut for the Mets: Franco Needs Surgery
For John Franco, the discomfort at last brought some comfort.
There was an identifiable reason for the lingering injury to his left elbow.
And with the reason there at last came an answer: surgery.
Franco, the multimillion-dollar closer for the Mets, will undergo surgery later this month to correct damage that was discovered yesterday to the flexor tendon in his left elbow.
The procedure, termed routine by the club's medical personnel, normally requires less than 30 minutes and will be performed Sept. 28 or Sept. 29.
The rehabilitation will require three months, so the Mets expect Franco will be 100 percent for the start of 1993 spring training.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; In Little Rock, a Group Plans for a Transition in Washington
Down in Little Rock, Ark., it's called long-range planning.
But that's just a political euphemism.
The fact is, in recent weeks the Clinton campaign has begun laying plans for a takeover from the Bush Administration next January -- the transition.
And in coming weeks the pace of that planning will quicken.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 15


Western Waste Ind.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Express Cash International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Taylor Devices Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Irradiation Approved by U.S. To Rid Poultry of Salmonella
The Agriculture Department approved irradiation of poultry today to control harmful bacteria like salmonella.
But consumer groups are so opposed to the technology that the nation's top poultry companies say they have no plans to irradiate their products.
"Our business is driven by consumer demand," said Stephen McCauly, a spokesman for Perdue Farms Inc. of Salisbury, Md.
"We are not going to use the system until the consumer supports it."


Review/Music; A 2d, Complementary Philharmonic Opening
Although they have not advertised it as such, one gets the impression that Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic regarded the opening of the orchestra's 150th season as a two-part affair, with complementary installments on consecutive evenings.
The opening flourish, on Wednesday, used the brassy swagger of popular 20th-century suites by Prokofiev and Bernstein and a group of reflective Strauss songs to present the orchestra as a sleek, flexible symphonic engine.
By contrast, the season's first subscription concert, on Thursday evening, showed off the orchestra's virtuosity from a different perspective.
Here, in a program of early-19th-century works, reflectiveness ruled, but not to the exclusion of power and electricity.
Thursday's program, which is to be repeated tonight and on Tuesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, offered music that would have been new but not alien to the audience at the orchestra's debut in 1842.
Mr.
Masur's centerpiece, the Beethoven Fifth Symphony, was the debut concert's opening work.
But the occasion was only the work's second New York performance.
Schubert's "Unfinished" Symphony, Mr.
Masur's opener on Thursday, was composed 20 years before the Philharmonic's debut (but did not have its premiere until 1865).
And Etienne-Nicolas Mehul's Symphony No. 1 in G minor, though a novelty today and one worth hearing, it turns out, was fairly popular in the early 19th century.


No Headline
It will be a travesty if the Games are presented and if nothing is fundamentally done to improve Atlanta in the process.
BILL CAMPBELL, an Atlanta City Councilman.  [ 8:1. ]


See George Hit Single. See Scoreboard Glow.
There was George Brett's quest for 3,000 hits tonight and there was little else.
It was typical September baseball between two sputtering teams as thousands of pairs of eyes often glanced at the crown-shaped scoreboard to monitor the pennant chases.
Brett's chase was probably the only reason many fans ventured to Royals Stadium to watch the fourth-place Yankees oppose the sixth-place Royals on a chilly Friday night.
Did someone say yawner?
The mound matchup pitted Kansas City's Hipolito Pichardo against New York's Scott Kamieniecki.
Double yawn.


Kenneth Shorter, 77, Supreme Court Justice
Kenneth L. Shorter, a former New York State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old.
Justice Shorter died of heart failure, said his son, Elliot.


Adobe Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


South Africa Homelands Face Change
To the Editor:
In "Apartheid Has 9 Million Other Victims" (letter, Aug. 24), Len Clarke of Uxbridge, England, writes of those who live in South Africa's homelands, asserting that they are classed as "alien" and that they have even been stripped, as he puts it, of their South African citizenship.


American Medical Response Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Closet Space: The Final Frontier
What is it that few people have enough of?
Forget money: that goes without saying.
Try closets.
There seems to be some immutable factor working here, or a genie that flits around and arranges things so that every house or apartment is at least one closet short of the number needed to get organized. (And even if that genie were to provide the extra closet, within two and a half minutes there would still be a closet too few.)


Heico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Ennis Business Forms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Greenstone Roberts Advertising Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Topps Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Oppenheimer Multi-Gvt Tr reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Oklahoma Vs. U.S.C. Just Like Old Times
On those special occasions when Southern California and Oklahoma have come together on a football field, the meetings have usually been about power and prestige.
The Trojans, in their cardinal and gold, and the Sooners, in their crimson and cream, were often separated by little more than shades of difference.
But their eighth meeting, Saturday on Owen Field, is a symbol of the era of parity in the sport, an opportunity for the Sooners or the Trojans to take a step toward recapturing a sense of success that was once taken for granted.


Winds of Change Blow, and Europe's Governments Feel the Chill
The storm buffeting Europe is a strong one, but it has not yet uprooted a government or tossed a leader aside.
The leaders on the Continent all are buttoning up, however, as the vote on European union approaches.
Giuliano Amato
Prime Minister of Italy
Giuliano Amato's nicknames are almost contradictory.
One is Dr.
Subtle because of his ability in political maneuver.
The other, beloved of caricaturists, is Topolino, Italian for Mickey Mouse, because of his modest stature and physical appearance.


Poor Response Turns Storm Into Catastrophe
To the Editor:
National news media coverage of Hurricane Andrew has again clouded the issues in dealing with catastrophe by treating the problem as essentially a natural disaster.
Virtually all the news media focus as the storm approached south Florida was on the trigger, the natural phenomenon, and none on the infrastructure of communication, transportation, social and political organization that turned this storm into a catastrophe.
"Natural" disasters are never natural, but always the result of human actions and decisions made before, during and after the event.


Crested Corp. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Gustafsson Is Out
An ankle injury has forced MAGNUS GUSTAFSSON off Sweden's Davis Cup team for next weekend's semifinal against the United States in Minneapolis.
Gustaffson, ranked 55th in the world, twisted the ankle in practice earlier this week in Bastad, Sweden.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the standings of President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton in the latest public opinion polls in Florida misstated the state's voting record in Presidential elections.
Democrats have won the state twice in the last 40 years.
President Johnson carried Florida in 1964, and so did Jimmy Carter in 1976.


Payless Cashways reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Observer; About The Size Of It
It's the age of downsizing.
Downsizing sounds like a new dry-cleaning process, but it is not.
It is simply the opposite of upsizing.
The great age for upsizing was the 1950's.
Republicans think the 1950's was the great age for family values.
Nonsense.
The great age for family values was the 1930's.


Base Ten Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Leadley, Gunning &amp; Culp International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Europe's Mixed-Up Money: Economists Foresee a Transition
As political leaders traded barbs today, the growing strains of economic nationalism from Britain and Germany added to the uncertainty about how the economic coordination system can be put back together again.
Even if France approves the unification treaty on Sunday, some economists and government officials said, the wide differences among the economies of Europe may well require a transition period before the European Community's monetary system can be put back into one piece.


Newark Man Held in Chase In Stolen Car
A Newark man was charged with attempted murder today after the police said he rammed a stolen car into a police car, then fired two shots at pursuing officers before he was finally arrested.
The Acting Essex County Prosecutor, James F. Mulvihill, said the suspect, David D. Mackoon, 21 years old, had been driving a 1988 Honda Accord that had been stolen at gunpoint two days earlier.


Natural Gas Prices Up Sharply
Natural gas prices surged to a new high for the year yesterday after volatile trading in the futures market.
The contract price for October delivery rose 9.7 cents, to settle at $2.328 for 1,000 cubic feet.
Traders and analysts said technical factors accounted for some of the rise, but that big utilities, pipelines and other gas purchasers were active bidders.


Bush Acts on the Trade Pact
Turning aside requests by Congressional Democrats to postpone any action until early next year, President Bush officially notified Congress today that the North American Free Trade Agreement has been completed.
The step allows him to sign the pact as early as Dec. 17.
The notification begins a 90-day period during which the Administration, consulting with Congress, begins drafting legislation to put into law all provisions of the pact, which would eliminate tariffs and other trade barriers among the United States, Canada and Mexico over the next 15 years.


Hauser Chemical Research Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Checking Whether a Policy Provides Enough Coverage Against Disasters
The recent devastation caused by hurricanes in Florida and Hawaii serves as an unpleasant reminder: if you own a home, be sure your homeowner's insurance policy provides adequate coverage if a natural catastrophe should strike, no matter how unlikely that might seem.
Of course, it is too late for those whose homes have already been damaged or destroyed, but millions of other Americans can take steps now that might make the difference later between a fair settlement of their claims and a heavy financial loss after a disaster.


Ault Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


CHRONICLE
As BEATRICE WELLES-SMITH, the youngest of Orson Welles's three daughters, sees it, the attention being given his film "Othello" is long overdue -- by four decades.
"Finally, people are taking notice," Mrs.
Welles-Smith said from her home in Las Vegas, Nev., yesterday.
"This movie has been totally ignored for almost 40 years."


Circuit Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Poor Response Turns Storm Into Catastrophe; Coastal Damage
To the Editor:
"Storm Cycles and Coastal Growth Could Make Disaster a Way of Life" (The Week in Review, Aug. 30), your discussion of Hurricane Andrew, fails to take into account the tremendous damage that occurs annually to coastal development from gales, tropical storms and Northeasters.


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Little League Official Quits in Protest
A day after a Philippine team was stripped of its Little League World Series title for the use of ineligible players and coaches, the administrator of the country's Little League program resigned in protest yesterday.
The official, Aramando Andaya, denounced the decision made by the tournament committee Thursday night in Williamsport, Pa., to award the 1992 championship to the Long Beach, Calif., team that had lost the final game to the Filipinos last month.


Lone Star Steakhouse &amp; Saloon Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 8


And Now a Word From Our Announcer; 30 Years Before the Mike: Inside Work, No Heavy Lifting (Fame Not Included)
He can do a smooth delivery.
He can do what he calls a "smash-them-in-the-mouth" delivery (popular for pushing analgesics).
He can do an average-guy-on-the-street delivery.
He can do a quiet, syrupy delivery that makes you feel warm and joyous inside and think what an awfully sweet man that is talking to you.
Chances are you've heard his voice before -- perhaps obstinately elaborating on the grip of dental adhesive or breaking the news about the reductions in your health benefits during that personnel film (that takes the syrupy delivery).


Portrait of the Artist as a Bronx Girl
WHEN Latoya Hunter graduated from the sixth grade at Public School 94 two years ago, her English teacher predicted she would be a writer.
"The world is waiting for Latoya!" he wrote on her report card.
That comment was quoted in this paper in the last part of a series about life in the Bronx school.
Richard Marek, an editor at Crown Publishers, saw it and was inspired to offer the 12-year-old girl a $5,000 advance if she would keep a daily record of her first year in junior high school.
Now, "The Diary of Latoya Hunter" is on its way to the bookstores, intended for an adult audience.
Latoya received $25,000 for the paperback rights and is about to begin a round of promotional interviews.
Her mother, Linneth, a nurse's aide, and her father, Linton, a security guard, have been calling relatives in Jamaica and Canada to preen.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH  In a speech yesterday to A.T. &amp; T. employees and women service organizations at A.T. &amp; T. corporate headquarters in Basking Ridge, N.J.


INSIDE
Albany Pressure on Shelters
Pressing for more permanent housing for the homeless, state officials plan to limit New York City's ability to expand its shelter system.
Page 21.
Deadly India-Pakistan Floods
Officials say deforestation and road building are partly to blame for flooding that killed 2,500 over the last 10 days in Pakistan and India.
Page 3.
Plan to Raise Suffolk Taxes
The Suffolk County Executive, elected as an anti-tax candidate, presented a $1.5 billion budget with a 20 percent property-tax rise.
Page 21.


Vallen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Women Need Free Markets, Not Government, Bush Says
Facing a significant gap in support between men and women in the latest opinion poll, President Bush took his top female aides in tow, lined his speaker's dais end-to-end with women and cast himself today as a feminist, free-market style.
Speaking to several hundred employees at A.T. &amp; T. corporate headquarters in central New Jersey, Mr.
Bush argued that his economic programs offer women and families more equality and opportunity than the "Government mandates" that he said were favored by his opponent, Gov.
Bill Clinton.


Senate Panel Votes No New I.M.F. Funds
As finance ministers gathered here for the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, a Senate panel approved a foreign aid bill today that provides none of the $12 billion in additional American money that President Bush has promised the I.M.F.
The action, by the Senate Appropriations Committee's Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, sends a signal to the Bush Administration that some Democrats remain leery of supporting the fund despite its new-found role in helping Russia and the other former Soviet republics.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Paul Martin, a former Canadian diplomat, misstated his age in some copies.
He was 89.


Mansell Is Switching To Indy Cars Next Year
NIGEL MANSELL, the Formula One champion, will drive for Newman-Haas Racing in the Indy-car series next year, the team announced yesterday.
The Briton takes the spot vacated by MICHAEL ANDRETTI, who announced last week that he was switching from Indy cars to Formula One and will drive for Team McLaren.


Premier Industrial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Waiting for the Bus


Baby Wounded by Bullet
A 6-month-old girl was seriously wounded yesterday morning when a bullet struck her in the right leg while she slept in her carriage in the playground of a Harlem elementary school, the police said.
Investigators did not know who fired the shot that struck the baby, who was with her grandparents at Public School 121, near East 104th Street and Second Avenue, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
The baby's grandmother said two men in their 20's were running by the carriage when the shot rang out, Officer McInnis said.
The baby, whom the police did not identify, was taken to Mount Sinai Medical Center.


Inercim Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Consolidated Nevada reports earnings for Year to June 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
CLINICAL DATA INC., Boston, said it had signed an agreement with Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology A.B., Uppsala, Sweden, to acquire Pharmacia LKB Biochrom Ltd., Cambridge, England.
Terms were not disclosed.
FIRST USA INC., Dallas, announced that it had priced a $350 million securitization of credit card receivables in connection with the First USA Credit Card Master Trust.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the standings of President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton in the latest public opinion polls in Florida misstated the state's voting record in Presidential elections.
Democrats have won the state twice in the last 40 years.
President Johnson carried Florida in 1964, and so did Jimmy Carter in 1976.


Albert G. Lanier, Editor and Lawyer, 89
Albert Gallatin Lanier, a retired editor and lawyer, died yesterday at New York University Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan and Wilton, Conn.
He died after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Suffolk Executive Proposes Property Tax Increase
Last year, Robert J. Gaffney ran for Suffolk County Executive as the anti-tax candidate, branding his opponent "High Tax Halpin."
But today, Mr.
Gaffney presented his administration's first budget, a $1.5 billion package that includes steep cuts in services combined with a 20 percent increase in property taxes levied by the county.


Some Unexpected Suspects in Currency Turmoil
Currency traders who have been placing high-risk bets have had a lot to do with the crisis that is rolling through Europe.
The word speculator, an accusation in itself, has rolled easily off the lips of finance ministers, like Norman Lamont of Britain, who are looking for scapegoats.
But there is growing evidence that it is the much more conservative institutional investors -- the mutual funds, corporations and pension funds -- that have humbled the British pound, the Italian lira and the Spanish peseta and helped to threaten the future of the European Monetary System and economic unity.


EcoScience Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Winds of Change Blow, and Europe's Governments Feel the Chill
The storm buffeting Europe is a strong one, but it has not yet uprooted a government or tossed a leader aside.
The leaders on the Continent all are buttoning up, however, as the vote on European union approaches.
John Major
Prime Minister of Britain
John Major, who is also serving a six-month term as the president of the European Community, is caught in a political and economic box.
He insists he is committed to the idea of closer European union, and as recently as Thursday, Downing Street reaffirmed his enthusiasm for the Maastricht treaty and for closer political and economic cooperation.


Algonquin Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to July 26


Sidewalk Bike Jockeys
To the Editor:
I find I'm sharing the sidewalks with bicyclists of all sizes and types.
Some are delivery men, but the major portion are just bike riders riding up on sidewalks or turning into side streets, regardless of who is in the crosswalk.
The other day I walked out of the front door of my apartment building and so narrowly escaped a bicyclist riding past the door that I felt the breeze as he went past.


Equitrac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Winds of Change Blow, and Europe's Governments Feel the Chill
The storm buffeting Europe is a strong one, but it has not yet uprooted a government or tossed a leader aside.
The leaders on the Continent all are buttoning up, however, as the vote on European union approaches.
Carl Bildt
Prime Minister of Sweden
The turmoil in the European Community is rippling beyond its borders, particularly in Austria, Finland, Sweden and Switzerland, which have applied for membership.
Of the government leaders looking on during last week's currency crisis, no one has more at stake than Carl Bildt of Sweden, a fiscal and political conservative, who pushed aside decades of Socialist planning and studious political neutrality to make clear how committed he is to gaining admittance.


Turkish Cypriots Needed Protection
To the Editor:
The whole tenor of " 'Ethnic Cleansing,' Cypriot Style" (editorial, Sept. 5) gives the wrong impression that an "ethnic cleansing" was started on the Mediterranean island in 1974 and that Turkey was at fault.


Review/Cabaret; Barbara Cook Changes Pace
One of the most gratifying things about Barbara Cook's fall show at the Cafe Carlyle (Madison Avenue and 76th Street) is the wealth of new material that the singer, who has shown great reluctance over the years to change her repertory, has brought into her act.
Of 16 songs in the program, 10 are numbers she has never before performed.
With the exception of "Someone Else's Story," a plodding ballad from the musical "Chess," they are well-chosen selections complementing the luster of a lyric soprano that tinges everything with an aura of maternal empathy.
A high point on Wednesday evening was "I'm Way Ahead," a little-known Cy Coleman-Dorothy Fields ballad from the 1973 musical "Seesaw," which the singer and her longtime musical director and pianist, Wally Harper, matched with the Rodgers and Hart standard "It Never Entered My Mind." "When I Fall in Love" was paired with "The More I See You," and the medley offered as a tribute to the Nat (King) Cole and Dick Haymes renditions of these standards.


Marcus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 20


Review/Music; Low Budgets, High Hopes At Brooklyn Lyric Opera
For 25 years, the Brooklyn Lyric Opera has been giving the limelight to young singers in a series of low-budget opera productions.
These presentations serve two purposes: to help the singers learn and grow into repertory that might otherwise be out of reach, and, through an "In School Program," to educate audiences encountering opera for the first time.
Opera in America needs this sort of second-tier support for its major institutions.
The cast for Thursday night's Opera Showcase Theater production of "Rigoletto" in Hirsh Hall at Temple Ansche Chesed included several singers who might bear watching.
Patrice Boyd as Gilda did not quite grasp the murky motivations that propel her character to tragic glory, but she is gifted with a shining soprano tone, effortless in the upper registers: her "Caro nome" made for the evening's highlight.
Another innately talented singer was Bill Tomic as Sparafucile, sure and strong across his entire range; he exuded almost no menace and yet commanded attention whenever he appeared.


Bridge
Bridge deals normally have post-mortems, but bridge columns are another matter.
This department does not, in general, discuss the same deal twice, but the one shown in the diagram is an exceptional case.
Those who like to analyze should consider whether or not three no-trump can be made, with best play on both sides, if West leads the diamond king.
As reported Aug. 9, this dramatic lead was made by Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., during the final of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship in Toronto.
This was a deliberate Merrimack Coup, aiming to cut the communications between the North and South hands, and it succeeded in its objective.
South chose to unblock the queen and allow the king to win, but West continued remorselessly with the diamond jack and the contract failed.
South could not establish and use his club suit.


Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


OPEC Is Forced to Confront Life in Post-Cold-War Era
Ecuador's decision to leave OPEC reflects the spirit of the post-cold-war era in which monopolistic and socialist policies have unraveled to make room for freer trade and Western free enterprise.
Ecuador will be the first country in the 13-member oil cartel to leave since the group's founding 32 years ago.
The decision, announced late Thursday night, deals another bruising blow to an organization that has seen its market power wane steadily for nearly a decade and is still reeling from depressed oil prices, rising energy taxes and a successful anti-pollution campaign to restrain the use of oil.


French Pitch for a Yes on the Treaty
For years, Elf Aquitaine, the oil producer that is France's largest company, has confidently built service stations across Europe, looking forward to the time late this decade when a single currency would make it as easy for a French company to pump gasoline in Barcelona or Berlin as in Lyons.
But then this spring, Loik Le Floch-Prigent, Elf's chairman and chief executive, heard many of his own employees speak against the Maastricht treaty that would bring about this unification.
Some innocently asked him where he stood.
Mr.
Floch-Prigent, joining other French business leaders to found the "Yes Committee," has since taken his cause to television, radio and newspapers, as well as his own refineries and plants.
The prosperity of their companies and their expansion across the Continent, the business leaders say, rests on the referendum tomorrow.


MDS Health reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mets Serve The Expos' Purpose
The score from Pittsburgh was frozen on the Shea Stadium scoreboard, the game there delayed by rain.
The night's dual assignment for the Montreal Expos -- to win and to watch -- had thus been cut in half.
Beat the Mets was all they could do for the moment, and so beat the Mets they did all too easily.


Arab Resistance Leader Held
The Israeli Army said today that it had arrested the underground commander of the militant Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine in the occupied territories on Sept. 1.
The commander, identified as Ahmad Suleiman Katmash, 42 years old, from the town of El Bireh near Jerusalem, had been wanted since 1976, the army said.
A military spokesman said that documents found on Mr.
Katmash included a forged identity card and calls for action, including "attacks on soldiers and civilians."


Some Games Can Be Played From the Bench


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Fifth Avenue between 61st and 86th Streets will be closed beginning at noon for the Steuben Day parade.
Amsterdam Avenue between 96th and 106th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Amsterdam Avenue street fair.
TOMORROW
Fifth Avenue between 48th and 57th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. for New York Is Book Country.
Columbus Avenue between 66th and 96th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Columbus Avenue street fair.
Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard between 111th and 142d Streets will be closed beginning at 1 P.M. for the African-American Day parade.
In Queens, 37th Avenue between 70th and 94th Streets will be closed beginning at 1:30 P.M. for the Queens Hispanic Day parade.


Missed the Storm Out of the Matron With Respiratory Problem
Belmont Park's Super Saturday lost one of its 36 stars yesterday when the trainer Bill Mott scratched the filly Missed the Storm from the Matron Stakes because of a respiratory problem.
But in the temper of the extravagant times, Mott continued to prepare three other horses for three other owners for three other Grade I stakes, for one of New York's busiest and best days at the races.
The program was created by clustering three additional Grade I races around the $500,000 Woodward Stakes, one of the landmark events of the year at Belmont Park.
It will be followed Oct. 10 by another Super Saturday with five additional stakes flanking the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup.
Both Saturdays will serve as New York milestones on the road to the Breeders' Cup championships on Oct. 31 at Gulfstream Park in Florida.


After the Police Riot, a Subway Fight
According to witnesses on the subway train, the first young man tripped on the second young man's foot.
They exchanged words, then blows.
The second man suffered a deep razor wound to his face.
His friends jumped on the first man and beat him severely, fracturing his jaw.
Sadly enough, such a confrontation would not normally attract more than passing notice in New York these days.
But in this case it engages powerful forces that threaten the whole city.
Only a swift and fair conclusion to the investigations now under way can reassure the public.


Psychiatrist Resigns License In Case Over Medical Ethics
After two days of trying to find a way to avoid a public hearing scheduled to begin Monday, a Harvard psychiatrist accused of improperly treating a patient and contributing to his suicide, submitted a letter today unconditionally giving up her medical license.
In a brief meeting this evening, the state Board of Registration in Medicine voted to accept the offer by the doctor, Margaret Bean-Bayog, to resign her license after rejecting a previous offer she made Thursday.
The hearing has been cancelled.


William A. Swanberg Dies at 84; A Pulitzer-Winning Biographer
William A. Swanberg, the author of a Pulitzer Prize-winning biography of Henry R. Luce, died on Thursday at his home in Southbury, Conn.
He was 84 years old.
His son, John , said his father, who had continued to write book reviews, died of heart failure.


Chicago Dock &amp; Canal Trust reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Finding A Number Overseas
Most people know how to call a directory assistance operator for the phone number of a company or an individual within the United States.
But finding an overseas number can be daunting.
It doesn't have to be.
These days, nearly every country has a system of directory assistance, and the Consultative Committee for International Telegraph and Telephone, the worldwide governing body, requires every international operator to speak English.
So language shouldn't be a deterrent.


Military Analysts Detect Some Signs That the War in Bosnia Is Receding
The tide of battle that swept Serbian and Croatian forces into control of all but a few isolated patches of Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last three months has begun to recede here and there, according to military analysts in Washington, Belgrade and London.
While Serbian fighters continue to hold sway in roughly two-thirds of the republic and Croatian fighters control most of the rest, forces loyal to the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government have regained a few towns and villages, notably in the Gorazde and Zvornik areas, the analysts said.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the trial of a subway motorman charged in the deaths of five passengers in a derailment at Union Square last year referred incorrectly to the defendant's lawyer.
He is Michael Parson.


Syracuse Gets Feeling That Things Are Starting to Go Its Way
With two impressive victories in two games, there is a growing sense among the players at Syracuse that something more than a successful season is building.
After an inspired victory over Texas last week, Qadry Ismail, Syracuse's all-purpose threat, said that going into the game, the team thought the game had special meaning.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot Says He May Rejoin Race To Publicize His Economic Plan
Ross Perot today took to his favorite forum, talk television, with a new twist to his on-again, off-again designs on the White House.
The Texas businessman said he might want to run for President, but not because he actually wants to be President.
Instead, he said, re-entering the race would make it easier to buy television time from the networks for commercials pushing his prescription for the ailing economy.


Nu-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


3 Officers Shot in Harlem
Three police officers were shot and wounded in a Harlem apartment building early this morning in a confrontation with an armed suspect, the police said.
The officers had chased the suspect into the building, at 11 East 109th Street, after hearing shots fired nearby, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.
About 12:20 A.M., after the officers caught up with the suspect, he turned and fired on them, she said, and then escaped.


Rohr Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Man Shot by Police Carried Water Pistol
Four police officers shot and seriously wounded a man on a Brooklyn street last night after he pointed what they believed to be a gun at them, the police said.
Moments later, the officers discovered that the gun was a water pistol, the police said.
The man, identified as Maurice Brown, 32 years old, was struck twice in the leg and once in the chest and taken to Kings County Hospital, where he was listed in serious condition, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.


Government Branches Entangled
By pointedly entering the debate about how Congress may conduct impeachment proceedings, a Federal district judge here has sought to throw into turmoil some fundamental notions about the constitutional relationship between Congress and the courts.
In overturning the impeachment conviction of a former Federal district judge, Alcee L. Hastings, Judge Stanley Sporkin challenged the United States Senate, sidestepped a ruling by the appeals court that presides over his district, and even sent a clear message to the Supreme Court, which is considering similar issues in a different case.


G.M. to Speed Cuts in Work Force
The General Motors Corporation said today that it would speed up its plan to shrink its salaried work force in the United States.
It also told nearly 200,000 retirees and salaried American workers how much they must pay for health-care benefits starting in January.
Salaried G.M. workers, who were told in late August that one of the most generous health-care packages in American industry would become less so, got the details today in a closed-circuit television address by Robert C. Stempel, the G.M. chairman; John F. Smith Jr., the president and chief operating officer, and Richard F. O'Brien, the vice president of personnel.


BONN URGED TO ACT BY U.S. AND BRITAIN
With the finance ministers of the leading industrial nations scheduled to meet here Saturday, American and British officials teamed up today to put pressure on Germany's central bank to cut its interest rates.
Lower German rates would encourage world economic growth and help to stem the currency crisis in Europe.
Though the Bush Administration was actively urging Germany to ease its tight money policy last year, it has been relatively quiet recently, even as Europe's system of economic coordination seemed in near collapse this week.
But a senior Administration official said the White House now saw in the European chaos an opportunity to "demonstrate leadership" on a high-profile economic issue and "be a force for stability."


Wausau Paper Mills reports earnings for Year Aug 31


Sports of The Times; Taking A Bull By Its Horns
IN a matter of weeks after the opening of school, the University of North Carolina has reached a critical juncture in what has become a tense, emotion-filled battle over the construction of a separate black cultural center on campus.
Last night, a rally at the Dean Smith Center was scheduled, where the film director Spike Lee was to speak on behalf of the building project.
A black cultural center already exists within the university's student union, but a free-standing center has become the object of a bitter tug-of-war between Chancellor Paul Hardin and a coalition of U.N.C. student groups.


CHRONICLE
More than 500 people are expected at Sotheby's in Manhattan tomorrow for a benefit auction and to honor ELLEN SULZBERGER STRAUS and her husband, R. PETER STRAUS.
The couple are to receive the 1992 Fabulous Family Award of the Child Care Action Campaign, an advocacy organization.
It will be the second time in a month that a spotlight will shine on Mrs.
Straus, 67, well known for her efforts for a variety of causes.
In this month's Self magazine, she appears swinging on a trapeze.
"Two years ago, we took our grandchildren to a Club Med in Florida that has a circus theme," she explained.
"I figured that if my 5-year-old grandson could learn the trapeze, so could we."


Chateau Stores reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Dutch-British Merger Forms Publishing Giant
The Dutch publisher Elsevier N.V. and Reed International P.L.C. of Britain have announced a stock merger that will create one of the world's largest publishing empires, with sales of nearly $5 billion a year.
The new corporation, to be called Reed Elsevier, will trail such media giants as Time Warner Inc. and Bertelsmann A.G. in size, but because Reed and Elsevier have relatively little debt, the new enterprise will be able to expand its operations far more easily than can competitors like Time Warner.


Coping With Race and Rage In the New York Police Dept
From officers on the beat to commanders in precincts and detective squads, a pervasive anger at Mayor David N. Dinkins, spawned by months of smoldering resentments over his handling of street disturbances and other police matters, has swept large segments of the New York City Police Department.
Interviews yesterday with many officers -- white, black and Hispanic, men and women at all ranks from the street to Commissioner -- also showed profound racial divisions in a department that is 74 percent white, 11.5 percent black and 13.6 percent Hispanic.


Lamonts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Poor Response Turns Storm Into Catastrophe; Airlift for Animals
To the Editor:
"A Plea for Pets Made Homeless by Storm" (news article, Sept. 8), about saving dogs and cats made homeless by Hurricane Andrew, is gratifying.
You may be interested to know that the North Shore Animal League, with the generous help of Delta Airlines, has flown 40 pets from Florida to its shelter in Port Washington, L.I.
Additional flights will bring up 40 to 50 more each week, and all animals will be cared for until permanent homes can be arranged.


Unican Security reports earnings for Year June 30


Vital Living Products reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


COMPANY NEWS: Radioactive Recycling; Koreans Find a Re-use For Fuel From Reactors
South Korea will buy two Canadian nuclear reactors, and it may use as fuel the waste from American models already operating in the country.
Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. yesterday announced a deal to sell two reactors to the Korea Electric Power Corporation for a total of about $790 million.
The South Korean company had previously bought two Canadian reactors, one completed in 1983 and the other still under construction.


Funco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 5


Rymer Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 25


Germans Hail the Mark But Not Their Leader
The European currency crisis this week has brought Germany's Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, harsh criticism from abroad, and at the same time put new pressure on him at home.
While Britons and Italians lament the sharp decline in the relative value of their currencies, Germans are celebrating what amounts to the victory of the Deutsche mark.
Newly impressed with the mark's strength, many are less willing than ever to support Mr.
Kohl's advocacy of a single European currency to replace it.


United American Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


The Words I Lost
As the national labor correspondent of The New York Times for over 40 years, I always considered a vibrant, principled union movement a hallmark of American democracy.
My mission, I felt, was to bring together organized labor, employers, the workers and government.
My most valuable tool, I thought, was making sense of the turmoil.
I was wrong.
My most valuable tool is words, the words I can now use only with difficulty.
My voice is debilitated -- mute, a prisoner of a communication system damaged by a stroke that has robbed me of language.


The Idea of the 'Chosen People': An Exchange
Hannah Arendt, who came to the U.S. as a refugee from Hitler's Germany, became one of the most influential social philosophers of our time.
Among her books are "The Origins of Totalitarianism" (1951), "Eichmann in Jerusalem" (1963) and "The Life of the Mind" (1978).
Karl Jaspers was a leading representative of existentialist philosophy, which originated in Germany in the 1920's.
Their correspondence began in 1926, when the 20-year-old Arendt was studying philosophy under Jaspers at Heidelberg University.
It was interrupted by Arendt's emigration and Jaspers's "inner emigration," and was resumed in the fall of 1945, when the American Army helped re-establish the link between the two.


Kitty Stehli, David Scharf
Katharine Thompson Stehli, a daughter of Peter H. Stehli of Westport, Conn., and Joan T. Gilmour of Alexandria, Va., was married yesterday to David Leonard Scharf, a son of Leonard R. Scharf of Deltaville, Va., and Lynne J. Phillips of Sherman, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Allan H. Munroe performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrews-in-the-Valley Church in Tamworth, N.H.
Mrs.
Scharf, who is 33 years old and is known as Kitty, is a program coordinator at Hospital Audiences, which runs art workshops in New York City hospitals.
Her father is the president of the Georgianna Foundation in Westport, which provides funds for research on autism.
The bride's stepmother, Annabel W. Stehli of Westport, is an author.


Love All? Not!
To the Sports Editor:
At the United States Open, we watched a 40-year-old who denigrates his opponents when he loses or watched another player who knocks over television cameras.


Campaign for Funds Proves Big Success
The financial markets might be formidable for some but not, apparently, to the United States Olympic Committee.
An auction of Olympic souvenirs and memorabilia on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday evening generated more than $13,000 toward the four-year budget leading to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.


Man in a Flag Shirt
ABBIE HOFFMAN: AMERICAN REBEL
By Marty Jezer. Illustrated. 345 pp. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.


The Thrill of Outer Space for Earthbound Lives
AN ANNIVERSARY IS UPON US, and attention must be paid.
It has been 25 years since the opening of Atlanta's Hyatt Regency Hotel, the first of the atrium-style extravaganzas created by the architect and developer John Portman.
Is it possibly redundant to celebrate this milestone?
After all, the Portman atrium has been a nonstop celebration for the past quarter century.
A festive mix of fountains, flapping banners and light-bulb-studded elevators rising to the skies like effervescent bubbles, the Portman atrium is architecture at happy hour.
It's a building that's gone out of town to a convention, determined to have a blast.
Still, a toast is in order for a concept that set out to give pleasure and in fact did so.
Architects work with space, and few architects of this century have created such drama out of three dimensions.
Twenty-three stories tall, set off by balconies carpeted a rich red, the Atlanta atrium presented space as the ultimate luxury.
Here, the empty void became a commodity as precious as the marble and gold that adorned the grand hotels of the Edwardian age.


POSTINGS: The Tenement Museum; Now, Landmark Status
It probably would not have occurred to any one of the 10,000 people who lived over the years in the six-story tenement at 97 Orchard Street that their crowded and ungenerous home would one day warrant inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places.
But on Thursday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is to lead a ceremony at the building, which is now the Lower East Side Tenement Museum, to celebrate its placement on the register.


Julie Spiegelberger, S. Michael Nadel
Julie Ann Spiegelberger, a legislative aide to State Assemblyman Richard N. Gottfried, a Manhattan Democrat, was married yesterday to S. Michael Nadel, counsel to the Brooklyn District Attorney.
Judge Robert G. M. Keating of the New York City Criminal Court officiated at the pavilion in Hudson River Park in New York.
Mrs.
Nadel, 37 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Spiegelberger of Wyckoff, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in public administration from John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Westchester Community College Expands Its Cultural Horizon
WESTCHESTER Community College is staking its claim as an arts center this season, bringing the famous, the brilliant and the supremely talented to the campus here in a fresh package of events.
Lisa Deutsch, the college's new manager of cultural affairs, said she hoped the fourfold increase in programs would attract both students and the public.


4 Suspects Still at Large in Bronx Beating Death
A month after a Bronx bodega worker was beaten to death outside his apartment building by at least five men who mistook him for someone else, the police have so far arrested only one suspect, even though they say they know who the others are.
But the case, which attracted so much attention because the victim, Carmelo Rivera, was an innocent bystander, has not been forgotten, said Deputy Chief Edward Capello, who is in charge of Bronx detectives.


Columbia Roars but Not Quite Enough
Columbia came close to defeating Harvard yesterday for the first time since 1978, "close" meaning 7 points in an opening 27-20 defeat in the Lawrence Wien Stadium at Baker Field.
The contest suggested that if the Lions can provide their new quarterback, Chad Andrzejewski, with better protection, they will win games this season and be exciting regardless.


Tour Explores Baja California
The Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University will be the host of a trip to Baja California and islands in the Gulf of California from Jan. 9 to 17, 1993.
The tour, which will be led by zoologists and naturalists, starts in La Paz, Mexico (via Tucson, Ariz.), with a visit to the Museum of Anthropology.
Passengers will cruise from San Carlos, on the western shore of the Baja peninsula, on board the 70-passenger Sea Lion, sailing among small islands in Magdalena Bay to see California gray whales breeding and calving in sheltered lagoons.
Small rubber boats make it possible to explore beaches and mangrove channels, with their populations of egrets, herons, ibises and frigate birds.
The Sea Lion also sails to Cabo San Lucas on the southern tip of the peninsula and to Gorda Banks, where dolphins and whales gather.
The cruise continues into the Gulf of California.
Highlights among its islands will include sea lions at Isla Los Islotes, and Isla Santa Catalina, which offers snorkeling, a close-up look at dolphins and a chance to see finback and blue whales.
The cruise ends in La Paz, with a return flight to Tucson.


The Night of the Matisses
A major retrospective opened at MOMA, Sept. 16.


The $16.98 CD: How High Is Too High?
The economy is in the dumps.
Consumer confidence is low.
So the recording business has announced a price boost.
Here comes the $16.98 compact disk.
New albums to be released on Tuesday by Garth Brooks ("The Chase") and Michael Bolton ("Timeless"), along with Madonna's "Erotica," due Oct. 13, will have an effective list price of $16.98.
Recordings don't have official list prices, but Thorn-EMI (which owns Liberty, Mr. Brooks's label), Sony (Mr. Bolton) and Time Warner (Madonna) have raised wholesale prices on those albums to $10.70 per CD, up from $10.30.
With the standard markup, retailers say that translates to a list price of $16.98 or $17.98.
Labels are betting that eager fans won't mind spending an extra dollar or two.


Elizabeth Tauro, Todd Saunders
Elizabeth Helen Tauro, the daughter of Judge Joseph L. Tauro of Marblehead, Mass., and the late Elizabeth M. Tauro, was married yesterday in Gloucester, Mass., to Todd Richard Saunders, a son of Roger A. Saunders of Boston and the late Nina A. Saunders.
The father of the bride, who is chief judge of the Federal District Court in Boston, performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bridegroom's father.
Mrs.
Saunders, 30 years old, is the associate general counsel of the Arthur D. Little consulting company in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from Cornell University.
She is the stepdaughter of Ann L. Tauro and the granddaughter of G. Joseph Tauro of Swampscott, Mass., a retired Chief Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court.


Cowboys Get Everett From Steelers
The Dallas Cowboys acquired safety THOMAS EVERETT yesterday from the Pittsburgh Steelers for a draft choice.
Everett, who lives in Dallas and played high school and college football in Texas, will sign after the game today against Phoenix, the Cowboys said.


Campaign for Funds Proves Big Success
The financial markets might be formidable for some but not, apparently, to the United States Olympic Committee.
An auction of Olympic souvenirs and memorabilia on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday evening generated more than $13,000 toward the four-year budget leading to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.


Wall Street; Comparing Racy Stocks With Boring Bonds
Bonds really are dull after all.
L/G Research Inc., a San Francisco money manager that invests in no-load funds, says it does not usually pay to put your money in bonds.
At least not when you compare the results with that of stocks.
L/G studied the return on stocks versus bonds in 1-, 3-, 5-, 10- and 15-year periods, and found that stocks almost always beat bonds.
Indeed, over 15-year periods, stocks do better 94 percent of the time, L/G said.
The average one-year return of 12.4 percent by stocks is more than double that of bonds in the 55-year period that was studied, said Ken Gregory, editor of the L/G No-Load Fund Analyst newsletter.
Like most good things, though, the happy returns come at a price.
Stocks are riskier, Mr.
Gregory said, declining more than bonds in bad years.
The worst 12-month performance of bonds was a 5 percent loss, he said, while the worst year for stocks was a 50 percent loss.
To do the study, L/G compared the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index with intermediate-term Government bonds.


Turnovers Give Princeton Needed Edge
Princeton, outscrambling Cornell by two recovered fumbles to one blocked punt, won the season opener for both Ivy League teams yesterday, defeating the Big Red, 22-20, on Cornell's home turf in Ithaca, N.Y.
Cornell opened the scoring on its first possession as quarterback Bill Lazor directed a 73-drive that ended with a 3-yard run by Matt Speicher, but Princeton came right back with a 76-yard drive that evened the score at 7-7 at the end of the first quarter.


Debate Over Summer Reading
In the article on the debate over the summer reading list at Connecticut College (Aug. 23), it was stated that I "actively sought the removal" of Camille Paglia's book, "Sexual Personae," from the 1992 summer reading program, and the article continued by quoting me as saying, "it shouldn't be read by students."
As I thought I made clear to the writer, I tried to get the committee to drop the book only initially.


Miss Concannon, D. E. Geithner
Christine Mara Concannon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Concannon of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to David Ehrlich Geithner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter F. Geithner of Larchmont.
Msgr.
James P. Cassidy performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
Mrs.
Geithner, 26 years old, graduated from Holy Cross College.
She is a network-television time buyer at Young &amp; Rubicam, the New York advertising agency.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kelley Drye &amp; Warren.
The bride's grandfather the late John V. Mara was an owner and the president of the New York Giants, the football team founded by his father, Timothy J. Mara.


Old 'Tales' Retold at the Met
Will wonders never cease at the Metropolitan Opera?
First, after 24 seasons without presenting a newly composed work, the company undertook to present two premieres in two seasons: John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles," unveiled last December, and Philip Glass's "Voyage," to come on Oct. 12 in commemoration of Columbus's arrival in the New World. (Others may follow; Bruce Crawford, president of the Met's board, said recently that another commission might be considered for the passing of the millennium, or even sooner.)
Now, to open its season tomorrow evening, the company takes a leaf out of the early-musickers book, cleaning up its 10-year-old production of Offenbach's "Contes d'Hoffmann" ("Tales of Hoffman") to hew more closely to the composer's original conception, insofar as that can be determined.
The work, left incomplete at Offenbach's death, has led a checkered career in the theater, its three acts typically shuffled or reduced to two.


Aware of Its Own Limits, U.S. Favors Unity Treaty
While the Bush Administration has carefully avoided commenting on the French vote on European unity so as not be accused of meddling, Administration officials leave little doubt that they hope the French will vote yes and endorse the Maastricht treaty.
The simple reason, American officials say, is that the United States has much more to fear from European fragmentation and resurgent nationalism than it does from European consolidation.


From Fast Food to a Roadside Garden
A GARDEN CAFE in Riverside offers a very appealing place to eat along the Boston Post Road.
Taking a small freestanding, roadside fast food dispensary and turning it into an attractive restaurant would have been challenge enough.
Add to that an unpromising, noisy location facing the Post Road and the problems might have seemed insurmountable.
But the owners of Duval Catering have covered all the windows with airy matchstick blinds that let light in, but keep noise and kitchen distractions out.
The tables in the L-shaped interior have summery, floral-patterned cloths topped with glass and pink paper place mats and napkins.
Lighting is soft but not dim and the net effect is modest but pleasing.
The major achievement, though, is outside, where an exuberant garden of zinnias, rose of Sharon, mallows, snapdragons, petunias, chrysanthemums and 7-to-10-ft-high cosmos are blooming, planted thick enough to form a hedge that successfully screens out the sight and most of the traffic noise from the Post Road just beyond.
Three large tables are outdoors, surrounded by the luxurious blooms.
Near one table a parakeet twitters in a cage.
In spirit, one could be in the countryside, miles from traffic of any kind.


TEST-MARKETING A PRESIDENT
Focus-group discussions are an important tool in corporate marketing research, when they are used properly to generate ideas and hypotheses that are then subjected to further scientific study ("Testing-Marketing a President," by Elizabeth Kolbert, Aug. 30).
Unfortunately, when they are misused by political operatives posing as researchers, focus groups can become a shortcut to the kind of negative-attack strategies referred to by Kolbert -- a quick and dirty means to get fodder for campaign tactics.
It does not have to be that way.
JOE PERITZ
Litchfield, Conn.


Julie Zander, Kurt Zoller
Julie Louise Zander, the daughter of Mrs.
Norman B. Champ Jr. of St.
Louis and the late William A. Zander Jr., was married yesterday to Kurt Michael Zoller, a son of Helen Zoller of Pepper Pike, Ohio, and the late John H. Zoller.
The Rev.
Patricia Stern, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Graham Chapel at Washington University in St.
Louis.
Ms.
Zander, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, was until recently the public affairs associate at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York.
She graduated from Washington University.
Her stepfather is the president of Champ Spring Company, a maker of automotive leaf springs in St.
Louis, and Champ Goodwood Farms, a dairy farm in Elsberry, Mo.


Handy Traditional Carpenter's Toolbox
FEW containers are as well suited to carrying tools as a carpenter's traditional open toolbox.
Made of wood to prevent damaging sharpened items, such a toolbox consists essentially of a rectangular tray with tall ends spanned by a sturdy handle.
Following are instructions for two toolboxes that can be built by using just hand tools or, more easily, by using hand tools supplemented by a power circular saw and electric drill.
One toolbox is a basic model.
The other has three drawers for small items.


The Male Is Growing More Deadly
TALLER WOMEN
A Cautionary Tale.
By Lawrence Naumoff. 289 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $21.95


Catholic Orders Need 'Dramatic' Change to Survive, Study Says
An extensive three-year study of Roman Catholic religious orders, long the backbone of the nation's Catholic schools, hospitals and other institutions, concludes that they will have to undergo "dramatic changes" if they are to survive.
Many of the nation's 900 religious orders have lost a clear sense of their purpose, the survey's authors say in a summary of their research that was made public last week.
The two authors, the Rev.
David Nygren and Sister Miriam Ukeritis, both psychologists, say the orders are hampered by a lack of strong leadership, a growing individualism and a deep distrust of the hierarchy and the Vatican.


Buckeyes Trample Syracuse
Ohio State barreled into the Carrier Dome this evening and ransacked the place.
The Buckeyes obliterated Syracuse's option game, made a shambles of the defensive line and sliced up the secondary as they rolled to a 35-12 victory.
The 23-point loss, Syracuse's first of the season, was its worst at the Carrier Dome since a 41-10 rout by Florida State in 1989.


Illness Mistreated
To the Editor:
The failure of New York's mental health policy is not related, as you indicate, to lack of funds for community services (news article, Sept. 7).


White-Collar Recession: Shifting Perceptions and Politics
The Mazda is five years old now, but running fine, so Ed and Donna Huntress will wait another year or two to replace it.
Mr.
Huntress is remodeling the kitchen himself, instead of hiring a contractor.
Vacation this year was a camping trip instead of the usual journey to the Virgin Islands, but Michael is 5 years old now, and likes camping better.
At the Huntresses' bungalow here, as in most homes across the vast archipelago of comfortable middle-income suburbs outside New York City, the recession has not taken much of a visible toll, but it is changing the way that many families live and the way they view their future.


The Winning Thing
MARCHING IN PLACE
The Status Quo Presidency of George Bush.
By Michael Duffy and Dan Goodgame. 316 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Mum's the Word but Tulips Are on the Mind
THIS is a reminder.
If the bulbs to bloom next spring have not been ordered from catalogues, get busy.
Domestic orders must be in as the mail-order houses will soon begin shipping.
Spring-blooming bulbs will be planted this fall, usually October, so that they will be ready to put on their displays when the weather settles.
Bulbs are dormant when planted, but will soon start to develop roots.
Depending on the soil temperature, these young roots will continue to grow but will stop developing when the soil chills.


IN SHORT/UNIVERSITY PRESS: FICTION
CHASING UNCLE CHARLEY By Cruce Stark. Southern Methodist University Press, $17.95


Passion Re-enters The Game
Just as professional golf was winding down into its own late summer dog days, Greg Norman and Nancy Lopez resurrected themselves and the game with victories demonstrating that a sport whose top players are growing more distant still needs its old-fashioned stars.
By winning the Canadian Open in a sudden-death playoff with Bruce Lietzke last Sunday -- his first victory anywhere in 27 months -- the 37-year-old Norman injected a vital dose of credibility to the tenuous notion that he is still one of the best players in the world.


Oligarchy and Skill Beat Money Players
IT is rarely recognized that procedures for selecting international teams have a considerable impact on the outcome at the world level.
And in this area oligarchy, or even dictatorship, seems to work better than democracy.
The United States has long favored democracy.
Teams that are successful in major national events play each other for the right to advance to world level.
The result is always a good team but rarely the best possible team.
This situation occurs in part because almost all the best players are professionals and must be supported by a sponsoring teammate.


Washington's Defense Handles the Huskers
Its reputation and national ranking were built last season on defense, and nothing has apparently changed.
The University of Washington, ranked No. 2 by The Associated Press, made the decisive plays with defense tonight, slowing No. 12 Nebraska's respected running game for a 29-14 victory at Husky Stadium.
Washington (3-0) converted three turnovers into 17 points after initially getting on the scoreboard with a a first-period safety.
In so doing, the Huskies extended their winning streak to 17 straight games, the second longest in the country.
The loss by Nebraska (2-1) was its eighth in a row to a team rated in the top 10.


Margaret O'Brien, William Greason
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. O'Brien Jr. of Garden City, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margaret Mary O'Brien to William Anthony Greason, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Greason of Forest Hills, Queens.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss O'Brien is a vice president at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank, in New York.
She graduated from Fairfield University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is president of M. C. O'Brien Inc., an industrial real-estate concern in Brooklyn.


Sandra Wagstaff, Robert Reynolds
Sandra Tilford Wagstaff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Wagstaff 3d of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married there yesterday to Robert Clinton Reynolds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic C. Reynolds Jr. of New Vernon, N.J.
The Rev.
Mitzi M. Noble performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Reynolds, 26 years old, was until recently the manager of Sam's Restaurant in New York.
Her father is a management consultant in Oyster Bay and the chairman of the Vectura Group Inc., a shipping and stevedoring company in Pittsburgh.


True West: A Reading List
The 14 essays in UNDER AN OPEN SKY: Rethinking America's Western Past, edited by William Cronon, George Miles and Jay Gitlin (Norton, $35) offer a useful sampling of the methods and interests shared by many of the new revisionist historians of the West.
There are studies of the complex interactions of ethnic minorities with the dominant Western culture, of the subtle ways in which life in the West transformed relations between the sexes, and of the manner in which previously untapped materials, such as newspapers produced by American Indian tribes, reveal a fuller portrait of conflict and adaptation in Western communities.
These pieces originated in a 1989 symposium on the new history, held in Santa Fe, N.M.


When a Baby Is So Unaffordable It Is Abandoned
About 3 o'clock on a warm August morning in one of San Diego's rougher neighborhoods, a woman was awakened by the sound of a crying baby.
She put on a robe, went downstairs and, on her front porch, found a plump baby boy wearing a diaper and a T-shirt.
He had two front teeth and a robust pair of lungs.
Since the discovery of the 9-month-old boy -- the sixth child abandoned this year in San Diego County -- the police and social service agencies have stepped up a publicity campaign to find the family.


Old Master Drawings That Lead a Charmed Life
To those who cannot have enough of Florence, I recommend "Fra Bartolommeo: Master Draughtsman of the High Renaissance" at the Pierpont Morgan Library (through Nov. 29).
Though grouped around more than 100 drawings by Fra Bartolommeo (1472-1517), these exhibitions touch at the highest level on life as it was lived in his time.
There is an edition of Xenophon in the original that comes with humanist decorations that would have greatly surprised the author.
There is the Farnese Book of Hours (a shade late, at 1546, but too good to leave out) that caused Vasari to speak of a "new, if smaller Michelangelo." Lorenzo de' Medici turns up as a poet, and doesn't look too bad.


Na'ama Lewin and Jules Polonetsky
Na'ama Batya Lewin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Lewin of Potomac, Md., was married on Thursday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Jules Polonetsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Polonetsky of New York.
Rabbi J. Howard Ralbag, a great-uncle of the bride, officiated at the Tappan Hill mansion.
Ms.
Lewin is 24 years old and is keeping her name.
She is a staff writer and photographer for The Washington Jewish Week in Washington, where her mother, Rikki G. Lewin, is the photography editor.
The bride graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is a senior partner in the Washington law firm of Miller, Cassidy, Larroca &amp; Lewin.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON EXPANDS POSITION ON DRAFT
Gov.
Bill Clinton acknowledged today that he might have received special treatment in 1969 from Federal and local officials in his ultimately successful effort to avoid the Vietnam War draft.
Mr.
Clinton said in a question-and-answer session with reporters that his decision to seek help from the office of Senator J. W. Fulbright of Arkansas in 1969 was part of an effort to get information about his options involving military.
But he said the favors he may have received had been the result of loopholes in a faulty Selective Service system, not of pressure he was able to exert on politicians and others he knew.
Mr.
Clinton made his remarks at a news conference called to announce his endorsement by Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., who served as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Presidents Reagan and Bush until 1989.


The Executive Computer; Zenith Looks for Blue Skies Beyond the Air Force Contract
The news earlier this month that the Zenith Data Systems Corporation, a division of France's Groupe Bull, had won a $740 million Air Force contract for 300,000 desktop computers marked the third time in four recent Government contracts that Zenith caught the gold ring.
While the final disposition of the contract is not yet certain -- the Air Force decision has been protested by the Compuadd Corporation of Austin, Tex. -- Zenith Data already holds 37 percent of the Federal personal computer market, based on machines now installed.
Those contracts have provided the company with a solid base.


Why We're in a Slump and Not Creating Jobs; The Right Education
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 6 Week in Review report on the failure of the American economy to create jobs begins with the now popular concept of work-force training and education.
Yes, our work force is at least as well educated as its Japanese and German counterparts.
But, unlike those examples, American education mismatches its products to the demands of the market.
It is not more college education, but higher quality education at all levels, plus diversified alternative education, that we need.


Making a Difference; More Than a Name Change
DONALD J. BAINTON was once the proud president of the Continental Can Company, a huge packaging concern that ended the deal-driven 80's with only its name intact.
But soon Mr.
Bainton will once more head Continental.
He bought the name last week and hopes to return the company to its former glory.
Continental Can was "literally decimated" and thousands were thrown out of work as its businesses were sold off in the last decade, Mr.
Bainton said.
"I'd like to build the business back up," he said, "and employ some of those middle management people. This will be a labor of love, with an eye on the bottom line."


Sept. 13-19: Improve or Die; New York's Chancellor Lets Students Pick Any School
The national movement to let students choose their schools enlisted a mighty player last week: New York City, with its almost 1 million students.
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said that, starting next year, he will let parents send their children to any of the city's 32 school districts, not just to their neighborhood schools.
While he is still working out details, his plan will mean that parents of elementary and junior high school youngsters can scour the city for good schools and arrange to get their children there.


Susan K. Randol, Joseph J. Schoder
Susan Kirk Randol, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ward Randol Jr. of Birmingham, Mich., was married yesterday to Joseph James Schoder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart Schoder Jr. of Beverly Hills, Fla.
Richard Sennett, a Roman Catholic deacon, officiated at Marquand Chapel at Yale Divinity School in New Haven.


RECORD BRIEFS
Falla: 'Atalantida'; 'El Amor Brujo' Suite
Soloists; La Scala Opera Chorus and Orchestra conducted by Thomas Schippers ("Atalantida").
Teresa Berganza, mezzo-soprano; National Orchestra of France conducted by Ataulfo Argenta ("Amor").
Memories HR 4464/5; two CD's.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
TIME FOR TINY VILLAGES
IT was just like Disney World.
Outside the Freeport Recreational Center a roped-off line of people snaked almost to Merrick Road.
Inside, the line continued through the foyer, up the stairs and round the bend.
Rounding the bend one saw -- more line, heading ever onward.


The Flight of the Raptors
HAWKS and eagles have been migrating for eons along the stony spine of the Kittatinny Ridge in northeastern Pennsylvania.
But it is only since 1934, when a section of the rocks became a bird refuge, that people have gone there to marvel.
Every year more than 50,000 people are drawn to Hawk Mountain Sanctuary, a 2,200-acre private nature preserve in a dot of a town called Kempton, about an hour north of Allentown.
The sanctuary is on a thickly wooded 1,300-foot-high promontory above the farmlands of the Pennsylvania Dutch.


Suni Pedersen, Woody Harford
Suni Pedersen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Richard Pedersen of Ridgefield, Conn., was married there yesterday to William B. Harford Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harford of Columbia, Md.
The Rev.
Richard Gilchrist officiated at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Harford, 30 years old, is an assistant vice president at Merrill Lynch in New York.
She graduated from Denison University and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father, now retired, was the vice president and general counsel of Primerica Corporation, a financial-services company in New York.


This Year, All Sure Bets Are Off
NEW YORKERS who endured the barrage of angry commercials and bitter debates of their Democratic primary may not see it that way, but the secret elections of 1992 have really been the contests for seats in the United States Senate.
As a national phenomenon, they have hardly been noticed.
Only one development, the nomination of a record 11 women, has drawn attention to Senate elections.
But another important theme is likely to develop in the 35 Senate races.
The striking success of women is a clue to the later lesson as well -- that voters want change.
A woman as a Senate candidate, after all, symbolizes change even before she announces her platform.


Deals and Discounts
CHINA TOURS Tours of China starting at $1,599 including air fare from San Francisco are being offered this winter by Orient Flexi-Pax Tours.
The lowest price is for a 10-day "Classic China" trip that includes Beijing, Xian and Shanghai; a 14-day "China Deluxe Plus Hong Kong" also includes Guilin and starts at $2,299; a 21-day "Spectacular China" itinerary, featuring nine cities in China plus Hong Kong, starts at $2,699, and a 17-day "Yangtze River Splendors" tour, including a four-day cruise, starts at $2,699.
The price is for each of two people traveling together and includes accommodations, sightseeing, transportation within China and all meals in China; air fare from the East Coast is $200 extra.
The tours are available from November to March; there are surcharges of $100 or $200 for some tours at the beginning and end of the period and for departures around Christmas.
Orient Flexi-Pax Tours, (800) 545-5540 or (212) 692-9550. .
ISRAEL CAR DEAL El Al Israel Airlines is offering a car rental special for passengers flying round trip to Israel from the United States.
A seven-day rental of a Hertz category A car (subcompact, with manual transmission, such as a Fiat Uno) with unlimited mileage costs $18 a day to March 23.
Cars may be picked up or dropped off in Tel Aviv or Jerusalem or at Ben Gurion Airport.
They must be returned by March 31.
Air fares from New York are $1,108 through Nov. 8, then $976 through March 23.
Flights are also available from other cities in the United States.
The offer is not good Dec. 16 to Jan. 5.
El Al, (800) 352-5786.


Sharpton Vows to Work for Future Campaigns
The Rev.
Al Sharpton told several hundred supporters at a celebratory meeting in Harlem yesterday that he would build support for future political races by keeping his Senate campaign offices open as voter-registration centers.
"We can't just go back to business as usual," he said.
"They used to laugh at us, but now they're scratching their head."


Shrinking Tax Base Means Higher Long Island Taxes
For the first time in its history, the total assessed value of property on Long Island is going down -- which means the average taxpayer now faces a property-tax increase to make up for lost revenues.
Officials say lower home-sale prices, a wave of challenges to assessments and new rules removing some property from the tax rolls have shrunk the total value of taxable property.
To compensate, county officials say they must raise tax rates, resulting in higher tax bills for a majority of taxpayers whose assessments have not changed.


Miss von Bothmer, Jerome Villalba
Maria Elizabeth von Bothmer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dietrich von Bothmer of New York, was married yesterday in Oyster Bay, L.I., to Jerome Loomis Villalba, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeronimo Villalba of Paris.
The Rev.
Robert Coyle performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Dominic Chapel.
Mrs.
Villalba, 24 years old, graduated from Princeton University.
Her father retired as the chairman of the Greek and Roman department at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where he is a distinguished research curator; he teaches the history of Greek and Roman art as an adjunct at New York University.
Her maternal grandfather, Robert Lee Blaffer, was a founder and chairman of the Humble Oil Company of Houston.


The Comfort of Actors
NAME: Rupert Everett, 33 years old, a Scottish-born actor known for his roles in such films as "Dance With a Stranger" and "The Comfort of Strangers."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'ORDINARY' DEPICTIONS
Forty paintings by Suzanne Challinor, exhibited at the Goldsmith Gallery in Madison through Oct. 4, may put the viewer fleetingly in mind of the 1930's and with the naturalist paintings by Isabel Bishop or Reginald Marsh.
Like them, Ms.
Challinor is concerned with the universality of the mundane.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Sept. 6 about a memorial in Jerusalem to European Jewish communities eradicated during the Holocaust misstated the dates for its opening and dedication.
The opening of the memorial, at Yad Vashem, will be on Oct. 14 and the dedication, with an address by the President of Israel, Chaim Herzog, will be on Oct. 15.


Pamela Ann Hunt, James Wombles Jr.
Pamela Ann Hunt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Hunt Jr. of Orchard Park, N.Y., was married in Buffalo yesterday to James Raymond Wombles Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wombles of Lexington, Ky.
The Rev.
John B. Smiley performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Wombles, 27 years old, was until recently an account executive at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, the advertising agency, in Manhattan.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president and the Western regional manager for the New York Telephone Company in Buffalo.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE WILLOW PATTERN STORY.
Written and illustrated by Allan Drummond.
North-South Books. $14.95. (All ages) All about the English china pattern that uses Chinese motifs and has been popular for 200 years.
Here is the tragic story of two lovers, Koong Shee and Chang, a mid-19th-century folk tale that was created to explain the elements of the familiar blue and white design.
This version has handsome, stylized illustrations.


Pesticides Can Stop Beetles and Ants
The Aug. 23 Home Clinic column, "The First Steps in Preventing Pests," was a disservice, making a gross assumption that if consumers see signs of carpenter ants or powder-post beetles they must in all cases "call an exterminator." Our company takes great exception.


Tech Notes; Blood Tests to Trace Cancer
A new blood test that can detect the presence of malignant tumors is enabling people who have been successfully treated for melanoma to obtain life insurance sooner and at lower cost.
The test holds the promise of ultimately providing early diagnosis of all kinds of cancer.
Usually afflicting the skin and eyes, malignant melanoma is the fastest-growing cancer in the world, in part because of the depletion of the ozone layer.
With early detection, more than 87 percent of melanoma patients survive, but they must often wait 5 to 10 years after treatment to obtain life insurance and then get it only at high cost.


U.S. Tries to Dispel Assertions It Hid Fraud Data
In an unusual step, the Bush Administration has moved to dispel accusations that it concealed information in a huge bank-fraud case involving Iraq by making intelligence documents available to the judge in the case.
The Justice Department said today that it had offered to make a small number of intelligence documents available to Judge Marvin Shoob in Atlanta, including a letter that the Central Intelligence Agency sent to a Democratic Congressman in July 1991 dealing with what it knew about the bank.


Sports of The Times; Another September For Kid
EVEN at age 38, even as the Montreal Expos' elder statesman, Gary Carter is still known as Kid to his younger teammates.
"Everybody calls me that," he said with a laugh.
"Even our rookie catcher, Tim Laker, calls me that. I got that nickname my first spring training camp with the Expos in 1974. Tim Foli, Ken Singleton and Mike Jorgensen started calling me Kid because I was trying to win every sprint. I was trying to hit every pitch out of the park."


IN SHORT/UNIVERSITY PRESS: NONFICTION
THE SOUND OF THE WIND  The Life and Works of Uno Chiyo.
By Rebecca L. Copeland.
University of Hawaii, $28.


Taking Bikes
To the Editor: Mark B. Williams might have saved himself the trouble he describes in his essay, "Exhibit A: One Crumpled Bicycle" (June 28) by renting bikes, as do most Americans who ride in the European countryside.
He and his bride could have been the American couple who delayed our London Heathrow airbus last fall by insisting that they board it with their bicycles.
The bikes were in cartons, and there was some talk of how that was what the airlines requested.
Later they were removed from the boxes.


Far From Old Hat, Headwear Is Back
TIME was when no self-respecting American dared venture into town without a hat.
Hats managed to survive the Depression, and even World War II when a large percentage of the population was in uniform and dressing down was considered patriotic.
Then, in the 60's, with bouffant hairstyles and a more informal life style, women's hats began to disappear from the sartorial scene.
The men's hat industry was dealt a severe blow when in January 1961, President John F. Kennedy appeared bareheaded at his Inauguration on the steps of the Capitol despite freezing temperatures.
Now hats are making a comeback.
"Hats are hot," said Casey Bush, executive director of the Millinery Information Bureau in New York, adding that sales of women's hats have been increasing at an annual rate of 10 to 20 percent since the middle of the 80's.


Stamps That Stick Without a Lick
THE Postal Service is issuing its sixth peel-off self-adhesive stamp.
The stamp comes on a sheet the size of a dollar bill, a standard size for paper items sold from vending machines.
The stamps, which are being released in Dayton, Ohio, on Friday, include easy-to-spot varieties that should attract new collectors interested in printing techniques.
The Postal Service is, in effect, testing three printers to see which makes the best of these experimental issues.


A Police Protest Gets Out of Hand
About 10,000 off-duty officers demonstrated outside City Hall last week to protest a plan to put New York's police review board entirely in civilian hands.
But as a lobbying effort, the protest may have backfired.
About 4,000 officers -- many were openly drinking -- surged up the steps to trap City Council members in the building, leapt on rows of city cars and then marched off to shut down the Brooklyn Bridge for an hour.
Uniformed officers on duty hardly got in their way, and some journalists covering the event were punched.
The demonstrators were angry about a series of incidents, including rioting in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, last year and Mayor David N. Dinkins's visit to the family of a man whose fatal shooting by an officer touched off a riot in Washington Heights.
A grand jury later decided that the officer had acted in self-defense.


Traffic Alert
Fifth Avenue between 48th and 57th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. today for New York Is Book Country.
Columbus Avenue between 66th and 96th Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. today for the Columbus Avenue street fair.


In the Land of Genghis Khan
OUT on the steppes, where the prairies stretch endlessly until they melt into mountain crags on the horizon, there's not much sign of the last few million years of human civilization.
At most, one sees an occasional rutted dirt road or a shepherd's tent exhaling a plume of white smoke from a cooking fire made of cow chips.
Mongolia, after all, has been in a funk for the last seven centuries.


A Tower of PC Babble
To the Editor:
"Coming Soon: The PC With Ears" (Technology, Aug. 30) announces the near arrival of personal computers that will respond to human speech.
As a technical consultant who is actively involved in the impact of new technology issues, I am angered to find the complete absence of attention to any possible adverse consequences of new technologies.
In the case of voice-activated electronic systems, the prospect of an office full of people all babbling away at their PC's is not something I would look forward to.


For a One-Stop Brand-New You
NEVER underestimate the power of makeup.
After an hourlong paint job at Il-Makiage, an East Side beauty salon that sells its own line of products, I literally stopped traffic: a taxi driver braked to ogle my doll face.
In business since 1972, Il-Makiage has a client roster that reads like the year-end issue of People magazine.
Iman was in recently for eyelashes.
Diana Ross buys Bordeaux lipstick; ($11); Cher likes China Red lipstick ($11) and Shoynear Sun Milk, a self-tanner ($22.50).
Demi Moore and Bruce Willis come for his-and-hers facials.


Alison Gertz Memorial
A memorial service for Alison L. Gertz, who died of AIDS on Aug. 8, will be held at 6:30 P.M. on Thursday at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, in Manhattan.
Ms.
Gertz, who died at age 26, had publicized her case to warn heterosexuals of the risk of H.I.V. infection.
Attendance at the service is by invitation, with limited public seating.


P.C. Lipstick
WHAT: Lipsticks that for health, ecological or philosophical reasons are made without ingredients some users may find offensive.
Key selling points are prominently placed guilt-free lists of ingredients and eco-minded packaging.
Chief producers include Aveda, MAC, Origins and Kiss My Face.
WHAT'S ABSENT: Typical lipstick staples like mineral oil and other petroleum-derived products (refining releases toxins into the air).
And no chemicals like isopropyl myristate and t-butyl hydroquinone.
By definition cruelty free, these lipsticks take pains to avoid animal byproducts.
Notable trade-off: Aveda abstains from carmine, a deep red coloring harvested from the shells of Peruvian beetles, but for texture and staying power, it uses lanolin, which comes from sheep's wool. (The wool-giving sheep in question are not slaughtered, said Prakash Purohit, Aveda's vice president of research and development, and are "very well treated.")


D.A.N.Y.: The Latest Fashionable Logo
District attorneys and their assistants, with the exception of John F. Kennedy Jr., aren't known for their interest in fashion.
But Linda Fairstein, the chief of the Manhattan District Attorney's sex-crimes unit, was talking about fashion on Wednesday night at the party for Jane Stanton Hitchcock's new novel, "Trick of the Eye" (Dutton, $19).
Ms.
Fairstein recently ordered 20 T-shirts for her unit.
On the front of the blue shirts was New York City's seal and the legend "Sex Crimes Unit," and on the back were the initials D.A.N.Y. (District Attorney New York), an unintentional play on Donna Karan's ubiquitous D.K.N.Y. logo.


'The Mask of Benevolence'
To the Editor:
Melvin Konner writes, "Contrary to 'audist' belief, American Sign Language is a fully developed language, as complex and effective as most oral ones." Although I wonder exactly what he means by "most oral ones," some people may not realize that A.S.L. dictionaries only go from English to A.S.L.
As far as I can see, there's no way of looking up the meaning of a sign that you might have seen.


Honoring Alice Tully
Music and tributes at Lincoln Center for her 90th birthday, Sept. 14.


Youth May Sleep On 'Big Mamie'
A new program that allows organized youth groups (with members aged 6 and older) to stay overnight aboard the 46,000-ton battleship Massachusetts was introduced recently at Battleship Cove, the collection of historic fighting ships in Fall River, Mass.
The star of the Cove's fleet -- which includes destroyers, PT boats and submarines -- "Big Mamie" was the last of the battleships to fire her 16-inch guns during World War II.
Her camping program, which will run year round except for July and August, puts children in the same steel-framed, canvas-covered bunks the sailors used.
About 200 yards long and nine stories high, the ship originally sailed with 2,300 men.
Today's quarters are geared for up to 500 people.


Miss Westenburg, D. A. Barnhorst Jr.
Kirsten Lee Westenburg, the daughter of Elinor W. Cotts of New York and Richard Westenburg of Monterey, Mass., was married yesterday in Lenox, Mass., to Dr.
Donald Anthony Barnhorst Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Barnhorst of Lawton, Okla.
The Rev.
Daniel Brunton officiated at St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Barnhorst, 26 years old, is an assistant marketing manager at General Mills in Minneapolis.
She graduated from Georgetown University, as did her husband, and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


Topics of The Times; President Trouncing Governor!
The President is overwhelmingly favored for re-election in the straw poll now being conducted at the Fraunces Tavern Museum in lower Manhattan.
Among the serious contenders, Governor Clinton is a weak third, behind John Adams.
The President in this poll is George Washington, elected to a second term as President 200 years ago this December.
The polling place is a ballot box in the historic tavern where he bade his officers farewell at the end of the Revolution.
And the Governor is George Clinton, the obstreperous Governor of New York at the time, who was trying to dislodge Adams as Vice President.


After the Fall


A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
As a naturopathic physician who specializes in classical homeopathy, I was pleased to see James Gorman's article "Take a Little Deadly Nightshade and You'll Feel Better" (Aug. 30).
However, I think he may have given the impression that these remedies are prescribed for specific conditions or illnesses in the same way that conventional medicines are prescribed.
The classical homeopath views illness from the holistic perspective; one's health is a condition of the entire person, rather than a group of unrelated symptoms.
The remedy is selected that best corresponds to the total picture of the symptoms, especially those that are unique to the patient.
HOWARD FINE, N.D.
Westport, Conn.


The New Blue Army
A news bulletin like this could flash around the world tomorrow, next week, anytime:
PHNOM PENH, Cambodia -- Thousands of United Nations peacekeepers came under rocket fire today as Khmer Rouge forces ended a year-old cease-fire agreement.
Heavy casualties are expected unless foreign help can be deployed quickly in remote jungle areas
.
Or perhaps the news would take this slant:


SEOUL CHIEF ACTS IN SCANDAL'S WAKE
In an effort to contain a vote-buying scandal that threatens the governing party's prospects in the coming presidential election, President Roh Tae Woo has said he will resign from the party and replace many members of his Cabinet.
Mr.
Roh made the announcement on Friday to quell a growing clamor over evidence that leaders of the Democratic Liberal Party bought votes in a parliamentary election in March.
While vote-buying is hardly uncommon here, the evidence of widespread efforts to fix an election threatens the presidential candidacy of Mr.
Roh's chosen successor, Kim Young Sam.


The Last O'Neill


New York Fears Impact of U.N. Cuts
From his 37th-floor windows at the United Nations, Vladimir F. Petrovsky, the former Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union, surveyed the Chrysler Building, Citicorp Center and other corporate monoliths as he described the deep financial problems at the world body, one of New York City's biggest employers.
"The United Nations has played a critical role in peacekeeping around the world," said Mr.
Petrovsky.
In February, he and Richard L. Thornburgh, the former United States Attorney General, were appointed by Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary General of the United Nations, as Under Secretaries General charged with streamlining the United Nations in ways that resemble the reorganization of a large American corporation.


The Favors Done for Quayle: A New Look at Guard Stint
At a time when the Republicans are stressing military records as a campaign issue, a re-examination of Vice President Dan Quayle's enlistment in the Indiana National Guard shows a striking pattern of favoritism and raises new questions about the fairness of the enlistment practices for the elite unit that saved him from the draft.
Twenty-three years ago, when thousands of young men trying to escape service in Vietnam were placed on waiting lists for the National Guard, Mr.
Quayle avoided those long lists and secured a coveted spot in the Indiana Guard because he was directed to the headquarters unit, where openings were largely unavailable to those without special connections, knowledge or qualifications.


No Headline
On April 11, 1986, a typically bright spring morning in Beirut, Brian Keenan rushed out of his apartment late for his lecture at the American University, where he taught English.
He never made it.
Along the way, he was thrown into the back of an old Mercedes by four armed men who apparently were under the misapprehension that Keenan, an Irishman, was English.
Having left his passport at home, he could never convince his captors otherwise.
Keenan endured a series of hardships at the hands of his captors, members of Hezbollah, the radical Shiite group.
It began with several months -- he isn't exactly sure how many -- in solitary confinement in nearly total darkness in a 4-by-6-foot cell and ended in a large room shared with four other hostages -- Americans Terry Anderson, Thomas Sutherland and Frank Reed and an Englishman, John McCarthy.


Kimberly Latham, Jeffrey Bullwinkel
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Latham 3d of Locust Valley, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kimberly Blake Latham, to Jeffrey George Bullwinkel, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
George A. Bullwinkel of Westport, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.


Beyond Pluto, an Icy New Orb
Something is out there beyond the outermost known planets, Neptune and Pluto.
Suspecting the fringes of the solar system are not entirely empty, astronomers have long searched for Planet X, the dark giant whose gravity could account for odd quirks in the orbits of Uranus and Neptune.
Using electronic sensors on an 88-inch visible-light telescope, two astronomers in Hawaii got a glimpse two weeks ago of a new planetary object in orbit well beyond Pluto.
It's probably no more than 120 miles in diameter, no massive Planet X and even much smaller than tiny Pluto itself.
But scientists think the faint reddish object, designated 1992 QB-1, could be the first direct evidence that distant swarms of icy minor planets do exist and could be the source of many comets streaking into the inner solar system.


No Headline
God forbid, or Goddess forbid, if he doesn't get elected, then we need somebody to clobber Bush.
And I'm a known clobberer. -- BELLA ABZUG, on Gov.
Bill Clinton.  [ 44:2. ]


New &amp; Noteworthy
BEGINNING TO SEE THE LIGHT: Sex, Hope, and Rock-and-Roll, by Ellen Willis. (Wesleyan University/ University Press of New England, $15.95.) Despite its new and somewhat flippant subtitle, this book of essays and reportage deals with serious subjects -- including abortion, date rape, the family and anti-Semitism -- issues that, if anything, have become even more topical since its first publication in 1981.
Ellen Willis has written a new introduction for the book, which our reviewer, Elinor Langer, found a "stimulating and satisfying collection" by an "unfailingly honest" observer.
THE HOMECOMING GAME, by Howard Nemerov. (University of Missouri, $12.95.) The poet laureate of the United States from 1988 to 1990, Howard Nemerov was also a fiction writer.
This novel, originally published in 1957, is about a college professor bold enough not only to flunk a star football player but also to fall in love with his girlfriend.
"A slip or two could have turned this novel into burlesque," Richard Sullivan said in The New York Times Book Review.
"But there are no slips." The University of Missouri has also reissued another Nemerov satire, his first novel, THE MELODRAMATISTS ($14.95), in which two sisters turn their wealthy father's Boston household upside down.
In 1949 our reviewer, Herbert Barrows, said, "Mr. Nemerov's verbal wit is always satisfactory."


Luciana Fato, Brian Curtis Erb
Mr. and Mrs.
Carmelo Fato of Pittsburgh have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Luciana Fato and Brian Curtis Erb, the son of Joanne K. Erb of Lebanon, Ore., and Delbert D. Erb of Albany, Ore.


The Next Question: Should Europe Press Onward?
WHAT tempted Europe, notably Germany and France, to plunge toward monetary marriage in the first place?
While most analysts agree that the most important goal was political -- a wish to submerge Germany irrevocably in a peaceful, democratic Europe -- the economic rewards alone seemed worth the gamble when the decision was made at Maastricht last December to move ahead from a currency-exchange system toward a common European currency.


Visiting Dutchess County Farms
The Dutchess Hunt Country Stable, Farm and Garden Tour, a daylong look at three thoroughbred horse farms, a sheep farm, a country estate and a winery in the Millbrook, N.Y., area, will be held Oct. 11.
Equestrian and sheep herding demonstrations and a polo match are also part of the program, organized by the Dutchess Land Conservancy, a conservation group.
The event will raise funds for the conservancy, which has worked to secure nearly 5,000 acres of protected land.
A 10-acre formal garden will be open at Wethersfield, the country estate of the late philanthropist Chauncey Stillmann, where visitors will also see a collection of hackney horses and historic carriages.
The winery is at the Millbrook Vineyard.
At the farms, visitors on this self-guided driving tour (10 A.M. to 4 P.M.) will go into stables, barns and carriage houses.
Two picnic sites are being provided.


A Post-Hurricane Status Report On Florida Hotels
While most attractions from beaches to nightclubs -- in northern Dade County in Florida are open, finding a place to stay is harder than usual in this off-season.
The hotels are busy with out-of-towners with business related to Hurricane Andrew, volunteer workers and the more affluent temporarily homeless.
For help in locating a room on Miami Beach call the Miami Beach Resort Association, (800) 733-6426.
Lodging inquiries for the rest of Dade County should be made to the Greater Miami Convention and Visitors' Bureau, (800) 283-2707.
Here is the current status in several localities following the Aug. 24 storm.


Abzug Seeks to Run for Weiss's Vacant Seat
Former Representative Bella S. Abzug yesterday threw her hat -- a broad-brimmed, beige one -- into the already crowded ring of Upper West Side Democrats seeking the party's designation for the Congressional seat left vacant last week by the death of Ted Weiss.
At a news conference at the New York Ethical Culture Society, Ms.
Abzug, 72 years old, who served three terms in the House, said she deserved the designation because: "I will require no warm-up time. I know the House very well. I know its rules, its procedures."


5,000 Tiny Bits of Fabric in Quilts That Scintillate
JOY SAVILLE'S fabric creations have the aura of a cave filled with treasure chests of sparkling jewels.
The stitched-together shapes of bright material glow under the spotlights in the Contemporary Craft Gallery of the Newark Museum like facets of rubies, diamonds or emeralds.
The viewer half expects to find the hues reflected on the walls and ceiling.
Ms.
Saville is not a traditional quilter.
There are no repeated patterns of calico stars or hearts in her work.
"Color is my focus," she said.


Making a Difference; 'Labor Peace' In Florida's Sugar Fields
Most employers of foreign migrant farmworkers figure they have about as much chance of winning kudos from representatives of the impoverished laborers as they do of seeing the crops harvest themselves, but J. Nelson Fairbanks, president of the United States Sugar Company, did not take poor relations with the workers' advocates for granted.
The result was an extraordinary joint announcement Sept. 11 of "labor peace" by the privately held company, which is based in Clewiston, Fla., and three persistent critics -- the Farmworkers Justice Fund Inc., the Migrant Legal Action Program and Florida Rural Legal Services.


Involve Congress in Vice Presidential Choice
To the Editor:
It is not too early for political scientists in this country to think seriously about the 1996 Presidential election.


Audrey C. Ross, Ledyard King
Audrey Celeste Ross and Ledyard Stevens Rhinelander King, both reporters for The Capital in Annapolis, Md., were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
John R. Price performed the ceremony at St.
Anne's Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Ross, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of American University, she is a daughter of Sheila Ross of St.
Thomas, V.I., and Washington, and the late James Ross-Fajardo.
Her mother is the administrative assistant in Washington to Ron de Lugo, a Democrat who is the delegate from the United States Virgin Islands to the House of Representatives.
The bride's father was a vice president in San Juan, P.R., of Young &amp; Rubicam, the advertising agency.


The Western Historians: Don't Fence Them In
FROM the 1930's to the 1950's, Walter Prescott Webb was one of the most eminent historians of the American West.
So it came as something of a surprise to his many admirers when, after spending a year teaching in England, he published an essay in Harper's Magazine in 1957 that seemed to repudiate much of his own life's work.
The West, he complained, was an unpromising and unrewarding field of study.
"What," he asked, "is the biographer going to do for a region that has so few men of distinction? What is the historian going to do with a country almost without chronology or important battles or great victories? . . . How can he make a thick history out of such thin material?"
Webb's lament was evidence of how far Western American history had fallen in the 1950's from the position of eminence it had occupied just 20 years before.
Beginning with Frederick Jackson Turner's famous 1893 essay, "The Significance of the Frontier in American History," and continuing until at least the early 1940's, the settlement of the West had served as a paradigm for the writing of American history as a whole.
Turner's "frontier thesis" had identified a process -- "the existence of an area of free land, its continuous recession, and the advance of American settlement westward" -- that seemed to explain American development -- and American democracy -- in the 18th and 19th centuries.


Hip-Hop's Hostile Takeover
QUINCY Jones is ecstatic, in a millionaire jazzman sort of way, about the news that the Tower Records outlets on both coasts have sold out of thousands of preview issues of a magazine he just founded.
Vibe, an oddly slick and gritty publication that is bankrolled by Time Inc., is poised to enormously enlarge the already insistent voice of rap and hip-hop music.
If the magazine can find a broad enough readership, as its backers certainly hope it will, Americans of all stripes may one day be deeply affected by the urgency of hip-hop style and the brooding inner-urban attitude that is so much a part of its culture.


Wallingford Mixes It Up For Series
THE musical components of the season at Paul Mellon Arts Center in Wallingford are colorful and diverse, from the recital this afternoon at 2 by the Leontovych String Quartet of Kiev, to a spring production of "A Chorus Line."
In between, visitors will find four concerts by the Wallingford Symphony (the first this Saturday at 8), three by student soloists or ensembles of Choate Rosemary Hall, two by the Wallingford Chorus, and several individual attractions including visits from the American Indian Dance Theater and the Rebirth Brass Band.


Meghan O'Hearn, Douglas Benedict
Meghan Patrick O'Hearn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter D. O'Hearn Jr. of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Douglas Brainard Benedict, a son of Julia B. Benedict of St.
Louis and Charles B. Benedict of New York.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Benedict, 28 years old, was until recently a partner at In Focus Associates, a photographers' representation firm in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a partner in the New York investment company of Keane Securities.
Her mother, Denise O'Hearn, is the managing director of the New York office of T. Barile &amp; Associates, an executive search company.


Edith Moore, Thomas Carhart
Edith Bradley Moore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Moore 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Thomas Carhart, the son of Dixie Caulkins of Hobe Sound, Fla., and the late H. Whitfield Carhart.
The Rev.
Richard H. Stearns performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Carhart graduated from New York University and is a candidate for a master's degree in art history at Columbia University.
Her father is a partner at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, a private bank in New York.


BEST SELLERS: September 20, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
4
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
2
2
28
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
1
10
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
4
3
17
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
5
4
4
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) The story of Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton and her spouse.
6
6
4
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
7
12
6
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
8
7
4
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $22.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
9
8
4
NIGHT OF THE HAWK, by Dale Brown. (Fine/ Putnam, $22.95.) American airmen and marines undertake to rescue a serviceman in Lithuania.
10
1
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) A half-dozen close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
11 *
9
10
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old South Carolina woman recalls her life at a Maine summer retreat.
12
10
11
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Random House, $21.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
13
14
2
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Visiting her native Napa Valley, a television star encounters shades of her unhappy childhood and romance with the heir to a winery.
14
1
BEFORE AND AFTER, by Rosellen Brown. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A tragic event in a New England town pits members of a family against one another.
15
11
14
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
2
2
17
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
3
3
14
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
4
7
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918; based in part on newly available material.
5
5
15
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
6 *
1
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the radio talk show host.
7
7
6
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
8
6
12
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
9
8
3
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
10
9
5
MARILYN: THE LAST TAKE, by Peter Harry Brown and Patte B. Barham. (Dutton, $23.) Did intrigues in Hollywood boardrooms and in the Kennedys' circle lead to Marilyn Monroe's death?
11
1
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
12 *
1
UP IN THE OLD HOTEL, by Joseph Mitchell. (Pantheon, $27.50.) Three dozen pieces about Manhattan life, published in The New Yorker during the past half-century.
13
13
34
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
14
10
13
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
15
12
10
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
41
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
2
2
31
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
8
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
5
42
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5
4
10
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
EVELYN WAUGH: The Later Years 1939-1966, by Martin Stannard. (Norton, $29.95.) Mr.
Stannard's perseverance and minute attention to detail show how much more there was to the aging Waugh than the ogre of reaction in his Somerset cavern.
ROSE MACAULAY: A Writer's Life, by Jane Emery. (John Murray/Trafalgar Square, $34.95.) A much-needed life of a London literary presence, a born adventurer and a novelist who capped her career with the miraculous "Towers of Trebizond."
THE GREAT GAME: The Struggle for Empire in Central Asia, by Peter Hopkirk. (Kodansha, $30.) The frankly admiring story of the men (all stouthearted) and the lands they strove over during more than a century of contest between Russia and Britain.
THE LAST MAGICIAN, by Janette Turner Hospital. (Holt, $23.) The "magician" of Ms.
Hospital's ambitious, powerful novel is Charlie Chang, a photographer and film maker whose images capture more truth about people than they are willing to bear.
KISSINGER: A Biography, by Walter Isaacson. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The 893-page chronicle of an immigrant boy who climbed to the top of the greasy pole; based on documentary sources and interviews with almost everybody, including the subject himself.
OTA BENGA: The Pygmy in the Zoo, by Phillips Verner Bradford and Harvey Blume. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Why
was
a 4-foot-11 Congolese in a cage in the Bronx in 1906?
This engrossing account reflects an America we can now (let's hope) only imagine.
YOU CAN'T SAY YOU CAN'T PLAY, by Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University, $15.95.) A master teacher relates what ensued when she told kindergartners they could not exclude classmates from their games.
It seems to have made them nicer.


The Himalayas' Hidden Kingdom
WE stopped for our picnic of boiled eggs, roast potatoes and cheese on the rim of the Phobjika Valley, not far from where the road vanishes into the shadow of the Gantey monastery.
The essence of Bhutan, the last Himalayan Buddhist kingdom, was all around.
Behind us, obscured by a thicket of brilliant April rhododendrons -- red, lavender and yellow plants the size of trees -- was the retreat where Gantey's Buddhist abbot had retired for a long meditation.
In front of us, on the valley floor where black-necked Siberian cranes had wintered, were half-timbered farmhouses, clusters of bamboo poles with flapping prayer flags and the emerald fields of spring.


SURFACING
FILM --
Ratings for parents by phone:
Reel review, (900) 903-1117, advises whether a movie is "appropriate" for children, at 99 cents a minute.
DRINK --
Nonalcoholic wine:
White zinfandel and chardonnay by Sutter Home Fre.  POLITICS --
Voting guidebooks:
For single-issue voters, from Earth Works Press.  MAGAZINES --
Outserts:
Calvin Klein's 116 pages with Vanity Fair; Request Jeans' 48 pages with Details, Revlon's 68 pages with Vogue.


What's Good for Daily News Means Different Things for Other Papers
On the muddy battlefield of New York City's longstanding newspaper war, a revived Daily News with a wealthy new owner like Mortimer B. Zuckerman would clearly affect the other combatants: The New York Times, The New York Post and New York Newsday.
One would be helped; the others, hurt, newspaper and labor leaders say.
Mr.
Zuckerman, the New York real-estate developer and the owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, will almost certainly acquire the bankrupt Daily News, having won the support of eight of the paper's nine unions and the endorsement of The News's board of directors.


Juliet C. Weber, Samuel S. Reid
Juliet Colket Weber, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Weber of New York and Ocala, Fla., was married yesterday to Samuel Seabury Reid, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Seabury Reid of York Harbor, Me.
The Rev.
John G. Hartnett performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James' Church in New York.
Mrs.
Reid, 22 years old, is the president of Verona Inc., a retail fashion business in Boston that is to open in March.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is an assistant professor of cell biology at Cornell University Medical College-New York Hospital in New York and is the president of the Florida Thoroughbred Breeders Association.


Step by Polite Step, Fishermen Take Turns at the Salmon
GUYSBOROUGH, Nova Scotia -- With my newly purchased three-day Atlantic salmon fishing license safely tucked into a pocket in my waders, I joined eight other fly fishermen who were moving down the shore of the Salmon River just upstream of where it empties into Chedabucto Bay.
Fly lines gleamed in the late afternoon sunlight as they curved up and over the high banks of sand and gravel behind the anglers, whose measured descent to the bay -- a cast or two or three, then a few steps downstream -- was a ritual that may be seen on any of the province's salmon rivers, all of which are open to the public.
This ballet of salmoneers gives each fisher a shot or two at all of the water in a run or pool.
When the person at the bottom of the stretch finishes casting, he or she walks back upstream to the beginning and comes down through again.


Sept. 13-19: Baby Bells; The F.C.C. Tries To Introduce A Little Local Competition
Long-distance calls used to be so expensive that people kept egg timers near their phones, but after the 1984 breakup of A.T.&amp;T., competition slashed prices.
Not so with local phone service, where prices actually rose and local phone companies enjoy a virtual monopoly.
Last week, the Federal Communications Commission took an important first step toward introducing vigorous competition at the local level.
Small communications companies catering to business customers will be able to link their equipment to the vast local networks operated by GTE, the regional Bell companies and other carriers.


Claude And Henri
CLAUDE MONTANA, the Paris ready-to-wear designer, was feeling itchy last July.
His couture collections for Lanvin had been heralded as leading the most extravagant branch of the French fashion industry into the 21st century.
But despite that succes d'estime, Lanvin dropped his couture line.
Other designers were introducing their couture collections, and Mr.
Montana had nothing to do.
Then Susan Falk, the president and chief executive of Henri Bendel, came to see him about opening his own shop.
He saw the opportunity to edge back into couture.


After the Geldkrieg
Today, the French go to the polls to decide the fate of Europe.
But it hardly matters whether they vote "oui" or "non" on the Maastricht agreement, grandiloquently titled "Treaty on European Union." For its key provisions have already been sunk -- blown out of the water by the nasty realities of politics among nations.
The U.S.
Constitution originally had seven Articles, strewn across a few pages, to underpin "a more perfect Union." The Maastricht treaty fills some 250 pages.
But you don't have to wade through hundreds of titles and protocols to get the gist.
It is right there on the first two pages, spelled out in the triple pledge to go for a "single currency" and for a common foreign and security policy.


Soviet Emigree Wins U.S. Women's Title
THE United States Women's Championship, held at Bentley College in Waltham, Mass., Aug. 19 to 30, was won by Irina Levitina.
The 38-year-old grandmaster, who was the Soviet women's champion four times and challenged for the women's world title before immigrating, scored 8-1 to capture the $2,000 first prize.
Esther Epstein, of Brookline, Mass., a women's international master and another Soviet emigree, took second prize, $1,000, with 6-3 in the 10-player invitational.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS -- N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Aug. 92
Jul. 92
Aug. 91
Rents
181.3
+0.1
+3.6
Homeowner's costs
178.9
+0.5
+3.5
Fuel and utilities
110.0
+0.1
+3.8
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.00
8.08
9.23
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.33
5.38
6.96
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.90
7.97
9.11
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.17
5.22
6.82
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.90
8.01
9.12
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.04
5.11
6.88
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.05
8.15
9.35
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.79
5.95
7.47
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.17
3.39
5.58
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.78
7.78
9.12
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Technology; Keeping Tabs on Power Lines
Bury an electric distribution cable in a concrete underground tunnel and it is protected from the two biggest causes of power failures: falling tree limbs and lightning.
Run the cables in a grid pattern and even if several of them fail, the customer's lights hardly flicker.
The result is a reliable system of electrical distribution.
But after many parts have failed, how can a utility manager tell that the network is near collapse?
"Go out and count how many manhole covers are smoking," said John A. Arceri, who is in charge of distribution at the Consolidated Edison Company of New York.
Another tip-off is intermittent explosions.


Three Officers Wounded In East Harlem Shootout
Three plainclothes police officers responding to gunshots pursued two suspects into an East Harlem tenement early yesterday and were shot in an exchange of gunfire in a dingy hallway.
The assailants escaped, despite an extensive search by scores of officers who flooded into the area with rifles and armored vests.
The shootout, just before 12:30 A.M. at 11 East 109th Street, left one officer wounded in the shoulder, back and armpit and two others with leg wounds.
The injuries were not life-threatening, doctors said, but the shootings had an unusual resonance at a time of increased tensions between the police and City Hall over a range of issues.


Hofstra Routed by James Madison, 38-6
Quarterback Eriq Williams passed for two touchdowns and ran for a third as James Madison defeated Hofstra, 38-6, last night in Harrisonburg, Va.
James Madison (1-2) converted three Hofstra first-half turnovers into scores to take a 31-0 halftime lead.
Hofstra (1-2) lost the ball six times in the game.
Its lone score came with less four minutes left when Lee Harris recovered a fumble on the James Madison 4 and ran it in for the score.
Colgate 17, Fordham 7
Quarterback Jim Russell ran 34 yards for a touchdown and had 275 total yards for Colgate in a Patriot League game in the Bronx.


As Nuclear Plants Close, Costs Don't Shut Down
WHAT'S the difference between an operating nuclear reactor and a retired one?
A lot less than you might think.
For years the Sacramento Municipal Utility District grappled with whether to fix the ailing Rancho Seco nuclear plant or permanently close it.
In a referendum on June 7, 1989, the voters pulled the plug.
The plant shut the next day, and technicians took the fuel bundles out of the reactor and moved them to a spent fuel pool, the equivalent of putting a car on blocks and draining the fluids.


UP AND COMING: Kyle Chandler and Tammy Lauren; Everybody's Favorite Postwar Sweethearts
Jeff and Ginger weren't supposed to have a long-term romance.
"Originally they were only going to be together for three episodes," says Lynn Marie Latham, one of the creators and executive producers of the ABC series "Home Front," which began its second season Thursday night at 9.
"But when we saw the dailies, we said, 'Wait a minute.' We saw it before everyone."


County Purchases Pocantico Lakes
THE County Board of Legislators voted unanimously last week to spend $3.7 million for a 164-acre parcel of parkland known as Pocantico Lakes, which in an emergency could also be a source of drinking water.
The property, situated mostly in the town of Mount Pleasant, includes the 27-acre Pocantico Lake, which formerly provided a population of 26,000 with drinking water.
The State Department of Environmental Conservation classifies it as Class A, or safe for drinking.


Mum's the Word but Tulips Are on the Mind
THIS is a reminder.
If the bulbs to bloom next spring have not been ordered from catalogues, get busy.
Domestic orders must be in as the mail-order houses will soon begin shipping.
Spring-blooming bulbs will be planted this fall, usually October, so that they will be ready to put on their displays when the weather settles.
Bulbs are dormant when planted, but will soon start to develop roots.
Depending on the soil temperature, these young roots will continue to grow but will stop developing when the soil chills.


Restoring an 1888 Landmark in the Loop
As he tells it, Thomas Baldwin became a developer by default.
There is every reason to believe him.
Anyone planning to become a developer would have picked an easier first project than the Rookery, a 104-year-old landmark listed on the National Register of Historic Places that was in need of rehabilitation.
Now, as he competes in a tough market to find office tenants for the Rookery, in the heart of this city's financial district, other developers are watching to see if he can make his architectural jewel pay.


Huge Rally Demands Brazil Chief's Impeachment
In the largest demonstration in Brazil's history, 750,000 people braved a rainstorm Friday night to demand the impeachment of President Fernando Collor de Mello.
"Impeachment now!" the huge crowd roared rythmically, sending their protest chants echoing through the skyscraper and neon canyons of Brazil's financial heartland here.


Stacey D. Siegel, Bradley J. Bolnick
Stacey Dana Siegel, a daughter of Alvin and Mildred Siegel of Central Valley, N.Y., was married last evening to Bradley Jay Bolnick, a son of Franklin and Florence Bolnick of Pomona, N.Y.
Rabbi David Chanofsky performed the ceremony at Singer's in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Mrs.
Bolnick, 27 years old, is a sales representative for the Crown Textile Company, a maker of fabric linings in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is a used-automobile distributor in Central Valley.
Her mother owns a Snelling Personnel Services office in Montvale, N.J.


Handy Traditional Carpenter's Toolbox
FEW containers are as well suited to carrying tools as a carpenter's traditional open toolbox.
Made of wood to prevent damaging sharpened items, such a toolbox consists essentially of a rectangular tray with tall ends spanned by a sturdy handle.
Following are instructions for two toolboxes that can be built by using just hand tools or, more easily, by using hand tools supplemented by a power circular saw and electric drill.
One toolbox is a basic model.
The other has three drawers for small items.


All This Might Never Have Happened
LEVIATHAN
By Paul Auster. 275 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


Deep, Deep Roots
To the Editor:
Your survey of world rap styles showed that rap, if musically jejune as some detractors insist, is also far more than music  [ "A Newcomer Abroard, Rap Speaks Up," Aug. 23 ] .
It has a lot in common, in fact, with an ancient ritual art form.
Its narrative line, its allusions to sexuality and extreme violence, its special rhythmic language, stylized dance movements and moral lessons give it an uncanny resemblance to classical Greek drama.


Apple Desserts That Are as Easy as Pie
THE fall apple harvest has started around the country.
In this region, apples are expected to be somewhat smaller than usual but, thanks to the cooler weather this summer, extremely flavorful.
For baking, when bigger apples are easier to use, this year's crop may prove somewhat less convenient.
More important than size, however, is taste and texture.
Apples that are tart allow greater flexibility in seasonings.
A sweet apple like Golden Delicious, on the other hand, requires less sugar or other sweetener.


BENEFITS
Auction for Child Care
Today -- The Child Care Action Campaign, a national group that seeks to improve child care, will benefit from a reception and an auction from 6 to 8:30 P.M. at Sotheby's.
The 100 events and items to be auctioned include a luncheon for four with members of the New York Jets, along with the chance to attend a training session, and a photographic portrait of the high bidder by Alfred Eisenstaedt.
Tickets, $150, or $50 for those under 35 years old, at the door.
Odyssey House Anniversary


Reinforcements Arrive; Result Is the Same
Fresh troops arrived from Class AAA Columbus today to try to help the Yankees wade their way through the final 14 games of the season.
Maybe the new arms and legs can provide them with a spark that has been severely lacking lately.
More than likely, only one will get the chance.
Four players from the Clippers joined the Yankees after completing one of the most successful seasons in Columbus history by erupting for three runs in the bottom of the ninth Friday to edge Scranton/Wilkes-Barre, 4-3, and snatch the International League championship.
Columbus won the best of five series, 3-2, over the Phillies' top affiliate and finished 101-51.


Songwriter Acts to Cut the Ribbons
A daughter is intimidated by her charismatic mother.
The song is "I Just Can't Move in Her Shadow."
A mother, jittery about her gifted daughter's blase attitude toward working, has "had it up to here." The song is "Her Career."


Quogue
To the Editor:
Your article on Aug. 30 about the Long Island community of Quogue did not mention its principal landmark, largest property and largest employer -- The Inn at Quogue.
The 70-room hotel -- with nine buildings on four acres, a restaurant, bar, pool, meeting rooms and the like -- is in the center of the village, at Quogue Street and Jessup Avenue.


Minding P's and Q's At a B &amp; B
THE ideal bed-and-breakfast sits on a pastoral country road next to a lake with a view of the mountains.
It's a restored 19th-century farmhouse with modern plumbing and heating, but furnished tastefully with period pieces, down to the 1829 sleigh bed covered with a hand-stitched patchwork quilt in your room.
An antique jelly jar filled with wildflowers graces the oak dresser.
Lace curtains stir at the windows.
In the morning, the scent of fresh-baked corn bread floats upstairs, followed by the cheerful whistle of someone heading out to the chicken coop to collect breakfast.
This is it, you sigh with happy recognition, rolling over on your goose-feather mattress.
This is
home.
Herein lies the charm, and the confusion, of staying in a bed-and-breakfast.
It looks, smells and feels more authentically homey than your own home, so familiar you could swear you had been there before.
Clearly you're not in a hotel, pension or hospice, and certainly not a motel (no coin-operated television set).
So where are you, exactly?
Nestled inside the consummate family home, as a customer.


Lainie Aronson and Jonathan Winer
Helaine Carol Aronson, a daughter of Donald E. Aronson of New York and the late Margery R. Aronson, was married yesterday evening to Jonathan Louis Winer, the son of Robert H. Winer of Morris Township, N.J., and Myra S. Winer of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Harvey S. Goldman performed the ceremony at the TriBeCa Grill in New York.
Mrs.
Winer is 30 years old and is known as Lainie.
She is the director of development of Loews Hotels in New York.
She graduated from the Cornell University School of Hotel Administration.
Her father, a former partner at Ernst &amp; Young in New York, is a business consultant to professional-service concerns and an associate professor of accounting at New York University.
Her stepmother, Joan Gelman of New York, is a freelance television producer and writer.


Do-It-Yourself Pest Control
The Home Clinic column "The First Steps in Preventing Pests" (Aug. 23) was a disservice, making a gross assumption that if a consumer sees signs of carpenter ants or powder-post beetles they must in all cases "call an exterminator." Our company takes great exception.


No Headline


Randi Abada, Gary Glasser
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph H. Abada of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Randi Susan Abada, to Gary Lee Glasser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Glasser of Denville, N.J.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Abada, 27 years old, is an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting concern, in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, and she and her fiance received M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University.
Her father and her mother, Renee Abada, own and manage real estate in New York.


Profile: Mohammed Sahnoun; A Diplomat Matches Wits With Chaos in Somalia
Trying to achieve humanitarian, military and political goals in the chaos of Somalia, with its deep clan fissures, lawlessness, horrifying famine and hostile desert environment, might seem an impossible task for a diplomat from the outside.
But Mohammed Sahnoun, the senior representative of the United Nations there, is perhaps better suited for the job than most: As an Algerian with an empathy for Africa and as a former ambassador in Bonn, Paris and Washington, he seems to bring to his job a sense both of the desperation in Somalia and of how the wealthier nations of the world might better respond.
"The greatest difficulty is we did not try to cope with the situation earlier," said Mr.
Sahnoun in a recent interview here, during a pause in his shuttling between Somalia, Kenya and Europe.
"The divisions and antagonisms have deepened and have taken on dimensions that are almost inextricable. When you go into a situation where the same family is torn by blood, it's not easy to find a leader to talk to because no leader is totally in control of his troops. When the civil war started there was no attempt from the outside to have reconciliation and now we are left with the law of the jungle."


INDUSTRIAL NATIONS STRIVE TO RESOLVE CRISIS ON CURRENCY
Finance ministers and central bankers of the leading industrial countries met here for more than seven hours today, searching for a way out of Europe's currency crisis and forging contingency plans in case the financial markets erupt again on Monday.
In a brief communique after the meeting, the officials gave no clear indication of whether Germany had agreed to lower its interest rates further, as many countries have pressed it to do.


The End of Racism, and Other Fables
FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL
The Permanence of Racism. By Derrick Bell. 222 pp. New York:  Basic Books. $20.


Nicole Kafka and Richard Foote
Dr.
Nicole Jeanne Kafka, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ernest Kafka of New York, was married yesterday to Richard Stuart Foote, a son of Col. and Mrs.
Edward P. Foote of Carmel Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
Paul M. Thompson, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the weekend home of the bride's parents in Newfane, Vt.
Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Foote, 30 years old, is a chief surgical resident at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
She received her medical degree from Cornell University, where her father, a Manhattan psychoanalyst, is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry.
Her mother, Barbara Kafka, is a cookbook author and the writer of the Microwave Cooking column for The New York Times.
The bride's late grandfather Jack I. Poses was a vice chairman of the New York City Board of Higher Education.


The New Name Of the Game
To the Sports Editor:
I want to thank Dave Anderson for saying what a great many baseball fans I know think ("The Worst Interests of Baseball," The Times, Sept. 8, 1992): Fay Vincent got a bum deal.


Sept. 13-19: United Nations; Southern Countries Fear An Environmental Bite
The United Nations General Assembly session that began last week will witness a new installment in the debate between North and South over respect for national sovereignty.
The issue is the environment.
Last spring at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, the members of the United Nations agreed to set up an international watchdog to insure that countries live up to their commitments to keep future development environmentally benign.


Sculptures of Wood In a Wooded Setting
STORM KING is almost a medieval fantasy.
An art center named for a mountain, it has a chateau that is a 1930's mansion with a touch of Hollywood and 400 beautifully landscaped acres.
But instead of flocks, herds and peasants, the estate abounds in sculptures -- most of them done after World War II.
The sculptures range from the 36-foot-tall Calder stabile that acts as a landmark at the center's entrance to a recent installation by Richard Serra that involves four long blades of Cor-Ten steel driven horizontally into a large hummock.


Sultry Song Captures Woodward
Charlotte and John Weber weren't there to see it.
They were in Manhattan presiding over their daughter's wedding, and they probably had their priorities straight.
But back at Belmont Park, while they were tending to family milestones, a pair of their race horses were passing two milestones in half an hour's time on the first Super Saturday of New York's fall racing season.
The Webers won the $400,000 Man o' War Stakes on the turf when their 5-year-old Solar Splendor outran the favored Dear Doctor by three-quarters of a length and took the race for the second year in a row.
Then another Weber horse won the next race, the $500,000 Woodward Stakes, when the 4-year-old Sultry Song, a half-brother to Solar Splendor, outran Pleasant Tap by nearly two lengths.


It's a Whole New Campaign as Senator and Attorney General Go One on One; Abrams Reaches for Clinton Coattails And Takes a Timeout to Plan Strategy
After a half-hour or so of hand-shaking with Manhattan straphangers the morning after he claimed the Democratic nomination for United States Senator, Robert Abrams closed his door and went to work on step one of his campaign strategy for the November general election.
He got on the telephone and started asking for money.
Then he quickly moved to step two: trying to coordinate his campaign with Gov.
Bill Clinton's New York campaign.


Artistic Mecca With a Brooklyn Flair
Barbara Brandon recently bought curtains. It was not decorating. It was self-defense.
The 31-year-old black cartoonist, creator of the strip "Where I'm Coming From," has the dubious distinction of living within peekaboo distance of Spike's Joint, the film maker Spike Lee's two-year-old retail establishment on South Elliot Place in Brooklyn, where the recent barrage of tourists and mail orders has created an L.L.
Bean of Fort Greene.


'Great Men Somehow Continued to Cross My Path'
THE BRIDE OF THE WIND
The Life and Times of Alma Mahler-Werfel.
By Susanne Keegan.
Illustrated. 346 pp.
New York: Viking. $25.


Schwarzkopf Says 'Hawks' Pressed for Early Land War
In a new memoir that raises questions about the conduct of the Persian Gulf war, Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf complains that he was pressed by Bush Administration "hawks" to start a land offensive against Iraqi forces before he was ready and before diplomatic efforts were exhausted.
General Schwarzkopf criticizes the "John Wayne" mentality that he says led civilian officials in Washington to try to advance the date of the ground war after Moscow mounted a last-ditch diplomatic effort that would have enabled President Saddam Hussein to withdraw his forces from Kuwait.


A Nikon Designed For the Computer Age
IT looks like a conventional 35-millimeter camera, but the new Nikon N90 was designed for life in the computer age.
The range of the N90 camera system is so wide that it will take a year or more for all accessories and components to get to the marketplace.
Perhaps the best way to view the N90, a companion to the Nikon F4, introduced in 1988, is as a series of new inventions.
The most sensational of these is the Nikon Data Link, which connects the camera to the Sharp Wizard electronic organizer.
The Data Link consists of a connecting cord, a programming card for the organizer and a data back to replace the conventional back on the camera.
The system is scheduled to go on sale next summer.


Ronni Turetsky, Brian D. Siff
Albert and Joan Weisinger of Brookville, L.I., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Weisinger's daughter Ronni Lynn Turetsky to Brian Douglas Siff, a son of Elliott and Marlene Siff of Westport, Conn.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Turetsky, 24 years old, is a teacher at the East 35th Street branch of International Preschools in New York.
She graduated from Washington University and received a master's degree in education from C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
She is also a daughter of the late Dr.
Martin J. Turetsky, a physician.
Her stepfather is the president of Ski Stop Inc., a ski-equipment retailer in Plainview, L.I.


Public &amp; Private; A Murder, A Mother, A Mystery
"To this day, I have no idea what I did for my two boys that was constructive and useful and right and good, and what damaged them, none."
-- Beverly Lowry, "Crossed Over"
On the morning of June 13, 1983, Karla Faye Tucker, age 23, helped murder two people.
There was a pickax involved.
That's what people in Texas remember, that the bodies of Deborah Ruth Thornton and Jerry Lynn Dean were full of pickax holes.
That, and the fact that Karla Faye said she got sexual satisfaction every time she swung the pickax.
It's not the kind of detail you forget.


Municipalities Challenge the State on Saw Mill Improvements
WHEN Mayor M. Gail Grimaldi of Pleasantville looks at roadway improvements along 30 miles or so of the Saw Mill River Parkway, she does not see the makings of a modern highway, but rather, she says, she counts the toll taken in downed trees, disturbed wetlands, runoff problems, noise and pollution.
"First we saw it in Ardsley, and now we're seeing it in Hawthorne," the Mayor said.
"They say they are improving the highway, but I say they are doing irreparable damage."


Elvira Barroso, Jeffrey Bronheim
Elvira Barroso, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jose Barroso of Madrid, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Martin Bronheim, the son of Helen Horowitz of New York and David Bronheim of Arlington, Va.
Millard Midonick, a retired judge of the Surrogate Court in Manhattan, officiated at the Water Club in New York.
Mrs.
Bronheim, 26 years old, is a Fulbright Scholar studying for a master's degree in philosophy at the New School for Social Research.
She graduated from Universidad Autonoma in Madrid.
Her father is the director of finance at Terquimsa, a chemical storage company in Madrid.


Kassie Cundey, David Means Jr.
Katherine Lyn Cundey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Haigh Cundey of Essex Fells, N.J., was married there yesterday to David Hammond Means Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Means of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Gordon Tremaine performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Means, who is known as Kassie, is an advertising account executive at YM magazine in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is an associate managing director at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, the investment bank, in New York.
Her mother, Katherine B. Cundey, is a medical researcher at Rockefeller University in New York.


Theater Is Guilty, Too
To the Editor:
In "Forgiving the Sin, Loving the Sinner"  [ Aug. 9 ] , Joel Engel gives examples of recent movies -- "Unforgiven," "Crimes and Misdemeanors" and "The Player," to name a few -- in which killers are "left entirely unpunished" for their actions.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Basking Ridge 475,000
24 Brook Ridge Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; h/w floors, crown moldings, wet bar; taxes $8,286.
Howell 130,000
7 Cannonball Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old Cape Cod; fenced yard, c/a, fireplace; taxes $2,350.
Toms River 110,000
1080 Ruby Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, in-ground pool, c/a; taxes $2,500.
Warren 475,000
74 Mountain View Road
4-bedroom, 2-full and 2-half bath, 6-year-old brick colonial; eat-in-kitchen, oak stairwell; taxes $8,208.
West Milford 213,000
10 Carriage Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; deck, fireplace, h/w floors; taxes $5,149.
Wyckoff 250,000
65 Katherine Street
3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; burglar alarm, attic fan, updated kitchen, c/ a; taxes $3,996.
OTHER AREAS Weston, Conn. 510,000
11 White Oak Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old contemporary; adjacent open space, electronic security system, 2.6 acres; taxes $7,542.
New Castle, N.Y. 700,000
22 Mountain Peak Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; fireplace, family room, deck, mud room, finished basement, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $13,001.
Baldwin, L.I. 195,000
488 Devonshire Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41- year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.


Relief at Guerrilla's Capture in Peru Turns to Fear
While Latin American governments celebrate the capture of the leader of the Shining Path guerrilla organization, their diplomats stationed here fear that they may have become the rebels' new targets.
In weeks prior to the capture of the Peruvian rebel chief, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, guerrilla teams started to target Latin missions here, apparently in an effort to deepen Peru's isolation.
A car bomb destroyed Bolivia's Embassy, and bomb threats were received at the Embassies of Argentina, Brazil, Panama and Paraguay.


Correction
Picture captions on Sept. 6 with a front-page article about La Mama misidentified two early plays at the theater.
They are Tom Eyen's "Miss Nefertiti Regrets" and Lanford Wilson's "Rimers of Eldritch."


A CENSUS DISPARITY FOR ASIANS IN U.S.
Americans with roots in Asian countries and the Pacific Islands continue to stand out in educational achievement, but this advantage does not translate into higher per capita income, according to newly released Census Bureau data.
The latest data from a periodic survey of American families reveal that Asian-Americans complete more years of school than whites, on average, and are as likely as whites to be in professional occupations, but are still underrepresented in skilled crafts and in executive suites.
As a result, median salaries of Asian-American workers lag behind those of whites.


Nationwide Tests Set For Prostate Cancer, But Doubts Surface
A drug company is sponsoring a nationwide effort to screen more than half a million middle-aged and elderly men for prostate cancer amid heated disagreement over whether the testing will do more harm than good.
The goal of the free checkups, to be offered by 2,000 medical centers for two weeks beginning Sept. 27, is to find this cancer early, when the vast majority of tumors are curable, instead of when more than two in five are incurable, as is now the case.


Laura L. Kane, Mark R. E. Pinney
Laura Louise Kane, the daughter of Shirley T. Kane of Short Hills, N.J., and the late Robert L. Kane, was married yesterday to Mark Reginald Eyre Pinney, a son of Julia M. Pinney of Dorset, England, and the late John Pinney.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Short Hills.
Ms.
Kane, who is keeping her name, is a painter in New York.
She graduated from Amherst College.
Her late father was the founder and chairman of Titanium Industries, a manufacturer of titanium industrial products in Fairfield, N.J.


Holly A. Heston, Carlton C. Rochell Jr.
May wedding plans for Holly Ann Heston and Carlton Charles Rochell Jr., the son of Mrs.
Stig Kry and Carlton C. Rochell, both of New York, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, the actor Charlton Heston and Mrs.
Heston of Beverly Hills, Calif.
Miss Heston is an associate in the development office at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
She graduated from Pepperdine University.
Her mother, Lydia C. Heston, is a photographer based in Beverly Hills.


More Issues Than Israel Concern Jewish Voters
I take exception to Abe Seldin, chairman of the Nassau County Board of Assessors, when he says, "Jews are more comfortable in the Republican Party these days"  [ "For L.I. Delegates, Touches of Glitter," Aug. 23 ] .
Mr.
Seldin cites a 2 percent rise in the number of delegates this year over the last convention and attributes the increase, albeit a skimpy one, to the Republican Party's Israel platform.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Seldin's statement gives the false impression that politically Jewish-Americans care only about the Israel issue.
Sure, most of us care deeply about the future of Israel.
It's the issue that coalesces us.
But it doesn't define us.
Jews, like most other Americans, care about issues such as quality education, affordable and accessible health care and revitalizing our economy.
Surveys show this to be true.


The Classic Sexual Mistake
BAY OF ARROWS
By Jay Parini. 383 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.


The Right Choice for City Schools
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, will soon give parents more flexibility to choose schools.
Next year he will allow more transfers among the 32 school districts, thus giving parents and students greater opportunity to search out the school best for them.
His plan will be limited by practical constraints, but it is a venturesome step in the right direction.
In a season when "choice" has become a seductive slogan, this plan offers an important example for public education everywhere.


'Wizard of Oz' Has High Wires and Flying Cows
THESE weeks, it's the road to the Paper Mill Playhouse that's paved with yellow brick, while the emerald green lights glow along the houses and the parking lot across the street.
Souvenir books are for sale even before you enter the theater, and no sooner does the show begin -- is anyone asking, "What show?" -- than these words are projected onto a scrim: "Time has been powerless to put its kindly philosophy out of fashion."
It isn't long before a spunky, obedient Toto has the audience oohing and aahing, and a horrific Almira Gulch, soon to be the Wicked Witch of the West -- boo -- seizes and scrunches him into the wicker basket in front of her bicycle.


A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
I have given my children homeopathic remedies when they were ill from the time they were infants and repeatedly have seen quick improvement.
How do the critics of homeopathy explain these good and consistent results when babies are not susceptible to the placebo effect?
LISA GOTTLIEB-CLARK
Ann Arbor, Mich.


A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
Gorman might have mentioned that the modern medical concept of immunization has its roots in a principle propounded by Samuel Hahnemann, homeopathy's founder:
Similus similibus curantur
(Let like cure like).


A la Carte; And Suddenly, It Might as Well Be Autumn
THE Labor Day weekend does not really end summer, but it is a signal.
When Labor Day came this year, the people who run Long Island restaurants, were, as always, drafting new menus, dreaming up promotions and introducing dishes for the fall.
Their plans include a dinner for survivors of the Andrea Doria at Caracalla in Syosset, a play by the Purple Cow Playhouse at Orlando's in Huntington and special dinners at Italian restaurants next month commemorating the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage.
Also, new restaurants are opening and established ones are offering creative new specialties.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FIBER SCULPTURE DISPLAY
Fragile and ethereal as Rebecca Medel's fiber sculptures may seem, they are firmly molded into shape with adhesives.
An installation of the unusual works may be seen at the Neuberger Museum on the campus of the State University of New York at Purchase today through Jan. 24.


Let the Season Begin!
New York Philharmonic opened its 150th on Sept. 16.


Elizabeth Detels, J. C. Campbell 3d
Elizabeth Fountain Detels, a daughter of Helen P. Detels of Madison, Conn., and Peter Detels of New York, was married yesterday to John Collins Campbell 3d, a son of Brig.
Gen.
Campbell Jr., U.S.A.F., retired, and Mrs.
Campbell of Quogue, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Cary performed the ceremony at the Westhampton Presbyterian Church in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
William J. Gormley, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


A Nation's Romance With a Political Dynasty
Speaking of family values (as who is not?), "The Kennedys" leaves no doubt that the values of America's most remarkable political family had less to do with church picnics and Little League than with an intense drive to win, a calling to public service and a weakness for fun and games.


It's a Whole New Campaign as Senator and Attorney General Go One on One; D'Amato Virtually Severs Ties to Bush And Attacks Opponent as 'Incumbent'
His best friend is not just Jewish, but Ed Koch.
He barely knows George Bush.
He has wheeled all kinds of bargains for middle-class New Yorkers, but God forbid people should think of him as part of the entrenched Washington Establishment.
And Al D'Amato is shocked, shocked, shocked by the "vicious, anti-Italian" campaign his Democratic opponent, Robert Abrams has led -- almost as shocked as he is by Bob Abrams's "fund-raising shakedown."
At least, that is the portrait Alfonse M. D'Amato is painting of himself as he seeks a third term in the United States Senate.
In the first volley of television advertisements, the D'Amato campaign has taken the offensive, defining his opponent as "hopelessly liberal," with claims that Mr.
Abrams's health plan and defense cuts would raise taxes and eliminate jobs.
But the Senator has decided to redefine himself as well.


TENDER TRAP
As a broadcast videotape editor, I found Bill Carter's article on Barbara Walters enjoyable ("Tender Trap, Aug. 23).


Children Hooked on Literature
To the Editor:
I read with interest "In the Thriving Land of Fairy Tale Sales" (Aug. 30), but was alarmed by this sentence: "Many schools are experimenting with literature-based reading programs that use storybooks instead of traditional texts."


IN SHORT/UNIVERSITY PRESS: NONFICTION
HOW I GOT CULTURED  A Nevada Memoir. By Phyllis Barber. University of Georgia, $24.95.


Ruling in Tobacco Case Tests Boundaries of Judicial Bias
In scores of opinions over the last 13 years, Judge H. Lee Sarokin gathered the evidence and spoke his mind, with a force and clarity that lawyers and judges say rivals or surpasses the best writing in any Federal judicial district.
The first few paragraphs of each decision are fully formed essays or editorials in simple but elegant language that pull no punches and can lure even the layman who may be shy of wading into the usually murky waters of legal syntax and expression.
So popular are these openings among reporters and students of the law that the judge was persuaded to keep copies of the openings on file.


Corrections
A chart on Sept. 6 headed "World Stock Markets," comparing a world index with one for Germany, was mislabeled.
The broken line at the top represented the world index; the solid line below was for Germany.


Upset by Pataki Leaves a Conservative Message
ASSEMBLYMAN George E. Pataki said last week that he would use the conservative message of his upset primary victory over Mary B. Goodhue, a 14-year State Senate incumbent, to change the direction of state government.
"The message was right," the jubilant Assemblyman said on the morning after his unexpected victory in a rare Republican primary.
"Republicans are fed up with Republicans who vote for higher taxes and who don't stand up and fight Mario Cuomo," Mr.
Pataki said.
"My message is what the people of New York think is right for these times."


Wendy K. Donath, Michael L. Selig
Wendy K. Donath, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Erwin Donath of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael L. Selig, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan Selig of Falls Church, Va.
Judge Paul Levy of New Jersey Superior Court officiated at the Princeton Battlefield State Park.
Ms.
Donath, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, is the legislative and communications director in Washington for Representative Porter J. Goss, Republican of Florida.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is a management consultant in Princeton.
Her mother, Marianne Donath, is an administrative assistant at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University.


POSTINGS: 2d Tenant for Americas Tower; So Long, Rockefeller Center
After two decades in Rockefeller Center, Bank Hapoalim is to move next May to Americas Tower, 1177 Avenue of the Americas, where it has signed a 15-year lease for 70,000 square feet of space.
The Tev Aviv-based bank, Israel's largest, is the second tenant attracted to the 48-story tower between 45th and 46th Streets.
The first was the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse, which is to take 350,000 square feet next year.
The Kumagai Gumi Company of Tokyo owns the million-square-foot tower through a New York subsidiary, KG A&amp;A Corporation.


Fire Damages House for Poor
Officials in New Haven said yesterday that an arsonist tried to burn down a newly renovated house in the neighborhood of Morris Cove on Friday -- possibly to protest a plan to place 183 low-income families in the city's middle- and working-class neighborhoods.
The fire, which occurred at 4:30 A.M. on Friday, damaged one of 11 houses purchased last year by the city's Housing Authority as part of its "scattered-site housing" program.
The house, a three-bedroom, ranch-style home at 1042 Townsend Avenue, had recently undergone renovation, but no one had move into it or the other homes yet.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Trammell Crow Thriving on Rental Units
WHILE many Connecticut developers have struggled to stay afloat in the recession, Trammell Crow, one of the nation's largest builders, has constructed 2,261 rental apartments in the state since 1986 and is building about 1,300 more.
Projects in Stamford, Hamden, Middletown and Manchester have rented quickly, attracting tenants with reasonable prices, traditional New England architecture, recreational facilities, security personnel and in-house management.
Rents range from $589 for a one-bedroom unit at Town Place in Middletown to $1,525 for three bedrooms at Town Glen in Stamford.


Corrections
A picture caption on Aug. 23 about Route 66 misidentified an abandoned gas station in Gardener, Ill.
It was a Sunoco station, not Texaco.


Ms. McGeown, Scott G. McLam
Maureen Ann McGeown, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John R. McGeown of Montclair, N.J., was married there yesterday to Scott Gregory McLam, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan C. McLam of Dix Hills, L.I.
The Rev.
William J. Dowd performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Immaculate Conception Church.
Mrs.
McLam, 33 years old, graduated from Marquette University.
She is an account executive for WWOR-TV in New York.
Her father is an orthodontist in Montclair.
Her mother, Mary McGeown, owns By Special Arrangement, a floral-design business in Montclair.


Small Palettes For Painting The Face
FIND OF THE WEEK
Fear of makeup is no joke.
Neither is fear of wasting money on misguided makeup-color choices.


Newspaper's Position In Garden Dispute
In regard to the dispute between the curator of the Presby Memorial Iris Gardens and its board of trustees who voted to eliminate her job (Montclair Journal, "Wrangle Over a Job Upsets a Garden's Serenity," Aug. 30):


Domestic Partners
To the Editor: Although airlines may not publicize their recognition of domestic partner relationships (Letters, July 26), Michael P. Dearing will be as gratified as I was to know that airlines seem not to discriminate in issuing compassionate fares.


Carl J. Megel, an Early President of the Teachers' Union, Dies at 92
Carl J. Megel, who began teaching in a one-room schoolhouse and rose to lead the movement that spread unionism among teachers across America, died Friday at his home in Rockville, Md.
He was 92 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Dutch Offer Up Art of Welfare
In the country of Rembrandt, Van Gogh and Mondrian, some Dutch art comes cheap.
Swamped by art collected willy-nilly from the 1950's to the 1980's as part of a welfare program for needy artists, the Netherlands is offering its citizens an assortment of 215,000 non-masterpieces -- free.
The Ministry of Culture, which estimated that its collection cost $65 million and benefited perhaps 10,000 people, made the decision to part with the lot to liberate storage space, computers and personnel.
Stored in a hangar in Rijswijk, a suburb of The Hague, is artwork ranging from bamboo sculpture to a leopard-spotted bicycle wheel to a trove of a mere 85,000 prints.
The program ended when the number of artists and their output soared out of control.
Schools, nursing homes and other institutions have already made requests, an institute for the blind asking particularly for tactile collages and tapestries.
A nursing home asked for no abstract art.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Aug. housing starts, annual rate, millions
1.12
1.17
Wednesday
Mid-Sept. auto sales, annual rate, millions
6.0
6.0
Purchasing managers index
56.3
56
Thursday
Second-quarter G.D.P., percent change
1.4
1.4
Mid-Sept. jobless claims
400
420
Friday
Aug. durable goods orders, percent change
-3.4
1.2
Aug. existing home sales, annual, millions
3.48
3.47
Aug. personal income, percent change
0.2
0.4
Sunday: French referendum on Maastricht treaty on European unity  Monday: European Community deputy finance ministers meet in Brussels  Tuesday: First auction of two-year Treasury notes under Dutch auction rules  Wednesday: Federal Reserve releases beige book for Oct. 6 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting


What Is So Pure About Ethnicity?
I am disappointed in the reporting on the Indigenous Visions gallery-museum in Southampton  [ "New Museum Offers More Than Indian Art," Aug. 30 ] .
I think all Americans, whether they care or not, are aware of the enormous physical damage which Europeans brought upon the people of this hemisphere.
As a result of the Bosnian horror, "ethnic cleansing" has become a household phrase.
I suspect most of us think of anti-Indian genocide as belonging to the frontier experience.
Yet Stalin-like deportations of Eastern Indians, many of them acculturated to the modern white world, but remaining politically independent, were carried out in the second quarter of the last century.
The New York Iroquois suffered expulsions again in that period.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Michel Dodges
Though he survived a primary challenge last week, Representative Nicholas Mavroules is no longer chairman of the House Armed Services subcommittee on investigations.
Facing Federal charges of bribery, tax evasion and influence peddling, the Massachusetts Democrat relinquished that post this month under a rule that requires indicted committee and subcommittee chairmen to hand over the reins to acting replacements.
The rule, imposed by the House Democratic Caucus, stands in marked contrast to the refusal by Republicans to confront Federal charges against Representative Joseph McDade of Pennsylvania.
House Republicans have no rule to cover the situation.
And the minority leader, Robert Michel, refuses to ask Mr.
McDade to step aside as the ranking member on the Appropriations Committee and its military subcommittee.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the headline of a biographical sketch last Sunday misidentified one of Gov.
Bill Clinton's domestic policy advisers in some copies.
He is Roger Altman, vice chairman of the Blackstone Group, not Robert C. Altman.


Americans Block French Move on AIDS Test
Representatives of the French Government have asked that royalties for an AIDS blood test be turned over to them because, they say, French researchers were the ones who discovered the virus that was used to create the test.
But Americans have blocked such a move.
The action came Wednesday at a board meeting of the French and American AIDS Foundation in Bethesda, Md.
The board makes policy on matters related to the 1987 agreement between the United States and France to divide the royalties evenly and to take equal credit for the discovery of the blood tests.


Results Plus
TRACK AND FIELD Yet Another Record for Bubka


IN SHORT/UNIVERSITY PRESS: FICTION
THE DIG  By Lynn Emanuel. University of Illinois, paper, $10.95.


Making a Difference; A Store Just for 'Guests'
Forget the recession.
Consider what happened Thursday when the Tandy Corporation opened the first of its consumer electronics megastores, called Incredible Universe, in Wilsonville, Ore., a Portland suburb.
Traffic backed up seven miles on Interstate 5 and two lines of customers wrapped around the four-acre building waiting to get in.
Only don't call them customers.
In Tandy's new universe, the buyers are "guests" who are entertained, educated and sold to by "cast members," not salespeople.


Mum's the Word but Tulips Are on the Mind
THIS is a reminder.
If the bulbs to bloom next spring have not been ordered from catalogues, get busy.
Domestic orders must be in as the mail-order houses will soon begin shipping.
Spring-blooming bulbs will be planted this fall, usually October, so that they will be ready to put on their displays when the weather settles.
Bulbs are dormant when planted, but will soon start to develop roots.
Depending on the soil temperature, these young roots will continue to grow but will stop developing when the soil chills.


49ers Could Be Blow To Jets' Confidence
Backs to the wall, egos battered, confidence shaken -- this is not exactly the shape the Jets wanted to be in for their home opener, against the 49ers at Giants Stadium this afternoon.
Floating on a 5-0 preseason cloud, the Jets wafted into the regular season believing they would be 2-0 at this juncture.
Atlanta punctured those hopes in the season opener, and the Steelers flattened them last week, leaving the Jets with the worst-case scenario for a first game at home: without a victory and desperate to avoid 0-3.
No one wants to think about what would be worse.


Songwriter Acts to Cut the Ribbons
A daughter is intimidated by her charismatic mother.
The song is "I Just Can't Move in Her Shadow."
A mother, jittery about her gifted daughter's blase attitude toward working, has "had it up to here." The song is "Her Career."


Apple Desserts That Are as Easy as Pie
THE fall apple harvest has started around the country.
In this region, apples are expected to be somewhat smaller than usual but, thanks to the cooler weather this summer, extremely flavorful.
For baking, when bigger apples are easier to use, this year's crop may prove somewhat less convenient.
More important than size, however, is taste and texture.
Apples that are tart allow greater flexibility in seasonings.
A sweet apple like Golden Delicious, on the other hand, requires less sugar or other sweetener.


THE PARTY CRASHER
The Republican and Democratic parties offer a big enough tent for everyone who wants to arm-wrestle over abortion, prayer in school, women in combat or, yes, family values. ("The Party Crasher," by Theodore J. Lowi, Aug. 23).
But if you are one of those boring people in the center whose main concern is affordable health care, decent schools for the kids, a job and a secure pension, you are out in the political cold.
Theodore Lowi's article marks a turning point.
Apparently, it is no longer wacko to yearn for a third party.
Used to be, the very term conjured up an image of William Jennings Bryan campaigning for free silver or John Anderson running on a vague platform that no one remembers.


Imposing Values
All this talk about family values reminds me of my grandfather, the patriarch I happen to have known best.
I come from a long line of middle-class Midwesterners with Southern roots.
My cousins and I learned to "ma'am" and "sir" our elders early on; I don't think I actually said "no" to an adult until I was in my early 20's.
My grandfather was a lifelong Republican.
I mention these particulars to pre-empt a credentials challenge on the part of those who have elected themselves the guardians of "family values." The thing is, my grandfather, while he came from a large and close-knit family and then sired another one, had no "family values." I remember him having only values.


Notes From the Front Lines of Life
Who would presume to argue with Simon Gray when he describes himself as an "absolutely driven" person?
Most nights, he settles down at his trusty old typewriter at 10 o'clock and rattles away until 3 or 4 A.M., smoking cigarette after cigarette.
Then it's up at 10 in the morning for another six hours' work until he leaves his comfortable house in West London and ambles off to what's supposed to be a soothing game of tennis.
There is, he says, a moment of intense exhilaration when he finishes a script, but it's never long before his creative juices are demanding a fresh fix.
When he isn't writing a new play for stage or television, he's probably revising an old one.
And when he's doing neither, he'll very likely be in the West End or New York, pursuing what is becoming a second career as a director of his own work.


Surrogate Mother Able to Sue for Negligence
In a tangled case involving a surrogate mother contract gone wrong, a Federal appeals court in Cincinnati ruled 2 to 1 last week that a woman could sue the lawyer who arranged the surrogacy contract for negligence.
The woman charged that the lawyer should not have allowed her to be artificially inseminated with semen that may have been infected with cytomegalovirus, a virus that causes birth defects.


Bimbo? Sarah Jessica Parker Begs to Differ
Sarah Jessica Parker has a bit of a bimbo problem.
Not that she is one, but the notion certainly has gained some currency lately.
And much to her surprise, Ms.
Parker, who has been a professional actress for most of her life, finds she gets a kick out of it.
Up to a point.


Conversations/Isaac Fulwood Jr.; Washington's Departing Police Chief Laments the Sleep of Murderers
IT was one more murder on the streets of southeast Washington, but for Isaac Fulwood Jr., it was a turning point.
In 1986, 22 years after he joined the Metropolitan Police Department in his hometown and three years before he became its chief, he went to the scene of a murder, and found himself in a city he didn't know.
On the bloody pavement was an 18-year-old who had been shot more than a dozen times.
Chief Fulwood grimaces at the memory.
"He was shot all to hell," he says.
"It was just vicious beyond anything you can imagine."


Uptown Downstairs, In Blass
"I don't have ladylike clothes, because I live in the country in England," said Jean Marsh, the actress who is best known for her role as Rose in "Upstairs, Downstairs."
On Tuesday, she remedied the situation at the Bill Blass showroom.
The designer is dressing Ms.
Marsh for her role as the hostess for 12 new episodes of "The House of Eliott," a BBC series about two London couturiers in the 1920's, which will be broadcast on the Arts and Entertainment Network at 10 P.M.
Eastern time, beginning next Sunday.


Gladwin Hill Dies at 78; Times Reporter 44 Years
Gladwin Hill, a journalist who in 44 years with The New York Times pioneered environmental reporting and described for a generation of readers Los Angeles's growth from an outpost to a metropolis, died this evening at his home here.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Hill, a heavy smoker, died of lung cancer after a seven-month battle with the disease, said his wife, Carole Fordham Hill.


Out of Patience
To the Sports Editor:
Kindly tell John Feinstein ("The Giants Don't Belong in a Dome," The Times, Aug. 16) to stick to writing about hoops or tennis.


A Nation's Romance With a Political Dynasty
Speaking of family values (as who is not?), "The Kennedys" leaves no doubt that the values of America's most remarkable political family had less to do with church picnics and Little League than with an intense drive to win, a calling to public service and a weakness for fun and games.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Boys &amp; Girls 7, Springfield Gardens 0
Even though Brooklyn's Boys &amp; Girls doesn't play its home opener until next Saturday, the Kangaroos got a warm welcome and a 7-0 victory in their season opener at Springfield Gardens in Queens.


The Ideal of Unity In West Europe Cracks Under Stress
The year 1992, which began with hope for growing economic and political unity in the 12-nation European Community, has turned instead into a grave test of its very cohesion.
Founded in 1957 as a way of cementing French-German reconciliation and enabling Europe to stand up to the Soviet Union, the community is now in a crisis caused by the consequences of having won the cold war.


Lisa Meredith, Richard Stewart
Lisa Standish Meredith, the daughter of David Standish of Chicago and Elizabeth L. Meredith of Montclair, N.J., was married in Montclair yesterday to Richard T. Stewart, a son of Florence Stewart of Fair Lawn, N.J., and the late Joseph Stewart.
The Rev.
Richard Reno Neff, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, George D. Meredith.
Mrs.
Stewart, 29 years old, is the supervisor of programming administration at the USA Network, the cable television network, in New York, where her husband is a video editor.
She graduated from Ithaca College.


Still Stupid After All These Years
"Life is the scariest thing there is."
From "Middle Ages"  Maybe.
But television is a close second.
"Thirtysomething" I loved to hate; except for Melanie Mayron, the red-haired photographer, whom I just plain loved.
I never saw "Melrose Place," otherwise known as Twenty-Something, or "Beverly Hills, 90210," which I suppose would be Ten-Something, so they didn't bother me.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Sept. 5  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 350,000
228 West 21st Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, 2 exposures and 2 terraces; maintenance $400, no tax deduction (Brokers: Kingman Associates-Corcoran Group)  Columbia University Area 436,000
395 Riverside Drive (112th St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,100, 49% tax-deductible (Broker: A.J. Clark)  Gramercy Park Area 252,500
81 Irving Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in prewar building; manned elevator, dining area, renovated kitchen; maintenance $1,220, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher Co.)  Greenwich Village 1.25 million
26 Bank Street  3-family, 4-story, Greek Revival town house built in 1843; 3 bedrooms, 3 baths, dining room, family room, 4 fireplaces in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, fireplace in upper-floor simplex units; 19- by 93-ft. lot; taxes $8,400 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia/Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 225,000
60 Riverside Drive (78th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, terrace, partial Hudson River view; maintenance $841, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: West Side Properties)  BRONX  Eastchester Road Area 270,000
2817 Kingsland Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Realty World/Gold Circle)  Pelham Parkway 320,000
1208 Pelham Parkway South  2-family, detached, brick and frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, dining room in primary duplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in simplex; 2-car garage, 47- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,300 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Carroll Gardens 215,000
472 Clinton Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining area, fireplace, rear patio, 1-car garage, 20- by 50-ft. lot; taxes $2,650 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Prospect Heights 132,500
135 Eastern Parkway  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, Prospect Park and Manhattan skyline view; maintenance $630, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  Park Slope 495,000
29 Polhemus Place  2-family, semi-attached, brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, rear deck, stained-glass windows in primary triplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; 16- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Susan N. Breen Realty)  QUEENS  Ridgewood 130,000
16-73 Stephens Street  2-family, detached colonial; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath in each unit; 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  Whitestone 205,000
19-04 Clintonville Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 23-by 95-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,356 (Broker: Agranoff Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 62,000
894 Armstrong Avenue  (Armstrong Gardens)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar condo; mirrored dining area, pool, 2 exposures, free parking; common charge $101, taxes $1,200 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Sunset Hill 220,000
30 City Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached Tudor; dining room, sun porch, finished basement, 2-car garage, 109- by 157-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


No Headline


Real Fun for Conner Begins in Etchells Class
It has been years since Dennis Conner worked the streets of Newport, R.I., on a regular basis.
But he was back there this summer with a mission in mind.
It was a goal as far different from the America's Cup campaigns he waged in Newport during the 1970's and 1980's as a wave is to a ripple.
Yet Conner sees a challenge in both.
The San Diego yachtsman used Newport as a practice site for the I.B.M./Etchells World Championship, which is scheduled to begin today at the Larchmont Yacht Club in Larchmont, N.Y.
A field of 67 skippers, including five former world champions, is expected at the starting line in the six-race series.
Conner is the defending champion, having won the 1991 regatta in San Francisco.


Monkeyshines


Sept. 13-19: Hastings Case; A Ruling Impeaches The Judgment of the Senate
The atmosphere was solemn in the Senate chamber in October 1989 when the Senate voted to remove Federal Judge Alcee L. Hastings from the bench on articles of impeachment charging that he took a bribe in exchange for issuing a lenient sentence.
But last week another Federal judge ruled that the Senate had not done its job.
Judge Stanley Sporkin of the United States District Court in Washington said that by using a 12-member committee to consider the case against Judge Hastings, the Senate shirked its constitutional duty to conduct a trial.
The whole Senate had to sit as a jury and not delegate the chore to the committee, which reported back.


CASE OF THE BROOKLYN SYMBOLIST
We commend you on Adam Begley's illuminating article on Paul Auster ("Case of the Brooklyn Symbolist," Aug. 30).
However, as the publisher of Auster's "New York Trilogy" and the works of other well-established writers like Russell Banks, Steve Katz, Fanny Howe, Richard Elman, Djuna Barnes and Gertrude Stein, we could hardly be described as "tiny" -- except for our financial assets.


In Praise of Wordbooks
To the Editor:
Many years ago I was a lexicographer working under the direction of Robert L. Chapman on Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston's (eventually aborted) high school dictionary, and I know that he does not need my help in defending his new edition of Roget's International Thesaurus (review, Aug. 23).
Nevertheless, I feel I must speak up for the genus thesaurus itself, which, as a working journalist, I frequently consult.


South Africa's Communists Navigate a New Politics
Chris Hani is that rarity of the post-Soviet world, a Communist leader who is not geriatric, irrelevant or former.
Mr.
Hani, General Secretary of the South African Communist Party, has an enthusiastic young following in black townships, where the party's militant tradition and anti-capitalist oratory thrill crowds in a way the more buttoned-down style of moderate black leaders does not.


Houseplants, Head for the House!
Houseplants should be moving indoors right about now, but first it's a good idea to adjust the sun lovers to less light by setting them in a protected, partially shaded area for a few days.
Wash the leaves of houseplants, tops and bottoms, with water (a gentle spray with the hose is fine) to rinse off dust or cobwebs.
Remove dead leaves, and examine plants closely for insect infestations or disease.
It's best to toss out diseased plants; Safer's soap will kill soft-bodied insects.
But make sure you isolate any problem plants from the healthy ones.


Music; 'Concerts in Color': Feast for Eyes and Ears
THE Philharmonia Virtuosi's Mainstage series at the State University of New York at Purchase opens Oct. 4, but members of the chamber ensemble have a date this afternoon with music of four Baroque composers -- Vivaldi, Zelenka, W. F. Bach and Marin Marais -- when Historic Hudson Valley begins its 11th season of "Concerts in Color" at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills.
Aside from the tonal tints, the series title refers to the church's famous Matisse and Chagall stained-glass windows, which give these programs a resplendent ambiance.
You can take your choice between 4 and 6 P.M. recitals today and on each of the two remaining recital dates: Oct. 11, listed as a "Classical Sunday" with pieces by Haydn and Mozart, and Nov. 1, a "Romantic Sunday" featuring music of Brahms and Hugo Wolf.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Hurricane Aid: Vote on passage of a bill providing $10.47 billion in emergency assistance to the victims of Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki.
Approved 84 to 10, Sept. 15.


IN SHORT/UNIVERSITY PRESS: NONFICTION
THE BRECHT MEMOIR By Eric Bentley.
Northwestern University, cloth, $19.95; paper, $9.95.


Networking; Here Comes I.B.M., Embracing Ethernet at Last
The International Business Machines Corporation has been trumpeting its latest reorganization, which is supposed to turn it into a lean, mean marketing machine.
But last week's announcement of 30 new networking products, due to hit the market in waves starting this month, showed the old as well as the new I.B.M.
Some analysts saw clear signs that the new I.B.M. was struggling to assert itself.
"We're seeing an example of the new, agile I.B.M.," said Janet Hyland, director of network strategy research for Forrester Research in Cambridge, Mass.
Others are not so sure.


EX-MAYOR WRITES OF A DEATH PLOT
Former Mayor W. Wilson Goode, the city's first black mayor, has written a political memoir containing the revelation that he feared that racist Philadelphia police officers were planning to kill him during the fiery confrontation between the police and the radical group Move in 1985.
Mr.
Goode says he never alerted his security guards or any other law-enforcement officials but simply stayed home, out of harm's way.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Susan Levy; Why a Woman Became a Contractor
FOR a woman who grew up in in Baldwin Harbor with five brothers who played baseball and football instead of with dolls and at the age of 18 joined the Army, a career in a traditionally male-dominated industry was logical.
When the woman, Susan Levy, started her subcontracting business 12 years ago, she was one of a few women in the construction industry.
Her saw-cutting company, Femi-9, opened with a small capital investment and one employee in an office in Lindenhurst.
It has grown into a business specializing in saw cutting, milling and grooving, processes that are used to repave or resurface roads and bridges, with more than $1 million worth of equipment.
Ms.
Levy now employs seven full-time operating engineers, including her husband, as well as seasonal workers from March through November.


Jennifer Jackson, Paul P. Alfano
Jennifer Morgan Jackson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy E. Jackson of Alexandria, Va., was married on Monday to Dr.
Paul Phillipe Alfano, a son of Dr.
Mary F. C. Alfano of New York and Dr.
Jose A. Alfano of Nuremberg, Germany.
The Rev.
William Single performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Archbishop Lamy Chapel in Santa Fe, N.M.
Mrs.
Alfano, 24 years old, is a features assistant at Vogue magazine in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father owns Gadsby's Tavern, a restaurant in Alexandria.
Her mother, June R. Jackson, is a real estate agent with WJD Associates there.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Races; Minority Candidates See Congress as Useful Tool
Of all the changes coming to Congress, none is more certain than an increase of at least 10 blacks and five Hispanic lawmakers.
And these candidates, intent on helping neglected constituencies, conspicuously contradict the anti-government spirit of this year's Congressional elections.
Many candidates this year campaign with a sense that Congress itself is one of the nation's most serious problems, arguing over term limits, committee procedures and staff levels.
But the new minority candidates treat getting to Congress as a chance to bring money and programs to constituents who previously had to compete with better-off whites for their lawmakers' attention.


Armed With Their Pencils
LESLIE'S ILLUSTRATED CIVIL WAR
Introduction by John E. Stanchak.
Illustrated. 256 pp.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi. $50.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.60
124.30
134.20
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5025
1.4495
1.6850
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2173
1.2173
1.1343
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7345
1.9210
1.7315
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$351.00
$340.90
$348.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


In A Tornado's Wake, Tress and the Law
THE tornado that surprised Scarsdale earlier this month has some residents here rethinking their attitudes toward the old, towering trees they have always treasured.
They say the days of unconditional love for these rugged individuals may be over.
Visitors to the county remark on its parklike atmosphere, and increasingly trees have been protected by local ordinances.
But after seeing the damage done in seconds here by a ferocious wind, some people are asking whether it is wise to let old oak, locust and tulip trees stand close to homes.


The Vice President; Quayle Attacks Clinton on Draft and Is Heckled at a Rally in Ohio
Vice President Dan Quayle today renewed his attacks on Gov.
Bill Clinton for avoiding the draft, and a few moments later was heckled and taunted for 20 minutes as he tried to speak at a campaign rally here.
Swinging through a state that has become pivotal for the re-election prospects of Mr.
Quayle and President Bush, the Vice President went out of way to keep alive the debate over Mr.
Clinton's efforts to steer clear of the draft in 1969.


The Pure, the Angry, the Eerie
HANDS OF THE SADDLEMAKER
By Nicholas Samaras. 59 pp. New Haven: Yale University Press. Cloth, $16. Paper, $9.
COLOR PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE RUINS
By Elton Glaser. 66 pp.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cloth, $17.95.
Paper, $9.95.
FIRST A LONG HESITATION
By Eve Shelnutt. 93 pp. Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University Press. Paper, $9.


Hurricane Andrew's Aftermath: Damage and Doubt
Alomst a month after Hurricane Andrew tore across South Florida, people still see the remains of the swath it cut, still mourn the lives it took, still face the long struggle to rebuild.
In an effort to understand the extent of the storm's impact, The New York Times/CBS News Poll interviewed 355 Dade County residents Sept. 12-14, both by telephone and, as phone servie has not been restored in some areas, by face-to-face interviews.
The survey also interviewed 757 other Florida residents.


In Defense of Daxor
To the Editor:
"A Strange Few Months for Daxor" (Aug. 16) contains a number of distortions and omissions.
The article focuses on the most recent, atypical, quarter in which only 17 percent of revenues came from operations.
For the period 1987-1991, revenues from operations were $10,294,128 and from securities income, $8,891,104.
Therefore, over the past five years, revenue from operations has averaged 54 percent.


Coffee Irregular
To the Editor: Alan Cowell's article "Ordering Coffee Irregular" (Aug. 9) brought to mind the many ways one can order coffee (kaffee) in Vienna.
Here are some:


Tone Worship
"WHEN I saw that address I thought, '
Oh my God
,' " the film maker John Waters was saying at a party last Saturday night at Ross Bleckner's loft on White Street in TriBeCa.
Mr.
Bleckner, the painter, lives above what used to be the Mudd Club, the late 1970's New Wave viper pit where the black outfit and pointed shoe pandemic started taking root.
Attracting followers of bands like the Sex Pistols and the Ramones, it wasn't a place where looking healthy or wealthy got you past the bouncers at the door as easily as looking gangly, fungal and nihilistic.


Part Showman, All Genius
It was permitted, in connection with Richard Feynman, to use the word "genius."
"Half genius and half buffoon," the English prodigy Freeman Dyson wrote to his parents upon meeting Feynman at Cornell University soon after World War II.


Victoria Neuman, Jeffrey Sloan
Victoria Jacqueline Neuman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Neuman of San Juan, P.R., was married last evening to Jeffrey Steven Sloan, a son of Dr.
William Sloan of Livingston, N.J., and the late Barbara R. Sloan.
Cantor Bruce Benson officiated at Turnberry in East Hanover, N.J.


EFFORT TO BEEF UP RULES ON EMISSIONS
Air-pollution-control officials from New York, New Jersey and the New England states on Friday called for strict new controls on emissions of smog-causing chemicals from industrial equipment.
If adopted by the member states, the recommendations would extend pollution rules to many boilers, diesel engines and turbines that are not now subject to pollution controls.
Among the opponents of the proposal, oddly, are natural-gas pipeline companies, which promote their fuel as a way to clean the air.
But their compressor stations that push gas through the pipelines emit smog-causing pollutants.


Q and A
Learning to Surf
Q.
Are there any surfing schools on the West Coast or in Hawaii? -- Warren Busch, New York, N.Y.


Every Day's Crunch Time For Handley
Many Giants fans are looking for a lynching, and the neck they want belongs to Ray Handley, the team's beleaguered coach.
They blame him for the Giants' 8-8 record last year, one season after a Super Bowl championship.
They blame him for the Giants' 0-2 start this year, a record that could easily slip to 0-3 Monday night against the Bears in Chicago.
They blame him for everything except low interest rates on savings accounts.
They dislike him intensely.


One Sings, The Other Doesn't
To the Editor:
As a fan of both opera and baseball, I think the two entities could indeed be credibly merged.
They already share some parlance -- score, pitch, runs, coaches, warming up.
And baseball announcers love to observe how the opera's not over till the fat lady sings.


Betsy Evans, Christopher Hunt
Elizabeth Temple Evans, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dudley Evans of Demarest, N.J., was married yesterday in Woods Hole, Mass., to Dr.
Christopher Miller Hunt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Torrence M. Hunt of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Wolfson Richards performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Messiah.
Mrs.
Hunt, who is known as Betsy, owns the Evans Gallery, which specializes in fine-art photography, in Portland, Me.
She graduated from Colorado College.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president of Templeton, Dobbrow &amp; Vance, an investment counseling firm in Englewood, N.J.


Deborah E. Buhl, T. M. Bacigalupo
Deborah Elizabeth Buhl, the daughter of John D. Buhl of Vienna, Va., and Elizabeth S. Buhl of Falls Church, Va., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Thomas Mark Bacigalupo, U.S.N., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Bacigalupo of Towson, Md.
The Rev.
Porter Brooks performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in McLean, Va.
Lieut.
Salvadore Aguilera, a Roman Catholic chaplain in the United States Navy, took part in the ceremony.


U.N. Takes Step To Expel Belgrade
The Security Council, pressing Belgrade to end its military support for militias fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and halt "ethnic cleansing," voted that today's Yugoslavia is not the legitimate heir to the General Assembly seat held by the Yugoslav federation.
If the General Assembly follows suit, as is expected, Yugoslavia, now made up of only Serbia and Montenegro, must apply as a new nation.


JIGSAW JACKETS
This season's jackets - short and snappy or long and lean - hug the body and throw a curve into the new longer silhouette.
A balance of classic tailoring and modern proportions shape up this fall's jacket geometry.


Jennifer Zorek, Mark Pressman
Jennifer Lynn Zorek, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren W. Zorek of New York, was married last evening to Mark Stuart Pressman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Pressman of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Pressman, 34 years old, is the president of Zero In, a luggage and luggage-accessories wholesale company in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Hampshire College.
Her father is a merchandising operations executive at Bloomingdale's in New York.
He also volunteers as the disaster chairman of the American Red Cross in the New York region.
Her mother, Jane P. Zorek, is a rent-collection representative with Williams Real Estate Company in New York.


IN SHORT/UNIVERSITY PRESS: FICTION
PAINT IT TODAY By H.D.
Edited by Cassandra Laity.
New York University Press, cloth, $40; paper, $13.95.
ASPHODEL  By H.D.
Edited by Robert Spoo.
Duke University Press, cloth, $42.50; paper, $12.95.


Examining The Life Once Led By a Critic
ONE ought to get a kick out of whiling away a couple of hours with a critic who swam in the nude with George Bernard Shaw, made love to Jeanne Eagels, socialized with Eugene O'Neill, wrote the biography of George M. Cohan and lived in the torch of the Statue of Liberty, rent free.
But don't bet on it.
The reminiscences of Ward Morehouse (1899-1966) as set down by Ward Morehouse 3d, and produced by the Rainbow Theater at Norwalk Community College, are less an entertaining tribute than a gaping disservice to a reportedly colorful symbol of a bygone era when 70 legitimate theaters lit up Broadway.


After a Long Nap, Natural Gas Wakes Up
For natural gas producers in the United States, the last few years have been a famine of biblical proportions.
Prices have been so low that hundreds of companies have been driven out of business and thousands of workers have lost their jobs.
Now, suddenly, gas prices are at a post-1985 September high.
They were jolted upward most recently when Hurricane Andrew tore through the Gulf of Mexico last month, knocking out about 5 percent of the nation's gas output for several weeks.


Tapping Into the Abundance of the World's Music
Almost nobody paid attention 20 years ago when the journalist and freelance scholar John Storm Roberts came up with the idea of world music.
In his seminal book, "Black Music of Two Worlds," he showed that Latin music was enormously popular in Africa as well as South America and told how electric guitars, Jimi Hendrix and James Brown were adored in Nigeria and Zaire.
In Mr.
Roberts's view, many standard enthomusicological studies were admirably thorough yet narrow and unconnected.
"It was like a landscape with a large number of artesian wells, and nothing linking them," he says.
"And I conceived of 'Black Music of Two Worlds' being more like canals joining."
In 1982, with only the book and an anthology album, "Africa Dances," Mr.
Roberts started a record company and mail-order business, called Original Music, to bring his discoveries to a wider audience.
Now, a decade later, the company that he runs out of a barn near Red Hook in upstate New York has some 2,000 titles in stock.
Along with Original Music, world music began in obscurity but today supports a promising market.


For Hapless Dodgers, Bad Becomes Worse
Darryl Strawberry and Eric Davis fulfilled their childhood dream this season by playing together with the Los Angeles Dodgers.
No, that is not quite correct.
They played for the same team in the same season; they didn't do a whole lot of playing together.
The experience the Dodgers had with their local heroes basically epitomizes the futility in which Los Angeles drowned this season.
The closest Strawberry and Davis came to clicking together was last week, when they had surgery two days apart.


Mets, of All People, Sting the Expos
Over and over, the groundwork for surrender had been laid for the Montreal Expos.
The Pirates won and won, and the gap in the National League East stayed sizable.
One false step by the Expos and the retreat could have been on.
Last night, though, the Expos, neither short of heart nor energy, may have run out of chances in 1992.
The Mets, piecing together four runs in the eighth inning and then at last figuring out a way to obtain a game's final three outs in a nonetheless eventful ninth, defeated the Expos, 7-5, at Shea Stadium.
The triumph, parlayed with yet another victory by the Pirates, knocked the Expos five games out of first place with only 14 games remaining.


The Pet Cat That Evokes the Leopard
WHILE Jane Lee, a breeder of Bengal cats, sipped tea in the kitchen of her family's 1790 homestead here, Mogs, a Bengal, suddenly jumped up on the counter top, strolled over to the sink, turned on the water and took a drink.
"That's amazing," a visitor said.


The Many Moods Of Henri Matisse
If the Landmark Matisse Retrospective, which opens Thursday at the Museum of Modern Art, does not enthrall you, then probably no art exhibition ever will.
The story that unfolds in this show is extraordinary, and extraordinarily human, and it lays bare Matisse's restless, undoctrinaire mind.
One arrives at the last galleries, flooded as they are with the brilliant colors of the large paper cutouts of the late 1940's and early 50's to which he devoted his final energies, with the sense of having completed an epic journey -- a journey that demanded to be told at such length and in such detail.
Only Picasso among 20th-century artists justifies such elaborate treatment, and he got it in the Modern's historic 1980 retrospective.
Now it is Matisse's turn.
For most of the century, those two artists have been linked as the yin and yang of modernism, each defined by comparison with the other.
It has hardly mattered that the comparisons distort or ignore the many points at which the two converge.
What the Picasso exhibition of 1980 underscored was the artist's protean creativity, so that the event in its incredible variety seemed almost to be several shows at once, with new twists at every turn.


Neither Plain Nor Simple
AFTER THE FIRE
The Destruction of the Lancaster County Amish.
By Randy-Michael Testa.
Illustrated by Susie Riehl. 187 pp.
Hanover, N.H.: University Press of New England. $19.95.


Why We're in a Slump and Not Creating Jobs
To the Editor:
"Looking for Work: America Isn't Creating Enough Jobs, and No One Seems to Know Why," the lead article in the Sept. 6 Week in Review tells us.
Anyone who reads your newspaper knows there are at least seven reasons why America is in a slump with not enough jobs to go around:


INSIDE
3 Officers Hurt in Shooting
Three officers were wounded in East Harlem, in an incident with unusual resonance amid tensions between the police and City Hall.
Page 43.
Pro-Government Candidates
Congress is likely to gain at least 10 black and five Hispanic lawmakers, and these candidates conspicuously reject the prevailing anti-government spirit.
Page 26.


Commercial Property: Subleasing; The Market Has Made the Landlord More Flexible
IN 1986, when Erwin Shustak, a commercial lease lawyer, was negotiating a lease for his former law firm on 12,000 square feet at 545 Madison Avenue, at 54th Street, he recalls that landlords were so powerful it was impossible to get any subleasing concessions.
"There were no restrictions whatsoever on the landlord's right of approval over any subtenant we might find," he said.
"He kept total control."


Sept. 13-19: United Nations; Southern Countries Fear An Environmental Bite
The United Nations General Assembly session that began last week will witness a new installment in the debate between North and South over respect for national sovereignty.
The issue is the environment.
Last spring at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, the members of the United Nations agreed to set up an international watchdog to insure that countries live up to their commitments to keep future development environmentally benign.


Marino Trims Himself From Tax Cut Party's Line
New York State's election laws are so arcane that sometimes even the people who write the regulations stumble over them.
Ralph J. Marino, the majority leader of the Republican-led State Senate, disclosed on Friday that he had asked the State Board of Elections to remove his name from the "Tax Cut Party" line on the ballot when he runs for re-election in November.
The reason he cited: A review of the petitions "revealed technical deficiencies," Mr.
Marino said in a statement, including failure by some signers to specify the correct election or Assembly district on their petition sheets.
"Those mistakes generally were caused by this year's redistricting," he added.


Update; School Clinics Get Approval To Distribute Condoms
The Board of Education has voted to let the 17 health clinics in New York City's high schools distribute condoms just as many teachers do already.
The action arose out of an anomaly.
In several votes in the 1980's, the board allowed school health clinics to prescribe birth control pills, but specifically forbade them from directly distributing any devices, including condoms.


Scott Fitzgerald and L.I. of 'Gatsby' Era
HOWEVER much the tragic life and hyper-publicized notoriety of F. Scott Fitzgerald and the industry grown around him overshadow the body of his accomplished work, he is still the author of the great American novel of the century and remains a phenomenal best seller.
About 250,000 copies of "The Great Gatsby" are sold each year, and Great Neck, as the temporary Fitzgerald home and main milieu of that novel, is forever a landmark on the American literary landscape.


Topics of The Times; Ungracious Loser
What is Geraldine Ferraro waiting for?
She is understandably hurt by her loss to Robert Abrams.
But by every indication, he did win the Democratic Senate primary last Tuesday, and there's next to no chance that absentee ballots will change the outcome.
Her refusal to concede ill becomes her.
Even Friday, when Mr.
Abrams reached Ms.
Ferraro after failing once before, she would not commit to supporting him.
Why?
If somehow she emerges as the winner in the final, official ballot count, a concession would have done no harm.
Victory would be hers to claim anyway.
Her petulance demeans the process, and fractures her own party's unity.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Baldwin 195,000
488 Devonshire Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41- year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Glen Cove 600,000
1 Deepwoods Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; dining room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $13,000.
Glenwood Landing 140,000
11 Woodland Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 68-year-old ranch; 50-foot by 111-foot lot; taxes $1,017.
Massapequa 290,000
18 Dale Court  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old split level; dining room, den, finished basement; taxes $7,500.
Westbury 190,000
180 Rhododendron Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old split level; family room, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $6,600.
Williston Park 207,000
190 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old colonial; dining room, finished basement, attic; taxes $3,200.
OTHER AREAS Weston, Conn. 510,000
11 White Oak Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old contemporary; adjacent open space, electronic security system, 2.6 acres; taxes $7,542.
New Castle, N.Y. 700,000
22 Mountain Peak Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; fireplace, family room, deck, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $13,001.
Basking Ridge, N.J. 475,000
24 Brook Ridge Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; h/w floors, crown moldings, wet bar; taxes $8,286.


Women's Shoe 'King' Sets the Tone
It was extremely gratifying to read "Hail to Thee, O King of Women's Shoes"  [ July 5 ]  and to receive the many phone calls, letters and visits confirming the article.
We are pleased that the service we stress -- and that is exemplified to perfection by Clemente King -- doesn't go unnoticed.
NATHANIEL LAZAN President Premier Shoe Purchasing Corp.
Manhattan


Salvation Is at Hand: Lindros Makes Debut
The National Hockey League, which survived 75 seasons without him, presented its first Eric Lindros Show this afternoon in an exhibition match between the team he rejected and the team he accepted after forcing a trade.
Lindros scored one goal and set up Mark Recchi's game-winner in leading the Flyers to a 4-3 victory over the Quebec Nordiques before 17,226 fans at the Spectrum.


POSTINGS: Federally Financed Rehabs; Low-Income Bronx Co-ops
When members of 160 low-income families walked through model apartment 1B at 749 Jennings Street in the Bronx last week, they caught a glimpse of what it might be like to become a co-op owner through the New York City Housing Authority Multifamily Home Ownership Program.
Three five-story walkups at the site, formerly burnt-out shells that cost a total of $3.9 million to rehabilitate, are to be ready for occupancy in January.


The Queen Mary Awaits Its Fate
Perhaps it is no longer a ship.
The funnels are fake, the hull rests on supports and all but one of her engines are gone.
Yet the Queen Mary may well be headed out to open seas once more.
Since 1967, the ship that in the mid-1930's was the longest and fastest at sea has been a tourist attraction and hotel in Long Beach, Calif.
Several operators have tried to turn a profit with it, without sustained success.
The last of them, Walt Disney Company, announced in March that a 1,000-foot Art Deco ocean liner no longer fit into its plans.
In June, the Long Beach Harbor Commission, which owns the Queen Mary, decided that it, too, would have to abandon ship, by selling it.
Eighteen proposals are under consideration: 5 would leave it in Long Beach and 13 would move it.
Regardless of the decision, which is expected next month, the ship's hotel will close Sept. 30.
Tours and restaurants will remain open only until year's end, a Harbor Commission spokesperson said.


Romalda Clark, Peter Blanchard
Mr. and Mrs.
Russell B. Clark of Hamilton, Mass., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Romalda Berkeley Clark and Peter Thorne Blanchard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David W. Blanchard of Hingham, Mass.
Miss Clark, 25 years old, is an assistant dean of admissions at Bates College in Lewiston, Me.
She and her finace graduated from Bates.
Her father is a senior vice president of investment banking and the manager of the international department at H. C. Wainwright &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in Boston.


Canadian Unity Pact Faces Early Opposition
With early polls giving opponents of a new national unity accord an edge in Quebec and British Columbia, the Federal Government has warned that Canada faces economic setbacks if all 10 provinces do not ratify the pact.
Even though the leaders of the federal, provincial and territorial governments, the three main political parties and groups representing more than 1 million indigenous people are all in favor of the accord, opponents have capitalized on a multitude of deep resentments and gained early support.


ARTIST OF THE SOVIET WRECKAGE
YOU ENTERED "THE BRIDGE" along a narrow wooden walkway and proceeded halfway across the room.
There you found a long text and several pairs of binoculars.
The room was full of overturned chairs, and all along the walls, too dimly lighted to be legible, were paintings and paintings and paintings.
On the floor were hundreds of tiny white men cut out of paper.
The text explained that a tribunal had gathered to review works of modern art, that there had been a great explosion, that the members of the tribunal had fled and that after their departure these many little white men had appeared rushing in waves across the floor, too small to turn the chairs back or to bring the paintings into the light.
This was the Soviet artist Ilya Kabakov's installation at the Museum of Modern Art's "Dislocations" exhibition in January.
There is a literal reading of the piece: the tribunal is the old Soviet official structure, the explosion is glasnost, the white men are the well-intentioned but impotent Russian people who cannot make their country function now.
You, the viewer, looking through binoculars, are engaged in an act of surveillance, as the West has lately surveyed the helpless Russian people, as the K.G.B. used to survey them.
But these matter-of-fact readings deprive the work of its richness and its complexity.


Linguistically Elite, Navajo Corps Is Reunited
William Dean Wilson was only a 15-year-old schoolboy when Marine recruiters came to the Navajo Indian reservation in Shiprock, N.M., where he lived.
To Marine officials, Mr.
Wilson was an ideal recruit for an odd reason: He spoke both English and Navajo fluently.
He was a perfect candidate not to be just a regular marine but a code-talker, one of a small corps of Navajo radio operators who developed a secret code in their language and played a critical role in the American victory over the Japanese in World War II.


All Deaf Children Can Now Be Taught to Listen and to Speak
To the Editor:
Re "Linguists Debate Study Classifying Language as Innate Human Skill" (Science Times, Sept. 1):


For Fans of Slow Starters, History Gives Solace
You should have heard the wailing when the Jets lost at Pittsburgh.
Why, the season was over, fans moaned, a season of promise that showed no victories.
Some people in Jetland were yelling for the coach's scalp, or calling for a different defense or another quarterback.
Yes, things were terrible.
But this is not 1992 we're talking about.
This was 1981 -- the last time the Jets played in Pittsburgh until last Sunday.
And 11 years ago, the Jets came away from Pittsburgh with an 0-3 record.


Along Route 20
To the Editor: Having grown up along the shores of Lake Erie in Dunkirk, N.Y., very close to State Route 20, I enjoyed Harriet Brown's article "Crossing the State on Old Route 20" (July 19).
I was disappointed, however, that her trip ended in Cazenovia.
The stretch of Route 20 west of Buffalo between Silver Creek and Ripley contains some of the most beautiful farmland and vineyards along the route.
There are many wineries in the region open to the public as well as farms with roadside fruit and vegetable stands (or pick your own).
Fredonia and Westfield in particular are known for their Victorian homes; the Chautauqua Institute is a short drive from Westfield.


Rich Nations Lag in Response to Crises
To the Editor:
"A Foreign Legion for the World" (editorial, Sept. 1) quotes President Harry S. Truman's statement to the first United Nations General Assembly in 1946:


Handy Traditional Carpenter's Toolbox
FEW containers are as well suited to carrying tools as a carpenter's traditional open toolbox.
Made of wood to prevent damaging sharpened items, such a toolbox consists essentially of a rectangular tray with tall ends spanned by a sturdy handle.
Following are instructions for two toolboxes that can be built by using just hand tools or, more easily, by using hand tools supplemented by a power circular saw and electric drill.
One toolbox is a basic model.
The other has three drawers for small items.


Ann M. Magliocco, James A. Combias
Ann Marie Magliocco, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Magliocco of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Anthony Combias, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Combias of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Martin S. Igoe performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Combias, 25 years old, is the manager of sales and promotion at FYI Media Inc., a telephone-information service in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Quaker Equities Ltd., a holding company in Manhattan, and of its subsidiary Peerless Importers Inc., a wine and liquor distributor in Brooklyn.


West Haven Veterans Hospital Faces Changing Population
WITH a scaled-down military force and a growing, aging veteran population, the West Haven Veterans Administration Hospital is being forced to consider the kind of care it will provide in the future.
With more older veterans, it appears that the demand will be for long-term nursing care, rather than the acute-care programs that have given the West Haven Veterans Administration a national reputation.


Poor Nations Seek Exports to Rich Nations
With Latin American and Asian countries finding growth and even prosperity through trade, the finance ministers from 24 developing countries called on rich nations today to buy more goods from the Third World.
Trade issues have long been the unwanted stepchildren at the World Bank and International Monetary Fund's gatherings, which finance ministers together from around the world.
As officials from industrialized nations scurried among meetings today to draft responses to the turmoil in European currency markets, ministers from developing countries convened and fretted about whether rich countries' regional trade agreements would exclude them and to complain about the continued paralysis of global trade talks in Geneva.


Life at the Bottom -- America's Poorest County/A special report.; Sad Distinction for the Sioux: Homeland Is No. 1 in Poverty
The Pine Ridge Reservation is the home of the Oglala branch of the Sioux Indians, descendants of the warrior heroes Crazy Horse and Red Cloud.
It is as poor as America gets.
It spreads across nearly two million acres of butte-broken plains and listless creeks, and the oyster-gray cliffs and impervious clay floor of the Badlands.
It is a mean and despairing place of 16,000 inhabitants ravaged by isolation, disease, political infighting, and good intentions gone bad.
Fewer than 3 in 10 of the adults have jobs, and nearly all the jobs are in government agencies.


Angela Moore, Philip Block Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Roy W. Moore 3d of Fairfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Angela Stewart Moore, to Philip Wachter Block Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Block of Ashland, Ky.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Moore, 22 years old, graduated in May from Vanderbilt University, from which her fiance, a graduate of the University of Kentucky, received an M.B.A.
Her father is a partner in the Bridgeport, Conn., law firm of Marsh, Day &amp; Calhoun.
Her late grandfather Roy W. Moore Jr. was president of the Canada Dry Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Margaret T. Moore, is a teacher at the Greenfield Hill Congregational Nursery School in Fairfield.


Film Festival Starts And Finishes
From the earliest days of the New York Film Festival, which begins Friday with Agnieszka Holland's "Olivier, Olivier" and ends on Oct. 11 with Irwin Winkler's "Night and the City," a special glamour and sense of anticipation have surrounded its opening and closing attractions.
Here are the openers and closers of the past three decades.  1963: "The Exterminating Angel" (directed by Luis Bunuel), "Dragees au Poivre" (directed by Jacques Baratier).


'The Mask of Benevolence'
To the Editor:
Harlan Lane, the author of "The Mask of Benevolence: Disabling the Deaf Community," should take a peek from behind his own mask of benevolence and think about his own disabling of the deaf community.
Thank you, Melvin Konner (Aug. 2), for pointing out that there are differing schools of thought and opinion regarding the deaf.
What Dr.
Konner cannot know, at least through Mr.
Lane's writing, is that the future of the deaf no longer needs to mirror the past and be one of isolation and misunderstanding.
But it will not be Mr.
Lane's bias that paves the way.


Ms. Connolly, N. A. Gravante Jr.
Jacqueline Ann Connolly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Connolly of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Nicholas Andrew Gravante Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gravante of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Joseph Cieriello officiated at St.
Anselm's Roman Catholic Church.


Rebecca Moore, James H. Saft
Rebecca Elise Moore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Truman Moore of New York, was married yesterday to James Henry Saft, the son of Dr.
Virginia C. Saft of Chicago and the late Dr.
James H. Saft.
The Rev.
J.
Barrie Shepherd performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in New York.
Ms.
Moore, 25 years old, is an English teacher and the assistant director of alumni relations at Friends Seminary, the Quaker preparatory school, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College, as did her husband, and received a master of fine arts degree in fiction writing from Columbia University.
Her father is an advertising photographer in New York.
Her mother, Margaret Moore, is a writer.


Caitlin Dyk and Alejandro Palacios
Caitlin Shirer Dyk, a daughter of Mrs.
John W. Dean of Lenox, Mass., and Timothy B. Dyk of Washington, was married yesterday to Alejandro Palacios, the son of Mrs.
Peter Clark of Barnet, Vt., and Victor Palacios of Mexico City.
The Rev.
Duncan McQueen performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Lenox.
Mrs.
Palacios, 26 years old, is a law clerk for Judge Noel Kramer of the District of Columbia Superior Court.
She graduated from Bates College and received her law degree from the College of William and Mary.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue.
Her mother, Inga Dean, is a writer.


The Word 'Love' Had the Force of 'Kill'
SYLVIA
By Leonard Michaels.
Illustrations by Sylvia Bloch. 126 pp.
San Francisco: Mercury House.
Paper, $10.


Coffee Irregular
To the Editor: Apropos "Coffee Irregular": When I was living in Geneva in the 1960's, my favorite coffee was called "renverse," that is, reversed or upside-down, simply because the milk was placed in the cup first, and coffee concentrate injected into it.
It was a delicious beverage, but I was warned not to order it in Paris for fear that the waiter interpret "renverse" as an invitation to invert the cup and its contents into my lap.
I never tried the experiment.
ERWIN KLINGSBERG Mountainside, N.J.


Immortality Through Photos
THE picture illustrated at the right comes from Bruce Davidson's "East 100th Street" photo essay, which was published in 1970.
Its subjects are as carefully groomed as professional models: she with a bandanna that shows off the planes of her face, he with his "engraved" hair and -- nice touch -- a cigarette tucked behind one ear.
Apart from anything else, the print, one of about 30 on view in the Photography Gallery at Drew University, illustrates how the balance of power has changed in the fashion world.
Chic used to trickle down from society's top drawer; now it surges up from below, as if high fashion were following the example set by high art earlier in the century.


Fling That Mud! (An American Tradition)
Governor Clinton is a sure loser.
He may pick up a few votes in the South, and perhaps New York, but that's all.
His opponents will destroy him when they bring to light his reservations about the Constitution and use of family connections with respect to military service.
The target of those accusations was not Bill Clinton, Governor of Arkansas, but
George
Clinton, Governor of New York, who was briefly considered as a running mate for George Washington in 1789.


Dialogue Amid the Deluge
HANNAH ARENDT -- KARL JASPERS: CORRESPONDENCE, 1926-1969
Edited by Lotte Kohler and Hans Saner.
Translated by Robert Kimber and Rita Kimber.
Illustrated. 821 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $49.95.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Norwalk, Conn.  $430,000
34 Pine Hill Avenue  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; stone construction, slate roof, new kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,403.
Ridgefield, Conn. 233,000
16 Midrocks Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; new kitchen, roof and water heater, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,789.
Weston, Conn. 510,000
11 White Oak Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old contemporary; adjacent open space, electronic security system, 2.6 acres; taxes $7,542.
New Castle, N.Y. 700,000
22 Mountain Peak Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; fireplace, family room, deck, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $13,001.
Rye Brook, N.Y. 400,000
6 Old Oak Road
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old colonial; family room, maid's room, brick fireplace, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $5,480.
South Salem, N.Y. 135,000
Lake Kitchawan Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 11-year-old unique; new kitchen, French doors, living room, clubhouse; taxes $2,935.
OTHER AREAS Basking Ridge, N.J. 475,000
24 Brook Ridge Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; h/w floors, crown moldings, wet bar; taxes $8,286.
Baldwin, L.I. 195,000
488 Devonshire Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41- year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Glen Cove, L.I. 600,000
1 Deepwoods Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; dining room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $13,000.


Economic Compromise Is in the Air as Russian Legislators Head to Moscow
With the Russian Government weakened and the economy slipping out of control, an important session of the legislature opens next week amid signs that President Boris N. Yeltsin is seeking further compromise with forces opposed to Western-style economic reform.
This summer the Russian economy has borne the brunt of an unresolved political and constitutional struggle over the money supply.


'Broadway After Dark' In Norwalk Production
ONE ought to get a kick out of whiling away a couple of hours with a critic who swam in the nude with George Bernard Shaw, made love to Jeanne Eagels, socialized with Eugene O'Neill, wrote a biography of George M. Cohan and lived in the torch of the Statue of Liberty, rent free.
But don't bet on it.
The reminiscences of Ward Morehouse (1899-1966) as set down by Ward Morehouse 3d and produced by the Rainbow Theater at Norwalk Community College, are less an entertaining tribute than a gaping disservice to a reportedly colorful symbol of a bygone era when 70 legitimate theaters lighted up Broadway.


Arms Makers: Rather Fight Than Switch
In these hard times, no industry is laying off workers in greater numbers than weapons manufacturers -- and much public rhetoric is now being devoted to reversing this process through a policy called conversion.
The idea is that workers who produced tanks will be redeployed to make civilian products like sewer pipes.
But conversion is not happening.
And it might never happen.
William A. Anders, chairman of General Dynamics, the giant manufacturer of M1 tanks, jet fighter planes and nuclear submarines, gave fair warning of this in a little-noticed speech that has become the military industry's Gettysburg Address.
That speech, last Oct. 31 in St.
Louis, is now widely cited by chieftains of other big military contractors as a prudent call for a do-or-die policy: make weapons or shut down.


TENDER TRAP
To those of us in the mental-health field, the interview is serious business, an essential part of our stock in trade.
Some have developed it to the level of an art form.
In the field of news and entertainment, David Frost is among the best.
The veteran staff of "60 Minutes" is superior, each in his own way.


THE PARTY CRASHER
In his article, Lowi says, "The issue is a third party," but he ignores the biggest barrier to the entry of third parties: the restriction of voting for only one candidate in a multicandidate field.
Many of us, like Lowi, were John Anderson supporters in 1980.
But we shied away from voting for him because he was a certain loser, and we would have wasted our votes doing so.
On the other hand, if we could have voted for Anderson
and
either Carter or Reagan as the next-best choice, projections indicate that Anderson would have been approved by almost 50 percent of the voters -- drawing support about equally from Carter and Reagan -- instead of the dismal 7 percent that actually voted for him.


The Kickoff Downtown
Fall may bring the galleries to life, but book parties are perennial.


THE ACCENT FACTOR
Though by no means a native speaker of the English of the British aristocracy, I can offer a speculative etymology of the term
yonks
, meaning "a long time" or "ages" (On Language: "The Accent Factor," by Steve Lohr, Aug. 23).
My Edinburgh-born husband, lapsing into the diction of his school days, occasionally uses the phrase "donkey's years" to emphasize the passage of time ("I haven't seen her in donkey's years").
The phrase is presumably a pun on "ears," as those of the donkey variety tend to be long.
In Britain, donkeys are sometimes called "donks," and "donks years," if further shortened by compression, could become "yonks." M. BJORNERUD
Oxford, Ohio


Frieda Herskovitz and Martin Berezin
Frieda Schreiber Herskovitz of Philadelphia was married yesterday to Dr.
Martin Arthur Berezin of Jamaica Plain, Mass.
Judge Edith Fine of the Massachusetts Court of Appeals in Boston performed the ceremony at the Castle of the Cabot Estate in Jamaica Plain.
Dr.
Herskovitz, who is 75 years old and is keeping her name, is a retired marriage and family therapist in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College, from which she also received a master's degree in psychology.
She has a Ph.D. in psychology from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Abner Scrubber of Phildelphia.
Her father was an automobile financier in Philadelphia.


Understanding Travelspeak
A LARGE area of travel language -- beyond the sort of jargon used in any industry -- can prove hazardous to a traveler.
Some of its euphemisms can be misleading.
This language usually appears in brochures and other sales materials, or is used in defining what you are about to buy.
For example, unless you know to ask, you may assume that a first class hotel means the best, when there may be a deluxe or five-star grade above it, depending on the country or city.
Here are other phrases to be alert for.


Selling Arms to Keep Jobs: The Signals It Sends Abroad
Shortly after President Bush announced that he was selling 72 F-15 jet fighters to Saudi Arabia, Senator Christopher Bond of Missouri, where the planes are made, sent around a fax boasting that he would be shepherding the sale through Congress.
Mr.
Bond didn't even try to justify the sale in military or foreign policy terms.
He said simply that it "will allow the thousands of Missourians who build F-15's to stay on the job for years to come and to continue their critical contribution to our nation's security."
That was at least honest; unlike foreign arms sales during the cold war, which usually had a strategic rationale, or could pretend they did, this one appears to have been driven exclusively by an effort to secure jobs and votes at home.
It is part and parcel of the pork-barrel diplomacy instituted by the Bush Administration as it scrambles for a second term.
And whatever this may do for its re-election chances, such sales also are going to have serious consequences for American foreign policy vis-a-vis China, Europe and the Middle East after Nov. 3.


Wall Street; Advisers Who Stretch the Truth
Everybody knows that tough times can cause people to fall for some pretty wacky claims.
Which may help explain why investment pros seem to be taking ever-greater liberties with the facts when they publish advertisements seeking to woo new customers.
Not that some of these investment fellows really need to fudge their trading results.
A few of the truth-stretchers who sell trading advice, money-management and investment newsletters are downright talented when it comes to making money.
So you have to wonder why, for example, a guy with a 406 percent short-term gain would feel compelled to inflate that to 14,700 percent.


Cage Played His Anarchy By the Rules
If, by some chance, John Cage is now comfortably settled in the heavens, I am sure he is arguing with Albert Einstein: Cage's God not only plays dice with the universe, He relies on dice for everything.
This God's Scriptures are constructed out of splintered phrases randomly brought together.
His saints are distinguished by their faith in chance operations.
His Music of the Spheres is composed not by applying Kepler's laws for planetary motion, but by consulting the "I Ching." Sacred rites include performances of Cage's famous composition "4'33"," in which the Heavenly Host stands in silence.
If Cage is indeed housed in such a version of Paradise, I doubt he will mind much if, down below, I add a dissonant chord to the requiems that have been offered since his death last month.
Cage has been hailed for his influence, his humor and his inventiveness, all of which are undeniable.
But in interpreting his works and his ideas, we have tended to take Cage's own word for their meanings.


Karen Alyce Saul, Howard Ira Miller
Dr. and Mrs.
Barry I. Saul of Hewlett, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Alyce Saul to Howard Ira Miller, the son of Suzanne Miller of Plainview, L.I., and the late Dr.
Philip L. Miller.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Saul, 23 years old, graduated from Cornell University, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in psychological services from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a candidate for a doctorate in counseling psychology at Fordham University.
Her father is the associate director of cardiology at Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Ellen Saul, is a teacher at Public School 276 in Brooklyn.


Cynthia Rhea and Harry Woods
CYNTHIA RHEA, 30 years old, and Harry Woods, 33, survived everything from a bicoastal courtship to several breakups, one so serious they burned each other's love letters.
"I threw his letters into the incinerator in my apartment building," Ms.
Rhea said.
"I thought, 'There, he's finally out of my life.' "


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 20, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
34
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
23
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
3
4
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
4
10
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
3
SEE JANE RUN, by Joy Fielding. (Avon, $5.50.) A woman awakens not knowing who she is.
6
12
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
7
4
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Life as lived by writers, critics and editors in the Pennsylvania Dutch country and New York.
8
1
THE CHOICE, by Barry Reed. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) A Boston lawyer caught in a squeeze between loyalty to a drug company client and evidence that its product causes birth defects.
9
34
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
10 *
1
GAMES OF THE HANGMAN, by Victor O'Reilly. (Berkley, $5.99.) A photographer's discovery of a corpse hanging from a tree on his Irish estate sends him on a chase to Switzerland.
11
11
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
12
4
A TREASURE WORTH SEEKING, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman's quest for a brother she never knew.
13
3
THE COLOR OF HER PANTIES, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.99.) Continuing the "Xanth" fantasy series.
14
14
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
15
6
AGAINST THE WIND, by J. F. Freedman. (Signet, $5.99.) A lawyer undertakes to defend a gang of bikers against a ruthless district attorney.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
22
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
5
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
4
9
ME: STORIES OF MY LIFE, by Katharine Hepburn. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The actress's memoirs.
5
62
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
6 *
4
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
7
70
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
463
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
9
13
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
10
18
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
58
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
87
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3 *
106
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
22
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
5
2
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) The revised edition of a book offering counsel for parents-to-be.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Jill Silverman, Steven Greenspan
Jill Suzanne Silverman, a daughter of Leon and Marilyn Silverman of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married last evening to Steven Mark Greenspan, a son of Herbert and Davida Greenspan of Wantagh, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Levine officiated at the Brae Burn County Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Greenspan, 26 years old, is an associate in the real-estate finance group at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father owns Silverman Realty Group in White Plains, a developer and manager of real estate.
Her mother is the corporate secretary there.


In the Land of Genghis Khan
OUT on the steppes, where the prairies stretch endlessly until they melt into mountain crags on the horizon, there's not much sign of the last few million years of human civilization.
At most, one sees an occasional rutted dirt road or a shepherd's tent exhaling a plume of white smoke from a cooking fire made of cow chips.
Mongolia, after all, has been in a funk for the last seven centuries.


Karen Voss and Alexander Gruzen
Karen Malcolm Voss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Voss Jr. of Wheeling, W.Va., was married yesterday in Amagansett, L.I., to Alexander Gruzen, the son of Dr.
Joan Gruzen and Jordan L. Gruzen, both of New York.
The Rev.
Joel Gibson, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the summer home of the bridegroom's father.
Rabbi David Greenberg took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gruzen, 28 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is a guest-relations director at the Hotel Okura in Tokyo.
Her father is a general surgeon in private practice in Wheeling.


Ralph Lauren, Anne Slater, Toukie Smith Et Al.
Family ties are connecting John Fairchild and Ralph Lauren.
In the last year and a half, Mr.
Lauren has hired two of Mr.
Fairchild's sons, James and Stephen, to work at his company.
Mr.
Fairchild is the chairman of Fairchild Publications, the publisher of Women's Wear Daily.
"That's not a conflict," said Patrick McCarthy, Fairchild's executive editor.
"Mr. Fairchild's sons have to be free to do whatever they want to do. Where they work would have no influence on anything we do over here."


Island of Fear: Inside a Soweto Hostel
THE SCORE WAS TIGERS TWO GOALS, Rovers one, when the first bullets whizzed harmlessly into the hard scrub of the soccer field on the southern edge of Meadowlands Hostel.
Players and spectators ambled out of range as young men opened up with pistols from across the two-lane highway that separates the hostel grounds from the Soweto neighborhood called Killarney, one of innumerable frontiers in South Africa's black civil war.
The sniping was a regular annoyance, a rebuke to the hostel dwellers for having the audacity to play soccer where they were not welcome.
On this particular Sunday in July, however, the hostel teams had played ball with deliberate relish, hoping to draw fire and justify a reprisal that would teach the outsiders a lesson.
No sooner had the volley from the Killarney side died down than a band of hostel vigilantes charged out of hiding to respond with AK-47 assault rifles.


Foreign Affairs; Love Lombard Rates
While European politicians and financial gnomes panicked during last week's currency convulsions, the Swedes displayed uncharacteristic humor.
They raised their interest rates 500 percent.
"You shall not pass!" they shouted to the monetary barbarians at the gates of their precious krona.
This Swedish excess seemed the only sensible response to European behavior that made the U.S. appear, if only fleetingly, a well-governed country.
Hegel opined that to be sane in a world of madmen is itself a form of insanity.
Europeans are once again taking his advice to heart.


Update; New Clean Air Rules May Increase Gasoline Costs
State environmental officials have adopted emergency clean air regulations that are expected to slightly increase the cost of gasoline in the New York City and Syracuse areas.
The new state Department of Environmental Conservation rules require that all gasoline sold in those two areas be blended with oxygen during winter months so that carbon monoxide levels can meet Federal Clean Air Act standards.


IN SHORT/UNIVERSITY PRESS: NONFICTION
ON THE HEIGHTS OF DESPAIR  By E. M. Cioran. University of Chicago, $18.95.


A Small Uptick In New Housing
A MODEST increase in residential construction, mostly impelled by the rebirth of projects that had gone bust, has taken place in parts of the New York metropolitan region.
The activity hardly amounts to a boom.
Indeed, home builders, battered by the recession, a tightening of commercial credit and a dearth of consumer confidence, may be suffering through the worst times since World War II.


POSTINGS: B'nai B'rith in the Bronx; Housing for the Elderly
After nearly a decade of scrabbling for tight Federal funds, the B'nai B'rith housing program for the elderly is rolling again.
In November, a 100-unit, seven-story apartment building designed by Beyer Blinder Belle of Manhattan will open on a 43,750-square-foot site on Barstow Avenue, opposite Co-op City in the Bronx.
It will soon be followed by a 97-unit building in South Orange, N.J., and a 50-unit addition to housing in Boston.
And groundbreakings are scheduled early next year for 83 units in Deerfield Beach, Fla., 79 in Tucson, Ariz., and 75 in Fort Worth, Tex.


The Flashbacks of a Festivalgoer
Halcyon Nights, and some not so, at the annual New York Film Festival.
When it opens Friday, the festival will be celebrating 30 years at the same Lincoln Center stand.
In that time, Rainer Werner Fassbinder has come and gone.
Akira Kurosawa, who already had a full body of work behind him in 1963, continues to add to it today.
Francois Truffaut is dead, but Jean-Luc Godard, who has had more films at the festival than any other director (16 features, plus 5 short films), goes on.


Stepping Along


Dawn Labenow, Richard Lamb
Dawn Oudin Labenow, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Labenow of Babylon, L.I., was married there yesterday to Richard Paul Lamb, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Lamb of Massapequa Park, L.I.
Justice Joseph J. Saladino of State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I., officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


From Goldbrick to Bronze B.M.O.C.
MORT WALKER of Stamford is the scholar in residence at the University of Missouri this year.
His creation, Beetle Bailey, will be the loafer in residence there, presumably for all time.
A lifesize statue of Beetle Bailey, the comic strip character that Mr.
Walker created 42 years ago, is now being cast in bronze at a Bridgeport foundry and will be dedicated Oct. 23 during homecoming week at the university in Columbia, Mo.


Sept. 13-19: Hawaiian Crunch; Rebuilding in the Wake Of Hurricane Iniki
After Hurricane Iniki flattened their crops, toppled utility poles and ripped the roofs off their houses, some residents of the island of Kauai were able to take showers and make phone calls last week as basic services were restored.
But officials said it could take six months or longer to return electricity to all 55,000 inhabitants of the sparsely settled island.
The hurricane, with winds of 160 miles per hour or more, roared across Kauai Sept. 11, killing three people and causing at least $1 billion in damage, destroying sugar cane fields and fledgling macadamia nut orchards.


Freya Read, Mark Read
Freya Augusta Read, a daughter of Deborah S. Madeira of Portland, Me., and Frederick H. Read of Los Angeles, was married yesterday in New York to Mark Edwards Read, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald B. Read of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Christopher Brown performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church.
The bride and bridegroom are first cousins.
Ms.
Read, 26 years old, graduated from Tufts University.
She is an associate analyst at C. J. Lawrence Inc., a stock brokerage in New York.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president at the former New York brokerage firm of Hayden Stone Inc. and a member of the New York Stock Exchange.
Her mother is a freelance writer in Portland.


Handy Traditional Carpenter's Toolbox
FEW containers are as well suited to carrying tools as a carpenter's traditional open toolbox.
Made of wood to prevent damaging sharpened items, such a toolbox consists essentially of a rectangular tray with tall ends spanned by a sturdy handle.
Following are instructions for two toolboxes that can be built by using just hand tools or, more easily, by using hand tools supplemented by a power circular saw and electric drill.
One toolbox is a basic model.
The other has three drawers for small items.


Philharmonic: Past Meets Future
When Kurt Masur accepted the music directorship of the New York Philharmonic in 1990, he said he envisioned the orchestra at the center of the city's musical life, its concerts crossroads of ideas that would be eagerly anticipated and avidly discussed.
Last season, the repertory had been pretty much set before Mr.
Masur's arrival, though his own programs bore his stamp.
This season, the elaborate celebration of the Philharmonic's 150th anniversary, which began on Wednesday, made for another programming complication, since the concerts are meant to look back at highlights of the orchestra's history.
Yet the programs Mr.
Masur is conducting give a clear view of his intentions and philosophy.
Connections, musical and otherwise, are made between works and composers from different times and places.
Old scores are juxtaposed with new ones in ways that illuminate both.


Streetscapes:: Sidestreet Prestige; When Cachet Was Off 5th Ave.
EVERYBODY knows the best addresses: Park Avenue and foremost, Fifth Avenue.
That's why the developer Jack Heller secured special permission to renumber the old hotel he is converting to condominiums at 2 East 86th Street, 100 feet east of Fifth Avenue, as 1049 Fifth Avenue.
Who would ever consider the sidestreet address more prestigious?


Sports of The Times; Filipinos Just Wanted To Win, Baby
HOW did the adults explain it to the kids from Zamboanga?
Did they sugar-coat it by saying, "This is Ramon, his father just got transferred by the rubber plantation. We're going to let him play on our team just to make him feel at home?"
On their the way to the Little League World Series in Pennsylvania, did the surviving kids from Zamboanga feel cheapened by adults?
Or did they assume that short-cutting is the way of the world?


Dr. Bromberg, Raphael Clynes
Dr.
Jacqueline F. Bromberg, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip A. Bromberg of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married last evening to Dr.
Raphael A. Clynes, a son of Dr.
Manfred Clynes of Sonoma, Calif., and Renate Clynes-Walken of New York.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor officiated at the home of the bridegroom's brother and sister-in-law, Dr.
Neville Clynes and Dr.
Felicia Cosman, in Montebello, N.Y.
Dr.
Bromberg is 31 years old and is keeping her name.
She and her husband are fellows in medical hematology and oncology at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received her M.D. degree and a Ph.D. in molecular sciences from the University of North Carolina.
Her father teaches at the university as the Bonner Professor of Medicine and is the director of its Center for Environmental Medicine and Lung Biology.


Frequent Fliers, 12 and Younger
What do children want when they fly?
That question was asked in an informal survey of passengers under age 12 who frequently travel by air unaccompanied by adults.
Uniglobe Travel International, a franchise network of travel agencies that is based in Vancouver, British Columbia, commissioned the survey -- it said the term "focus group study" might be more accurate -- in July, when it interviewed 30 children from 5 to 11 years old who fly at least five times a year.


All About/Generic Pharmaceuticals; Now the Big Drug Makers Are Imitating Their Imitators
For years many pharmaceutical companies have scorned low-priced generic imitators that have stolen sales from their multimillion-dollar brands, suggesting that the copies aren't as reliable as the originals.
Now, however, big drug makers like Merck and Marion Merrell Dow are announcing that they will produce copies of some of their own products to grab a piece of the $4 billion-a-year generics market.
For consumers who might have been wary of switching to equivalent products from unfamiliar generic-drug companies -- products that might differ slightly from the originals and might produce less satisfactory results -- this will mean a chance to pay far less for a product they were already using, manufactured by a large company they have learned to trust.
But in the long run, the move into generics by major manufacturers may squeeze some competitors out of the market, which could mean prices will not fall as sharply as they might have otherwise.
When Patents Expire  Racing to Be First On the Market
More than 60 important drugs whose patent protection or other exclusive rights expire over the next three years may be exposed to generic competition.
These drugs have combined American sales of at least $8 billion a year.
Among the big-name players entering the generic field:


Ms. Eisenstadt, Barry Evans
Elizabeth Smith Eisenstadt, a freelance writer in Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Haydn Barry Evans, the president of the Grubb Institute in Washington, a human-resources consulting concern for churches.
Bishop Allen Bartlett of the Episcopal Diocese of Pennsylvania performed the ceremony at the Cathedral Church of the Saviour in Philadelphia.


The Shirt's A Skirt
The saga of the plaid flannel shirt continues with today's rap-inspired sportswear.
There's nothing new about tying a sweater around the waist to be ready for a chill breeze, but a shirt is better for the ultimate deconstructed hip-hop look.
In June, young people ripped the sleeves off their plaid shirts to frame their well-exercized arms.
Now those same trendsetters may be searching for those discarded sleeves so that they can stitch them back onto their shirts and tie them around their waists.


Let's Hear It for Propane
To the Editor:
In "The Refrigerator of the Future, for Better or Worse" (Aug. 31), the author dismissed propane as a suitable refrigerant that would have no adverse impact on the ozone layer.
Propane was ruled out on the basis of its being flammable.


Mutual Funds; The Many Voices of Newsletters
Most mutual fund investors -- in fact, all investors -- would love a peek at tomorrow's financial pages.
Next best is someone who can predict movements in the financial markets, and among those prognosticators are the seers for investment newsletters who specialize in guiding fund investors.
But look at what some of well-ranked and widely read newsletter advisers were recommending last month: buy, sell and hold -- stay fully invested, raise cash.
From that conflicting advice emerges a comforting notion for ordinary investors: There's more than one way to invest successfully.


Data Bank/September 20, 1992


Pamela Charlston, Robert De Grood
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry G. Charlston of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Pamela Jean Charlston to Dr.
Robert Louis De Grood, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. De Grood of Miami Lakes, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Charlston, 24 years old, is the special-events coordinator for Yachting Magazine in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is founder and president of Apollo, a maker of presentation-equipment products in Ronkonkoma, L.I.


Jennifer Cook, Joseph Cerami
Jennifer Lynn Cook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Michael Cook of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Joseph Paul Cerami, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore Cerami of Miami.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester performed the ceremony at the Second Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Cerami, 25 years old, is an assistant equity trader at Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities, an equities-trading concern in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is chairman and chief executive of the accounting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche in Wilton, Conn.


Kathleen Roberts, Howard Clyman
Kathleen Anne Roberts, a United States magistrate in Manhattan, and Howard Clyman, a lawyer in Brooklyn, were married yesterday at Bargemusic at Fulton Ferry Landing in Brooklyn.
Michael H. Dolinger, a United States magistrate, officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Oliver Roberts Jr.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Massachusetts in Boston and received a law degree from Yale University.


Apple Desserts That Are as Easy as Pie
THE fall apple harvest has started around the country.
In this region, apples are expected to be somewhat smaller than usual but, thanks to the cooler weather this summer, extremely flavorful.
For baking, when bigger apples are easier to use, this year's crop may prove somewhat less convenient.
More important than size, however, is taste and texture.
Apples that are tart allow greater flexibility in seasonings.
A sweet apple like Golden Delicious, on the other hand, requires less sugar or other sweetener.


A Gambler's Legacy
The story of South African wine began on Feb. 2, 1659, when Jan van Riebeeck of the Dutch East India Company wrote in his diary: "Today, praise the Lord, wine was pressed for the first time from Cape grapes."
Within 100 years, South African wines were among the most prized in the world.
Thomas Jefferson served them at Monticello, and when Louis XVI died, his cellar was found to hold far more of the legendary Constantia, from South Africa, than it did fine Bordeaux.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  TALKS ON CURRENCY CRISIS


Long Shadow of the M.I.A.'s Still Stalks a Pentagon Official
Nearly 20 years after American troops came home from Vietnam, Roger E. Shields, the Pentagon official in charge of accounting for those who did not return, is still haunted by accusations that the Nixon Administration knowingly left servicemen behind.
He is also pained, he says, to see himself quoted as the official who in effect wrote off all the missing as dead.
Mr.
Shields, who was Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs in 1973, when United States forces were withdrawn from Vietnam, says that Americans will probably never know how many soldiers were alive in Indochina when a prisoner exchange with Hanoi ended that year.


Finding the Corners In Pooh's Real Forest
I DISCOVERED Winnie-the-Pooh Country by accident.
Glancing through some tourist brochures while staying in Sussex, I was intrigued by an advertisement for Pooh Corner, a shop in nearby Hartfield that specialized in Winnie-the-Pooh.
Reading on, I discovered that Hartfield had been the country home of A. A. Milne, who had set his world-famous children's stories, "Winnie-the-Pooh" and "The House at Pooh Corner," in adjoining Ashdown Forest.
The Forest!
Although it had been years since I had reread the Pooh stories, I did remember the seductive appeal of the Forest.
"Once upon a time, a very long time ago now, about last Friday, Winnie-the-Pooh lived in a forest all by himself under the name of Sanders." His friend Christopher Robin had lived, enticingly, "behind a green door in another part of the Forest."


Business Diary/September 13-18
INTERNATIONAL The House of Major Wobbles as the French Go to Vote


Coffee Irregular
To the Editor: Alan Cowell's delightful article on the perils of ordering coffee abroad brought to mind an experience in Israel over 20 years ago.
Told that Israelis like their coffee very strong, I decided to play it safe and ordered instant.
"Nescafe?" the waiter asked.
No, I answered, not liking that brand.
"Anything else, not Nescafe." After some awkward moments, I was eventually served the Israeli version of instant coffee.


George Cherr, 97; Was Housing Official
George Cherr, a longtime New York State housing official who supervised the construction of Co-op City, the nation's largest subsidized housing project, died on Thursday at the Masonic Nursing Home in Utica, N.Y.
He was 97 years old and until recently lived in Manhattan.
He died after a series of strokes, his family said.


Carrying On The Torch
To the Editor:
Regarding David Richards's article on Sonny Averona, "The Life and Death of a Lounge Singer"  [ Aug. 30 ] : I just hope Sonny's son, Michael, carries on.
Sonny would have loved that.


New York 'Country' Garden in the Sky
THERE is a country air to the penthouse garden tended by Laurie Eichengreen and Bill Bailey that hovers 20 floors above the busy corner of 79th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
A pink hybrid tea rose blooms against the southeastern sky as the moon comes up over the Park Belvedere.
And around the corner, due west, the taillights of the cars flare like red fireflies down 79th Street.


Fischer Presses Spassky, but Settles for a Draw
Bobby Fischer pressed and pressed yesterday to get Boris Spassky to crack in Game 10 of their exhibition match in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia, but Spassky hung on to make a draw in 68 moves.
After this longest encounter of the $5 million series, the score remains Fischer 4, Spassky 2.
The draws don't count, except in effort expended.
Once again, Fischer produced an original opening move that gave Spassky problems.
Spassky probably did not find the best riposte, but he did find a pawn sacrifice that gave him drawing chances.
And he matched Fischer's relentless machinations with his own stubbornness to earn the draw.
He had lost the three previous games, and after such a streak it is normal to put the brakes on an opponent with a draw, as he did.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Sept. 6 about the preservation of heirloom seeds referred incorrectly to a Shinnecock Indian who grows 30 different vegetables, and misidentified his home.
He was Lamont Smith; his garden is on the Shinnecock Reservation in Shinnecock.


THE WORLD: Manhunt Ends; Peru's Shining Path Is Decapitated
IN this, Latin America's most war-torn nation, a "peace march" held last week drew only 200 people.
Intimidated by a decade of terrorism, Peruvians privately celebrated last week's capture of Abimael Guzman Reynoso, mastermind of the Shining Path.
Realists, they also braced for a "Red October" -- a terrorist campaign of car bombs and assassinations.


Cowboy Gear, at Home On the Range and Off
It's roundup time for American cowboy memorabilia -- elaborately carved saddles, Lone Ranger lunch boxes, 19th-century books about Buffalo Bill's Wild West and, of course, spurs that jingle jangle.
Inspired by the pistol-packing ranch hands who rode the open range or became broncobusters in rodeos or hailed from Hollywood, these artifacts have been collected since the 1980's and are part of a craze now sweeping the country, from SoHo to Santa Fe.
"The cowboy has been a pop-culture image for more than a century," said Michael Friedman, a dealer who helped organize "Cowboy Culture: An American Art Form," at the Ricco/Maresca Gallery, 105 Hudson Street, through Oct. 10.
A smaller version of the show will travel to Tokyo next year.


Hi, Mom


The Master Builder
IN their natural habitat, the Robert Clergerie shop at 41 East 60th Street in Manhattan, they sit pristinely, like colorful little buildings, awaiting the likes of Lauren Bacall, Madonna, Cicely Tyson and Demi Moore to make them their own.
The high-profile shoes are the creations of Mr.
Clergerie, a 58-year-old Frenchman who stumbled into the shoe business some 20 years ago.
Last week, Mr.
Clergerie passed through New York after making a personal appearance in the new Barneys New York store in Chicago.
He had hoped to go to the Guggenheim Museum but knew he wouldn't have the time.
"Work, work, work is all I do when I'm here," he said, in between meetings with store buyers and fashion editors.


'No One Spoke to Me About Being Gay'
To the Editor:
Rarely do I expect to run misty-eyed as I skim the morning paper.
But such was the case when I read your Sept. 9 article on freshman orientation at Columbia University, which now takes up such matters as date rape and being gay.


Protests Rise Over Adoption Proposal
A BILL to allow lawyers, doctors or next-door neighbors to act as matchmakers in adoptions has aroused angry opposition from officials of religious groups and adoption agencies.
They warn that it could lead to the selling of babies to the highest bidder.
The New Jersey State Bar Association, a driving force behind the bill, and other proponents say that the current adoption statute is confusing and obsolete and that their bill calls for a number of needed changes.
But it is the proposal to allow adoption intermediaries, forbidden under current law, that has drawn intense criticism.


Beth Schoenholtz and Ebong Udoma
Beth Schoenholtz, a daughter of Dr.
Jack C. Schoenholtz of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and Barbara Hill of Tel Aviv, was married in Mamaroneck last evening to Ebong Udo Udoma, a son of Sir Egbert Udo Udoma and Lady Grace Udoma of Ikot Abasi, Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Joan M. Schoenholtz.
Mrs.
Udoma, 29 years old, is a freelance writer in Bridgeport, Conn., and teaches creative writing at the Baldwin Center for Senior Citizens in Stratford, Conn.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Purchase and received a master's degree in English from Northeastern University.
Her father, a psychiatrist, is the medical director of the Rye (N.Y.) Hospital Center, a private psychiatric hospital.
Her stepmother retired as a psychiatric head nurse in White Plains for the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
The bride's mother is a massage therapist in Tel Aviv.


Focus: Chicago; Restoring an 1888 Landmark in the Loop
AS he tells it, Thomas Baldwin became a developer by default.
There is every reason to believe him.
Anyone planning to become a developer would have picked an easier first project than the Rookery, a 104-year-old landmark listed on the National Register of Historic Places that was in need of rehabilitation.
Now, as he competes in a tough market to find office tenants for the Rookery, in the heart of this city's financial district, other developers are watching to see if he can make his architectural jewel pay.


A Touch of the Farm in Suburban Roslyn
FRIEND OF A FARMER turns a Roslyn storefront into a farmhouse kitchen.
Stacks of homey baked goods greet diners.
Other edible first impressions are the baskets and bins of farmstand-fresh vegetables and fruit.
The restaurant is reassuringly rural with its brick and wide-plank floors, rustic barn beams, hanging lanterns, stone fireplaces and shelves of preserves and canning jars filled with the harvest's bounty.
In the background is a mural of a picturesque farm complete with barns, fields and cows.


U.S. Anti-Drug Moves Irk Bolivians
The United States effort to halt the flow of cocaine is coming under attack in Bolivia, which has opened its doors wider than any other to American drug agents and tolerated heavy political influence from Washington.
Recent miscues by the Bolivian Government and United States officials have stoked strong resentment against the American presence, and a move to restrict United States activities threatens to become a central issue in next June's presidential elections.


A Bloody Job, but Someone's Got to Do It
FEAR
By Anatoly Rybakov.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis. 686 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95


Clinton Waves at Blacks as He Rushes By
A significant layer of unease is percolating beneath the unified surface of the Democratic Party this year.
Many of the party's most liberal members fear that Bill Clinton, their Presidential nominee, is doing his best to downplay his connections to its traditional constituencies.
The loudest grumbling has come from Jesse L. Jackson's liberal and black wing of the party, where some of his staunchest supporters are complaining that Mr.
Clinton has decided to sacrifice black voters' support in exchange for winning back the Democrats -- most of them white -- who voted for Ronald Reagan and George Bush.


Dreaming of Capri
The island of Capri, a dot of land that marks the southern boundary of the Bay of Naples, is the kind of place you think about when love starts needing romantic restaurants and expensive vacations.
When it still seems possible that it is the world and not the two of you that's wrong, Capri kindles passionate desert-island fantasies while seeming to promise a happily-ever-after.
So we headed toward the coastal arc of land between Naples and Lazio, where we could catch a ferry to Capri.
We got hungry for the local specialties -- curried rice with crawfish, octopus pickled in marjoram -- as well as for the island's white wine, so crisp that lesser-quality wines from the Campania region are often labeled "Capri."
It was early October.
The tourists had already decamped, and there was no traffic to slow us along Amalfi Drive, the road that juts and winds for miles along coastal cliffs.
We hurtled along like a car on a roller-coaster track, gasping first at the drama of the cliffs dropping into the Mediterranean, and then at how close to death the road took us.
Careering the curves, the only thing between us and crashing into the drink was centripetal force.
By then, we were each nursing doubts about forces like that.


Nuggets Sign Hastings to One-Year Pact
Center SCOTT HASTINGS has signed a one-year contract with the Denver Nuggets, leaving only the team's two first-round draft choices unsigned.
Terms were not disclosed, but the deal is guaranteed.


EUROPE IN TURMOIL: Europe Awaits Verdict on Treaty by French Voters; At Stake: Stable Money, Economic Recovery and Social Peace
With anxiety over the outcome already convulsing foreign exchange markets, French voters hold the immediate future of Western Europe in their hands when they decide whether to ratify a treaty on European union in a referendum here on Sunday.
While the last polls suggested that the result is too close to call, attention has focused on the possibility of a "no" vote because of the enormous damage it may cause to the European Community's long-term plans to achieve closer unity and assume a more prominent international role.


Firemen Fighting for Volunteer Jobs
THEY are the kind of men volunteer organizations dream about.
Marc Burrell and Donald McCoskey like being firemen so much that when they finish their jobs as professional firefighters in New Rochelle and the second jobs they hold to make ends meet, they race home to volunteer to fight fires all over again.
Mr.
Burrell, 36 years old, volunteers for the Town of Mamaroneck Fire Department and for ambulance duty in neighboring Larchmont, and Mr.
McCoskey, 50, volunteers for the Lake Mohegan Fire Department.
That's whenever Mr.
Burrell isn't performing his duties as a paramedic for Nyack Hospital or when Mr.
McCoskey isn't driving a school bus for the Lakeland Central School District.


Al Gore Criticizes President Bush on Environment Policies


A Conflict Over Havens That Advise and Shelter
In the Bronx, in a fortresslike complex that lies at the end of the route that homeless families sometimes traverse through the city's complex and often frightening maze of shelters, there is a locked gate, an enforced curfew system and a prominently posted set of rules.
Residents must sign in and out.
They must behave according to community standards.
Miscreants are punished with expulsion, and their discharge, mostly, means a slide away from hope.


The Many Moods and Moves of Matisse


U.S.C.'s Finale Finishes Sooners
A Saturday afternoon in Sooner country, as seen through the looking glass:
Barry Switzer, the former Oklahoma coach who presided over the school's most recent football glory and more recent shame, emerged from the
visiting
dressing room at Memorial Stadium.


Skiing The Powder Of the Andes
THOUGH it was August, there was more than a foot of new snow.
This was ski season in the Andes, and the Chilean resort of Valle Nevado, about 40 miles from Santiago, looked like mounds of melting vanilla ice cream.
There are at least half a dozen major ski resorts in Chile and Argentina that are worth visiting, and another half dozen smaller areas.
Valle Nevado is the newest, begun only six years ago, and with about 22,000 acres of skiable terrain, one of the largest.
There is no town at the area, just two hotels, a condominium complex and four restaurants in a modern utilitarian style reminiscent of newer resorts in the French Alps.


Senate Race May Focus On Negative Images
Here's a pop-culture quiz: Which image carries the most negative baggage in 1992 recession-era politics -- the career politician entrenched in the hidebound ways of Washington, or the career businessman enriched by the excesses of 1980's Wall Street?
Both images are to some degree caricatures.
But if Connecticut's United States Senate race becomes as mean-spirited as the early signs indicate, voters in November could have just such a choice presented to them.


TEST-MARKETING A PRESIDENT
Focus groups do not give ordinary people a voice in the process; rather, they provide the means of fine-tuning our manipulation by a cynical power structure.


U.N. Takes Step Toward Ousting Yugoslavia
In an effort to force the Belgrade Government to cooperate with efforts to end the civil war in the Balkans, the Security Council today took the first step toward effectively expelling the truncated Yugoslav state from the United Nations General Assembly.
By a vote of 12 to 0, the Council ruled that Belgrade's representative cannot continue to sit in the seat of the former Yugoslav federation at the new General Assembly session, which convened this week.
China, India and Zimbabwe abstained from the vote.


Air Consolidators
To the Editor: Your article on air consolidators (Practical Traveler, Aug. 30) was of particular and timely interest.
Although I was greatly tempted by an attractive price for a round-trip five-night stay in Paris from an air consolidator, I didn't take the trip due to doubts about the company and the airline: two complete unknowns.
The 900 number of the Better Business Bureau reported that though this consolidator's fares were usually 7 percent higher than advertised, the consolidator had a satisfactory record with the bureau since it responded to complaints brought to its attention.


Mum's the Word but Tulips Are on the Mind
THIS is a reminder.
If the bulbs to bloom next spring have not been ordered from catalogues, get busy.
Domestic orders must be in as the mail-order houses will soon begin shipping.
Spring-blooming bulbs will be planted this fall, usually October, so that they will be ready to put on their displays when the weather settles.
Bulbs are dormant when planted, but will soon start to develop roots.
Depending on the soil temperature, these young roots will continue to grow but will stop developing when the soil chills.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Norwalk, Conn.  $430,000
34 Pine Hill Avenue  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; stone construction, slate roof, new kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,403.
Ridgefield, Conn. 233,000
16 Midrocks Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; new kitchen, roof and water heater, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,789.
Weston, Conn. 510,000
11 White Oak Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old contemporary; adjacent open space, electronic security system, 2.6 acres; taxes $7,542.
New Castle, N.Y. 700,000
22 Mountain Peak Road
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; fireplace, family room, deck, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $13,001.
Rye Brook, N.Y. 400,000
6 Old Oak Road
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old colonial; family room, maid's room, brick fireplace, playroom, 2-car garage; taxes $5,480.
South Salem, N.Y. 135,000
Lake Kitchawan Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 11-year-old unique; new kitchen, French doors, living room, clubhouse; taxes $2,935.
OTHER AREAS Basking Ridge, N.J. 475,000
24 Brook Ridge Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; h/w floors, crown moldings, wet bar; taxes $8,286.
Baldwin, L.I. 195,000
488 Devonshire Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41- year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Glen Cove, L.I. 600,000
1 Deepwoods Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; dining room, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $13,000.


Opera and Orchestra in Merger Con Brio
AFTER several seasons of financial uncertainty that resulted in postponed performances, late paychecks, severe cost trimming and rumors of bankruptcy, the future of the Connecticut Grand Opera is, according to its artistic director, Laurence Gilgore, "brighter than it's ever been."


Ms. Jahncke, John Carroll
Elizabeth Scott Jahncke, an associate in the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, was married in New York yesterday to John K. Carroll, the chief of the Securities and Commodities Fraud Task Force in the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan.
The Rev.
George F. Driscoll, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Brick Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert Anderson, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Carroll graduated from Georgetown University, and she and her husband received law degrees from New York University.
She is a daughter of Roger and Elizabeth Jahncke of New York.
Her father is a partner in the accounting firm of Ernst &amp; Young in New York.


Ann S. Brown, Peter T. Welling
Ann Shippen Brown, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Travis T. Brown of Washington, was married yesterday to Peter Terhune Welling, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Truman C. Welling of Kennett Square, Pa.
The Rev.
Dwight L. Neglia, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Scarlett Thicket Farm in Kennett Square.
Ms.
Brown, who is keeping her name, graduated from Williams College, as did her husband.
She received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She will begin doctoral studies in social welfare theory at the University of Pennsylvania later this month.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in Washington.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Crime
John Marshall Tanner, the hard-boiled but highly principled private eye in Stephen Greenleaf's provocative series, thinks he's seen a lot of human misery.
But he discovers new depths of suffering, in BLOOD TYPE (Morrow, $20), when he starts prowling the San Francisco Tenderloin area, where his barroom buddy Tom Crandall, who drove an ambulance in the neighborhood, is found dead of a drug overdose.
Knowing his friend to have been something of a philosopher-saint, Tanner doesn't buy the suicide theory, even though he is aware that Tom was despondent over his sour marriage and worried about his brother, a "certified crazoid" roaming and raving somewhere among the red-light district's homeless population.
An overwrought ending carrying an apocalyptic message about the vulnerability of the city's blood supply clashes with the novel's realistic views of people and places infected with the body-and-soul diseases of modern life.
But before he unveils this extravagant vision of evil, Mr.
Greenleaf delivers the incisive social observations, compassionate characterizations and fine writing that we've come to expect of this substantial series.
Sometimes it's just a matter of placing the right word into the right thought ("The day was far too real for a funeral").
Sometimes it's a long, meditative discourse on an interesting subject, like why Tanner considers himself "a drinking man" but not a drunk.
As befits an heir of Ross Macdonald, the author maintains his moral grip on what matters.


At Work; It's Lit, Not Just Lite, at Coors
For 27 years, Mayers T. Caldwell worked on the shop floor for the ceramics subsidiary of the Adolph Coors Company in Golden, Colo.
He showed his supervisors how to do the work often enough that he knew he could probably have been a supervisor himself.
But Mr.
Caldwell, who turned 61 yesterday, had a problem that precluded mobility.
The eighth-grade education he received in his native Kentucky left him barely able to read.
Mr.
Caldwell retired three years ago without making the leap off the line.
He encouraged his son to go to college, and the son repaid the favor.
"He said, 'You told me to go to school, now you go,' " Mr.
Caldwell said.
He enrolled at Red Rock, the local community college, to learn basic math and got straight A's.
By the time he was ready to tackle his reading, Coors made it very easy for him: earlier this year, it established a literacy program for employees -- current and retired -- in Golden.


Anne Tuten, R. L. Whittemore
Arthur and Rebecca Tuten of Mount Pleasant, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Hooper Tuten to Robert Lewis Whittemore, the son of Suzanne S. Whittemore of Edgartown, Mass., and the Rev.
James R. Whittemore of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Tuten, 30 years old, is the executive assistant at Bon Secours-St.
Francis Xavier Hospital in Charleston, S.C.
She graduated from the University of the South.
Her father, who is retired, was a corporate vice president in Charleston at the Citizens and Southern National Bank.
Her mother, also retired, taught English and history at the East Cooper School in Mount Pleasant.


Further Stats, Including an Error
To the Editor:
Allan Kozinn's essay "Three Balls, Two Strikes and a Flat C"  [ Aug. 30 ]  prompted me to take the baseball/ opera metaphor a step or two further, with a sobering conclusion.
Some observations:


CARE Headquarters To Move to Atlanta From Manhattan
CARE, the international relief group, announced yesterday that it would move its national headquarters from New York to Atlanta next year, a move it said was caused by high operating and housing costs.
CARE, which was established in New York 46 years ago, will be given a five-story building in downtown Atlanta, to be bought and remodeled by an Atlanta charitable group, the Robert Woodruff Foundation.
Atlanta civic and business leaders also arranged to cover part of the group's $6 million relocation costs and to give the group free and discounted legal, accounting and travel services.


European Unity? With Friends Like These . . .
It's a pity that European currency markets plunged into crisis because the mayhem could have been avoided -- at least that's what many economists say.
All it would have taken was more vision and courage from Europe's governments and central bankers.
In June, President Francois Mitterrand announced today's referendum in France, expecting that voters would approve the next step toward European unity.
He never imagined that the uncertainties surrounding the vote would foment a crisis, with speculators ganging up on various currencies.


Corrections
A report in the Business Diary column last Sunday about the Bentley Brooklands misstated the price.
The car sells for $138,000.


Ms. Berk, Mr. McCarthy
Claudia Sue Berk and Lawrence McCarthy were married Tuesday in New York.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the Stanhope.


Wedges and Bounces
America is back up on wedgies.
Remember those triangulated, high-soled shoes of the 40's that incorporated the heel and turned the fashionable woman into an endangered species?
They're back -- not merely in the form of platform soles, but planks in political platforms.
In 1990, as Bush White House aides fought over the degree to which affirmative action guidelines became quotas, the former Carter adviser Stuart E. Eizenstat said with some prescience that the Republicans had "a need to give the Reagan Democrats red meat at a time when the economy is going into the tank, and they see civil rights and quotas as a
wedge issue
."


Spiritualism Meets Capitalism
In the penthouse of a prestigious commercial building in this citadel of capitalism, a middle-aged woman in a smart pink suit addressed a gathering of socially prominent business people.
Was she selling real estate, the latest European luxury goods, memberships in a fabulously expensive new club?
Hardly.
As a subtle whiff of incense wafted through the air, she told the assembled believers, in an impeccable British accent, that there was something better than affluence: looking inward.
And that, she added, was what the guru they were all there to honor offers.


Hungarian's Attack on Opponents Sets Off Storm
A leader of Hungary's center-right governing party has touched off a storm with a report asserting that the political opposition, liberals, Jews, Western financiers and the press are sabotaging the Government's work.
The political leader, Istvan Csurka, a vice president of the Hungarian Democratic Forum, published his analysis last month in the party weekly.
The 57-year-old playwright was one of Hungary's most popular writers in the 1970's and 80's and an important figure in the opposition in the Communist era.


Lisa Schattinger and Alistair Buchan
Elisabeth Myers Schattinger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Schattinger of Shaker Heights, Ohio, was married there yesterday to Alistair Buchan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew S. Buchan of Edinburgh, Scotland.
The Rev.
Wilbur Green, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Plymouth Church of Shaker Heights.
Mrs.
Buchan, who is 27 years old and is known as Lisa, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Dartmouth College.
Her father is the president of the Pioneer Manufacturing Company, a maker of industrial maintenance products in Cleveland.
Her mother, Joan M. Schattinger, is a freelance writer in Shaker Heights.


Otis S. Freeman, 71, an Engineer Who Invented Techniques for TV
Otis S. Freeman, an innovator in television engineering who helped develop the sports instant replay and superimposed letters and graphics, died on Thursday at Anderson Memorial Hospital in Anderson, S.C.
He was 71 years old and lived in Anderson.
He died of complications of a heart attack, his family said.


Dow Chemical's Cleanup Czar Unlocks the Gates
Four times a year, David T. Buzzelli, a vice president of the Dow Chemical Company, prepares for a meeting that could have a major impact on the company's operations.
To get ready, he gathers information on manufacturing plans and product offerings, including material the company considers confidential.
But this is no ordinary meeting of executives.
Instead, Mr.
Buzzelli will share the company's plans with a panel of outsiders comprising Dow's Corporate Environmental Advisory Council.


Talking: Septic Fields; Regular Care Pays For Itself
AS communities grow more crowded and awareness of the impact of one home upon another spreads, regulatory authorities have begun paying more attention to the proper maintenance of each individual property.
One factor under scrutiny is the septic system.
Rather than leave it up to the homeowner to decide how often to clean and pump a system, a growing number of municipalities are imposing requirements.
In addition, state laws are being stiffened to more tightly control the type of system that may be installed, should an existing one fail or a new home be built.


Pittsburgh Journal; 120 Jobs Restored By Bread Alone
Without any full-dress rehearsal, the cast of 120 workers at City Pride Bakery turned the ovens on full blast on Sunday for the first time and produced 233,000 loaves of bread and packages of buns.
On Monday, shoppers applauded the bread's arrival, emptying supermarket shelves and saying things like, "I'm sure it will be good" and "I'll try anything for Pittsburgh."
City Pride, as much a civic project as a business, had an opening much like one for a major theatrical presentation in that fortunes were riding on the improbable meshing of a million plans and pieces.
And like a play or musical that lifts the soul, City Pride's successful debut provided a deeply satisfying experience to this community that has seen so many factories and jobs disappear.


Apple Desserts That Are as Easy as Pie
THE fall apple harvest has started around the country.
In this region, apples are expected to be somewhat smaller than usual but, thanks to the cooler weather this summer, extremely flavorful.
For baking, when bigger apples are easier to use, this year's crop may prove somewhat less convenient.
More important than size, however, is taste and texture.
Apples that are tart allow greater flexibility in seasonings.
A sweet apple like Golden Delicious, on the other hand, requires less sugar or other sweetener.


In Their Own Words
SENATOR AL GORE
In a speech yesterday at a beach clean-up rally in Sandy Hook, N.J.


Out of Wedlock


Bats Away!
BAT BOMB
World War II's Other Secret Weapon.
By Jack Couffer.
Illustrated. 288 pp.
Austin: University of Texas Press.


Julie Brenton, Robert Galbraith
Julie Ann Brenton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
C.
Buz Brenton of Des Moines, was married there yesterday to Robert Douglas Galbraith, a son of Virginia F. Galbraith of Berkeley Heights, N.J., and the late Eugene Galbraith.
The Rev.
Michael L. Barlowe performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Galbraith, 29 years old, is a real estate portfolio manager at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's investment-management subsidiary in Berkeley Heights.
She graduated from Carleton College and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Brenton Banks Inc., a bank-holding company in Des Moines.
Her mother, Sue R. Brenton, is a saleswoman at Borders Book Shop there.


On Sunday; Pious Village Is No Stranger To the Police
The State Police see few of the usual crimes in this village of 8,000 Hasidic Satmar Jews.
"No drugs, no D.W.I., no burglaries," says Maj.
James O'Donnell.
And yet, this tiny, pious village is a leading trouble spot in his five-county area.
Troopers have had hundreds of calls from people who've been stoned, their house and car windows broken, their sidewalks stenciled with Hebrew profanities.
The arrested and convicted are loyal followers of the Satmar's Grand Rabbi, Moses Teitelbaum.
Victims are dissident Satmars who question the Grand Rabbi's leadership.
It's grown so bad that two weeks ago troopers rode undercover on a school bus of kindergarteners in hopes of ambushing rock throwers.


In Praise of Wordbooks
To the Editor:
As a member of the usage panel for the third edition of the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, I was pleased to see Noel Perrin's glowing review (Aug. 23) and especially his admiring comments about the usage notes.
However, I was sorry that his review left the impression that the dictionary was somehow put together anonymously by elves at Houghton Mifflin.


Pesticides Can Stop Beetles and Ants
The Home Clinic column "The First Steps in Preventing Pests"  [ Aug. 23 ]  was a disservice, making a gross assumption that if a consumer sees signs of carpenter ants or powder-post beetles they must "in all cases call an exterminator." Our company takes great exception.


2 Arrested in Tossing of Debris From Roof
A Yale Law School student and an investment banker were charged with attempted murder early yesterday after dozens of cinder blocks were thrown from a 45-story condominium on the Upper East Side, narrowly missing two police officers, the police said.
The debris was thrown from the roof of the Waterford at 300 East 93d Street shortly after 4:30 A.M., forcing the two officers to take cover behind a truck for 30 minutes and touching off panic among residents of the block, who flooded 911 with calls, the police and witnesses said.


Despite Recession, Shoplifting Wanes
AT a glance, it is easy to assume that the combination of unemployment and recession would lead to an increase in shoplifting.
But although Westchester merchants say shoplifting is an ongoing problem, few have seen it rise sharply in recent months.
Kit Hughes, the president and general manager of Neiman Marcus in White Plains, said that Neiman Marcus's practice of employing more salespeople than other stores of similar size helps prevent shoplifting.


Mutual Funds; Where the New Issues Are
A definite theme runs through 1992's new stock fund offerings -- the categories that have seen the largest number of new issues are classic defensive investments.
The three types of funds with the biggest rate of increase through August were balanced funds, which combine stocks and bonds, usually in just about equal ratios; flexible funds, also called asset allocation funds, which can combine stocks and bonds in any way their managers choose, and utilities funds. (The unusually large rate of increase among capital appreciation funds stems from the fact that only three were introduced in 1991.)


Acts That Speak for Themselves
PERPETRATORS VICTIMS BYSTANDERS
The Jewish Catastrophe 1933-1945.
By Raul Hilberg. 340 pp.
New York: Aaron Asher Books/ HarperCollins. $25.


No Headline


Q and A
Prepaying a Mortgage  Question: I recently heard that there is a way to reduce my mortgage and save on the overall costs of the loan.
Is this true? . . .
Delaney Cummings, Jamaica, Queens Answer: Yes.
You are referring to prepayment.
It allows borrowers to pay all or part of the debt before the end of the term.
Margaret S. Scott, president of Mortgage Advisory Service, a Manhattan-based mortgage brokerage concern, said the option was fairly standard for mortgage lenders.
In New York, state-chartered banks can impose a prepayment penalty only on a fixed-rate loan within the first year.


Dinkins and the Police: A Campaign Issue
Race and crime, the two totemic issues that defined New York City's last mayoral campaign, starkly re-emerged last week to shape the next one.
The challenge posed by the bruising and emotional collision among Mayor David N. Dinkins, the patrolmen's union, and its chief defender, Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mr.
Dinkins's once and future Republican rival, is this: Will the Mayor be able to convince New Yorkers that he cannot only keep the peace but control crime?


After Hurricane, Floridians Show Symptoms Seen in War
Four weeks after Hurricane Andrew tore much of southern Dade County into shards of debris, mental health experts are measuring its inner toll.
They say that the storm delivered the kind of jolt rarely experienced off the battlefield, that they believe thousands of people are suffering symptoms similar to those endured by Vietnam veterans and that some are taking out their aggressions on those closest to them.
Reports of domestic violence have surged.
Calls for help to the Domestic Violence Hotline in Miami have more than doubled, to about 100 a day, and Judge Cindy Lederman of the Dade County Circuit Court said that about 20 women a day have been formally applying for police protection from husbands or companions, up from an average of fewer than 10 a day.


INSIDE
Peril for Bush in G.O.P. Base
Recent polls in Colorado point to a danger for President Bush: He has still not secured it or many of the other states that have long been the Republican base.
Page A15.
Blown to Freedom
After Hurricane Andrew damaged a detention center for illegal aliens near Miami, 40 detainees volunteered to help clean up.
When they finished, they were freed.
Page A10.
A Festival Without Papp


Shakespeare Festival Is on a Different Path Without Joseph Papp
As the New York Shakespeare Festival, for years the pre-eminent nonprofit theater in the United States, begins its first full season without its founder, Joseph Papp, who died on Oct. 31 last year, it is significantly different from the institution Mr.
Papp presided over with ebullience in its glory days.
In the last two years the staff has been cut in half, to 60 from 120, and the budget has been reduced by more than a third, to just under $10 million from $15 million.
The festival's stages at the Joseph Papp Public Theater on Lafayette Street, which in the theater's heyday saw the first performances of such celebrated works as "A Chorus Line," "The Normal Heart" and "That Championship Season," are increasingly being filled with a mix of films, literary readings, solo performances and community events.
While plenty of plays are still being presented, a majority of the productions in the new season originated at regional theaters instead of at the Public.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising HEADLINE&gt;G.M. May Drop an Ad Agency
In its clearest signal yet of its determination to change its marketing, the General Motors Corporation is reviewing its Oldsmobile advertising and considering a change in agencies after 25 years with Leo Burnett U.S.A..
Oldsmobile executives last week notified the Burnett office in Chicago that they would consider other agencies for their estimated $100 million to $110 million in annual advertising.


Econoblab on the Campaign Trail
However different, the economic proposals of the two Presidential candidates share an important characteristic.
They do not deal seriously with the country's three main, and different, economic problems: jobs, growth and poverty.
The jobs problem is linked to the recession that began in 1990 and from which we are slowly recovering.
This is the issue that makes economics the central concern of this election.
The other complaints about the economy -- sluggish growth, persistent poverty -- were as valid in 1988 as they are now.
So a basic question is what programs the candidates have for accelerating the recovery and regaining high employment.
The simple answer is that they have none.
A recovery plan would have to consist of one or both of two elements.
One would be monetary expansion.
I have not read every word in the hurricane of statements made by President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton, but I have read Mr.
Bush's "Agenda" and Mr.
Clinton's "Plan" and heard a lot of other talk by or for them.
I have not seen the words "monetary policy" or anything relating to it in either of their recent utterances, except a fleeting reference in Mr.
Bush's Agenda to "sound money" as a good thing.
Both candidates are silent on whether the Federal Reserve should increase the money supply faster and get interest rates down further in order to stimulate consumer demand and investment.


The Old Men Sit and Talk of a Virus Within
As dusk settled beyond the windows, the slow-talking, balding men leaned back in their metal chairs and, competing just a bit, bragged about their children.
Bob, 64 years old, was looking forward to the autumn wedding of his youngest girl (the older two remain "unclaimed blessings").
He was a little worried, though, about how the groom's family -- and his ex-wife and ex-in-laws -- would treat him now that he was out of the closet.
And H.I.V.-positive.


Rebecca Lish and Andrew Mutnick
Rebecca Lish and Andrew Mutnick, actors in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Steven Rosman performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Dana Robin in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Ms.
Lish, 32 years old, uses the stage name of Becca Lish.
She made her Off Broadway debut earlier this year in "Bella, Belle of Byelorussia." She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is Gordon Lish of New York, an editor at Alfred A. Knopf and the editor of The Quarterly, a literary magazine published in New York.
Her mother is Frances Lish of Burlingame, Calif., a retired social worker.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Riding Murphy Brown's Coattails
In television, controversy is almost always good marketing.
And the controversy surrounding "Murphy Brown" is very likely to pay off prodigiously for Diane English, the writer-producer.
Almost everyone who watches television is aware that "Murphy Brown" responds tonight to Vice President Dan Quayle, who helped push "family values" to the forefront of the 1992 Presidential campaign by criticizing the show's leading character last spring for having a child out of wedlock.


CHRONICLE
Some 350 human rights advocates will assemble at the headquarters of the Organization of American States in Washington this evening to honor the recipients of the 1992 Letelier-Moffitt Memorial Human Rights Awards.
The prizes, given by the Institute for Policy Studies, will go to EVANS PAUL, SAMUEL BUFFONE and MICHAEL TIGAR.
They will be presented by JONATHAN DEMME, the film director, and ISABEL MOREL LETELIER, widow of Orlando Letelier, for whom the prize is named.
Mr.
Paul was elected Mayor of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, in its first democratic election in December 1990, but was forced out of office during the military coups of September 1991.
He has continued to draw attention to the struggles in his homeland through his writing and political opposition.
Mr.
Buffone and Mr.
Tigar are American lawyers who won a civil suit against the Chilean Government for the 1976 assassinations of Mr.
Letelier, a diplomat and former cabinet minister in the Allende administration, and Ronni Karpen Moffit, an American associate.


Ultimap Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Clinton: Criticizing the President


Snuff the Anti-Smoking Bill
Early next month the New York City Council will vote on a bill that would give New York one of the nation's toughest anti-smoking laws.
If Council members have any respect for the free-speech guarantees of the First Amendment, they will reject it.
If they plunge ahead, as expected, the measure will deserve a veto by Mayor David Dinkins.
This ordinance, in one of its worst provisions, would require advertisers to display one anti-smoking message for every four smoking ads on city property or in advertising spaces relying on city contracts or licenses.
That includes baseball stadiums, bus shelters and taxicabs.


Deborah Benkov, Paul Dormitzer
Deborah Benkov, a daughter of Beatrice Benkov of Maspeth, Queens, and the late Sol Benkov, was married yesterday in Belmont, Mass., to Paul H. Dormitzer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph S. Dormitzer of Cohasset, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas J. S. Mikelson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Habitat Institute for the Environment.
Mrs.
Dormitzer, 35 years old, is a lawyer for the Digital Equipment Corporation in Maynard, Mass.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a J.D. from the University of Chicago.


A Boost at Harvest Time


Victory Seemed Too Easy As Syracuse Was Stunned
Three days before Saturday's game with Ohio State, Paul Pasqualoni the Syracuse coach, made two observations that would prove prophetic.
Asked about his quarterback, Marvin Graves, Pasqualoni said that if the offensive line did not give Graves "time to play" -- meaning time to throw, maneuver and improvise -- the Orangemen could have problems.


Susan Lichtstein, Robert Spiegel
Susan Lichtstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Lichtstein of White Plains, was married yesterday to Robert Spiegel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Spiegel of Madison, Conn.
Rabbi Dennis Math performed the ceremony at Le Chateau restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Spiegel, 26 years old, is a freelance sports producer in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the president of Fred Allen Design Associates, an interior design concern in White Plains.
Her mother, Marian Lichtstein, is a counselor at All Women's Health in White Plains.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; Day of Brawling for Presidential Camps
On a day of testy partisan squabbling, Gov.
Bill Clinton televised the first negative commercial of the fall Presidential campaign today, painting President Bush as an unrealistic leader who talked about prosperity while the economy tumbled into recession.
Vice President Dan Quayle found himself answering new questions about his military record and trying to avoid discussing the Republican Party's anti-abortion stand and Mr.
Bush's agreement to the 1990 tax increase, as the campaigns traded accusations on the draft, the economy and taxes.


Jean E. Schroeder, Scot C. Kuo
Dr.
Jean Ellen Schroeder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gustav C. Schroeder of Syosset, L.I., was married yesterday in Brookville, L.I., to Dr.
Scot Charles Kuo, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Kuo of Elkhart, Ind.
The Rev.
Steven Fondiller, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the chapel of the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Dr.
Schroeder, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is a researcher at the University of North Carolina Medical School in Chapel Hill, N.C.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a doctorate in neuroscience from Washington University.
Her father is an adjunct professor of business administration at Suffolk Community College in Selden, L.I.
Her mother, Carol Schroeder, is the business reference librarian at Adelphi University in Garden City, L.I.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DOUBLE ISOLATION: OLDER MEN WITH H.I.V.


Ari Network Services reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Revived Harper's Takes Its Next Step
Harper's Magazine is feeling confident. Even flush.
Ten years ago, Harper's was losing almost $2.5 million a year.
"Now we are balancing on the point of breaking even," the magazine's editor, Lewis H. Lapham, said.


Best Seller's Author Faces A Libel Suit
James B. Stewart, author of the best seller "Den of Thieves," has been sued for libel by Michael F. Armstrong, a lawyer who says the book wrongly accuses him of preparing a false affidavit to exonerate a client who was under investigation on charges of violating securities laws.
Mr.
Armstrong's client was Lowell Milken, the brother of Michael Milken.
Lowell Milken was indicted in 1989, but the charges were later dismissed.


Engineering Measurements reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Chiat/Day's Cooke Goes to London
Marty Cooke, who has held various top creative positions at Chiat/Day/ Mojo's New York and Toronto offices, has joined its London office as creative director.
Mr.
Cooke, 37 years old, succeeded a creative team, Kes Gray and Jonathan Greenhalgh, who left to join DMP DDB Needham Worldwide in London.


Catherine Nemser, David H. Sher
Catherine Gail Nemser, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles S. Nemser of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to David Harris Sher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Sher of Verona, N.J.
Rabbi Norman Patz officiated at the Helmsley Park Lane Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Nemser, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a media planner at Nickelodeon, the cable television network, in New York.
Her father is a sales agent in New York for the Chromate Industrial Corporation, a distributor of industrial maintenance supplies.
Her mother, Cindy Nemser, is a theater critic for The New York Law Journal and a freelance journalist and novelist in New York.


Sweden to Cut Worker Benefits
The Government reached agreement today with the main opposition party on an austerity program that would reduce state benefits for employee needs like sick leave and workers' compensation, further eroding Sweden's welfare system.
The deal is aimed at helping Prime Minister Carl Bildt avoid a collapse of his center-right coalition Government and at restoring confidence in the economy in advance of Sweden's expected entry into the European Community by 1997.
The package still requires parliamentary approval.


Where to Make Cuts in Federal Staffs
To the Editor:
In "At Last, a Bush Package" (editorial, Sept. 11) you lightly refer to the President's "fun" in challenging Congress to match a one-third reduction in their respective budgets.
Your approach, intended or not, advances Republican efforts to exaggerate the significance of the Congressional budget.
An example of this campaign is "Congress Is the Problem" by Representative Christopher Cox and Michael Horowitz, senior fellow of the Manhattan Institute for Public Policy Research (Op-Ed, Aug. 18).


Tamar R. Lehrich, Thomas Augst
Tamar Rebecca Lehrich, the daughter of Michael M. Hess of San Francisco and Susan Lehrich Greenburg of Caldwell, N.J., was married yesterday in Lincoln, Mass., to Thomas Edward Augst, a son of Bertrand Augst of Berkeley, Calif., and Jeanine Augst of Kensington, Calif.
Rabbi William Greenburg performed the ceremony at the Codman House Estate.
Mrs.
Augst, 26 years old, is the law clerk for Judge Edith Fine of the Massachusetts Court of Appeals in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her mother, who is retired, was a high-school English teacher in Livingston, N.J.
The bride's stepfather, Jonathan Greenburg, is a history teacher at Chatham (N.J.) High School.
Her mother was previously married to Richard Lehrich of Princeton Junction, N.J.


Adobe-Sun Agreement
The software publisher Adobe Inc. and the computer maker Sun Microsystems will announce an agreement on Monday under which Sun will license Adobe's Postscript printer and screen display language for use with its work station.
In the past, Sun has used a clone version of Postscript to display text and graphics on the screens of its computers.
As part of the new relationship, Adobe has agreed to develop versions of its software applications to run on Sun's work stations.


Don't Confuse China Trade and Human Rights; Arrested Dissident
To the Editor:
The arrest in Beijing of the young dissident Shen Tong (news article, Sept. 2) is a calamity for the democracy movement and a shock to his many friends around the world.
It means the loss of an eloquent spokesman for freedom in China who emerged as a leader of the Tiananmen Square protests and never let up the struggle after going into exile.


Outlook Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Peek at the Future? Yankees Take a Look At Snow on First Base
J.
T.
Snow did not want to look like too much of a rookie before today's game.
He was unsure where Buck Showalter posted the Yankee lineup, but he was keen enough to wait anxiously rather than ask.
Asking would have been a rookie mistake.
When Showalter finally revealed his lineup for the game against Kansas City, Snow discovered he would make his debut.
Snow played first base while Don Mattingly was the designated hitter.


GW Utilities Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to June 30


Dance in Review
Patrick Scully Bessie Schonberg Theater
Advance word on Patrick Scully, who performed on Friday night, was that he was a performance artist, dancer, film maker, writer, advocate for gay rights and H.I.V. positive.
It sounded as if his program, entitled "Queer Notions," would probably turn out to be pure polemics.
And it was, along with a little impure or politically incorrect discourse included for good measure.
But for all its exhortations and undertones of anger and sadness, "Queer Notions" was a fresh, thoroughly entertaining evening of theater performed by a gifted original.
Mr.
Scully is a tall, rangy man with a long blond ponytail and a presence and delivery that lie somewhere between laid back and doggedly deadpan.
He opened the program of four pieces with "Too Soon Lost," apparently a signature piece in which, dressed in a business suit and holding a bunch of daisies, he talks of buildings along one block in his hometown, Minneapolis.
The block sounds a little seedy and run down, but its buildings have histories and personalities that are full of color and vitality.
Or were, for most have been torn down or abandoned.


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Moscow Journal; Where Tourists Rummage in Communism's Attic
The Arbat, Moscow's half-mile pedestrian mall, is Russia's capital of "poshlost," but amid the dross are scattered treasures and a glimpse of how the new market economy, bribe ridden, actually functions.
Vladimir Nabokov, who should have known, declared "poshlost" untranslatable.
It encompasses banality, triviality and kitsch, with a crucial added dash of vulgarity.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Spirit of 1976 Haunts Jets and Giants
FOR those whose smiles or sneers are determined by the Jets and the Giants, if you think it can't get worse, it once did.
With their 31-14 loss to the San Francisco 49ers yesterday, the Jets are now 0-3 and if the Giants lose to the Bears tonight in Chicago, the two New York area teams will be on an 0-6 treadmill.
Only in 1976 did they ever flop more often together at the start of the National Football League season.


Green Bay Pulls Off a Miracle
Packers 24, Bengals 23
GREEN BAY, Wis., Sept. 20 (AP) -- Brett Favre, forced into the game by a first-quarter injury to Don Majkowski, threw a 35-yard touchdown pass to Kitrick Taylor with 13 seconds left today, giving the Green Bay Packers a hard-to-believe 24-23 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals.
With no timeouts left, the Packers moved 92 yards in five plays during a game-winning drive that took just 54 seconds.


Against Odds, Revival For Troubled College
When Robert E. Karsten took over as president of Upsala College here in 1988, he was often told that he faced one insurmountable hurdle in trying to revive a rapidly failing institution.
Since the 1967 riots in Newark, East Orange, Upsala's home, once a quiet, white suburb, had become a largely black city with a reputation similar to Newark's as a dangerous place.
People were not sending their children here to college, and the common wisdom went that people would never send them here again.


Primerica To Invest $722 Million In Travelers
The Primerica Corporation said yesterday that it would invest $722.5 million in the Travelers Corporation in return for a 27 percent stake and that its chairman, Sanford I. Weill, would start working closely with Travelers to direct its struggling operations.
In addition, Travelers, the country's eighth-largest insurer, announced that it would eliminate 3,500 jobs, 10 percent of its work force, during the next two years.


The Jets Quickly Descend From Prediction to Predicament
The hole that the Jets stumbled into in the first week of the season deepened this afternoon.
The San Francisco 49ers, a team clearly above ground, put on the National Football League's version of show-and-tell in dealing the Jets their third consecutive loss with a 31-14 whipping.


Pet Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Karen Cmar, Samuel Barth
Karen Amy Gordon Cmar, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel I. Gordon of Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday in Brooklyn to Rabbi Samuel Barth, the son of May Barth of London and the late Marion Barth.
Rabbi Gordon Tucker performed the ceremony at the Park Slope Jewish Center, of which Mr.
Barth is the rabbi.
Mrs.
Barth, 37 years old, is an associate at the management consulting firm of McKinsey &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Brandeis University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, founded and headed the Gemini Corporation, a maker of children's clothing in Springfield, Mass.


World Bank Vows to Weigh Environmental Effect of Projects
The World Bank said today that it would aggressively assess the environmental impact of many of its development projects in poor countries and that it would add "environmental components" to existing and new projects if the concerns seem well founded.
The environmental goals were outlined in the bank's annual report, which was released today.
The report comes as environmental advocacy groups are accusing the bank of negligence toward the environment and the indigenous people affected by bank projects.


Vincent's Finest Hour Wasn't, Says Ex-Mayor
Baseball may always remember Fay Vincent as the commissioner who remained calm during the crisis caused by the earthquake during the 1989 World Series, but not everyone shares that memory.
Certainly not Art Agnos, the former Mayor of San Francisco, who is saying now that Vincent was insensitive to the community after the quake and pushed to restart the Series between San Francisco and Oakland even as the Bay Area was still recovering.


American Recreation Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26


Dina Gerber, Marshall Huebner
Dina Rakhel Gerber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger A. Gerber of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday in Harrison, N.Y., to Marshall Scott Huebner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kurt Huebner of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Rabbi Norton Shargel officiated at the Jewish Community Center.
Mrs.
Huebner, 25 years old, is a law clerk to Judge Richard Owen of Federal District Court in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a J.D. from Yale University.
Her father is the chief operating officer of Meyers Parking System in New York.
Her mother, Dr.
Jane S. Gerber, is a professor of Jewish history and the director of the Institute for Sephardic Studies at City University of New York.


Man Arrested in Attack on AIDS Workers
A 30-year-old New York City firefighter was arrested yesterday and charged with impersonating a police officer and assault in an attack on a man and a woman who were handing out AIDS literature and condoms on a Queens street near the suspect's home on Saturday afternoon.
After the attack, on Queens Boulevard in Jamaica, the assailant and a male companion sped away in a car.
But the police said the car's license number was noted by a witness and used to trace the suspect, John Finn, of 139-28 87th Avenue, Jamaica, who was later picked out of a lineup by the victims.
Investigators said the second man was being sought.


Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jane L. Bloom, Richard B. Stewart
Jane Laura Bloom and Richard Burleson Stewart, environmental lawyers in New York, were married yesterday.
Herman H. Tietjens, the town justice of Rhinebeck, N.Y., officiated at the couple's home in Gallatin, N.Y.
Mrs.
Stewart, 37 years old, is a senior associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated from Brown University and received a J.D. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Bloom of Los Angeles.
Her father is the head of sales for A B Plastics, a manufacturer in Los Angeles.


Alabama Governor Tangled In Charges of Ethical Lapses
It has all the elements of a convoluted political thriller, and then some.
The main character is a Republican Governor, Guy Hunt, a preacher in the Primitive Baptist church who is already facing a grand jury investigation into his travel to preaching engagements on a state-owned plane.
Now he has to explain a $10,000 "personal gift" in 1986 from a man he later appointed to a state board.
The donor is under indictment in connection with a $29 million savings and loan fraud.


Plan Now for the Next Andrew
The experience of Hurricane Andrew shows how foolish it is -- indeed, how cruel -- to give disaster aid short shrift.
In years past, Federal disaster aid was directed from an office in the White House and thus commanded more attention throughout the Government.
Now it's an underfunded independent agency, overstocked with political appointees.


Travel Ports of America reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
With the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew, Florida could use some good news.
So here it is: Miss Florida, LEANZA CORNETT, is the new Miss America.
Miss Cornett, a 21-year-old singer and actress, is a sophomore studying communications at Rollins College in Winter Park, Fla.
She also volunteers at an AIDS hospice and a center for children with AIDS, and says that she will stress AIDS awareness.


Russia Seeks Delay In Debt Repayment
The United States and Russia are quarreling with Germany about what is a reasonable repayment schedule for the former Soviet Union's $70 billion foreign debt.
Russian officials, in Washington for the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund, have American backing for a plan to postpone for at least five years their repayments of interest and principal.
Half the debt is owed to German banks and German Government agencies, and very little to American banks or Federal agencies.
Article, page A9.


Ms. de Brito, Mark Schindler
Alexandra Lillian de Brito, a daughter of Hendrika and A. H. Dantas de Brito of Port Chester, N.Y., was married yesterday to Mark Edward Schindler, the son of Lynn and Norman R. Schindler of St.
Paul.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at the Manursing Island Club in Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Audrey Schindler, a Presbyterian minister and the sister of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Schindler, 27 years old, is an associate director of international and corporate affairs at the American International Group, the insurance concern, in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of the political and security council department in the United Nations Secretariat in New York.
Her mother is a sculptor in Port Chester.


Fire Damages East Village Soundstage


FRENCH APPROVE UNITY TREATY, BUT SLIM MARGIN LEAVES DOUBTS
After a bruising referendum campaign that divided France and alarmed Western Europe, French voters narrowly approved a treaty on European union today, keeping alive the region's ambitious blueprint for the future but underlining the depth of opposition that it has awakened here.
The result -- 51 percent to 49 percent, according to the Interior Ministry -- brought immediate expressions of relief from Government leaders throughout the 12-nation European Community who had feared that French rejection of the treaty would open up the region to a period of political uncertainty and even more profound economic disarray. 'Impetus' for Unity


Heidi Raker, Stuart Goldstein
Heidi Raker, a daughter of Marcia L. Raker of Longmeadow, Mass., and Joseph Schwartz of East Greenwich, R.I., was married yesterday in Pearl River, N.Y., to Stuart Marc Goldstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Werner Goldstein of River Edge, N.J.
Rabbi Robert Levine officiated at the Pearl River Hilton.
Mrs.
Goldstein, 30 years old, owns Raker Public Relations in New York and is a contributing editor to Parent Guide News, a monthly magazine in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.


Equity Offerings Expected This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
American Insurance Group, 1.5 million common shares. Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Co.
Arvin Industries Inc., two million common shares. Merrill Lynch &amp; Co..


Vie de France reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Son, 14, Held in Shooting
A 14-year-old boy shot his father several times yesterday morning in their Brooklyn home after an argument over cleaning the boy's room, the police said.
Roy Semple Sr., 34, of 237 Macon Street, Bedford-Stuyvesant, was shot with a semiautomatic handgun.
The son, Roy Jr., was arrested on charges of assault and criminal possession of a weapon.
Mr.
Semple, a carpenter, was in critical condition at Kings County Hospital.


CHRONICLE
With the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew, Florida could use some good news.
So here it is: Miss Florida, LEANZA CORNETT, is the new Miss America.
Miss Cornett, a 21-year-old singer and actress, is a sophomore studying communications at Rollins College in Winter Park, Fla.
She also volunteers at an AIDS hospice and a center for children with AIDS, and says that she will stress AIDS awareness.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Floyd: History and Largess  Raymond Floyd made history yesterday and promptly turned it into an occasion to help victims of Hurricane Andrew.
Floyd, who turned 50 years old earlier this month, birdied five of his last seven holes to win the G.T.E.
North Classic in Indianapolis and become the first golfer to win tournaments on both the regular and Senior PGA tours in the same year.
He won the Doral-Ryder Open in March on the regular tour and added yesterday's victory in only his second start as a senior.
Floyd's six-under-par 66 gave him a 17-under 199 total, two shots ahead of Mike Hill.
Floyd matched the tournament record set last year by George Archer and won $67,500, which he announced he would donate to the PGA Tour's hurricane relief fund. (AP) Frost Holds On for Victory: David Frost, despite posting four birdies and six bogeys, held on for a three-stroke victory in the Hardee's Golf Classic in Coal Valley, Ill.
Frost, who won the Buick Classic in June, shot a two-over-par 72 for a 14-under 266 total.
He protected his five-stroke lead with birdies on two of the first three holes, but then bogeyed three of the next six holes.
After rain delay of 1 hour 22 minutes, Frost bogeyed Nos. 14, 15 and 16, allowing Loren Roberts to pull within a stroke.
But Roberts bogeyed his last two holes to finished with a 70 and a 269 total, tied for second with Tom Lehman, who also shot 70.
Jay Delsing, who shot a 68, was fourth at 271. (AP)


Riser Foods reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Mets Juggling Lists for Expansion
The date is Nov. 17.
The event is the National League expansion draft.
The mission for the Mets -- one they are not exactly unfamiliar with in 1992 -- is damage control.
"We are going to lose one, perhaps two players we don't want to lose," said Gerry Hunsicker, the team's vice president for baseball operations.
"I don't think there is a question about it."


Warren Moscow, 84, a Reporter and Top Aide to Mayoor Wagner
Warren Moscow, a political reporter for The New York Times who became a top aide to Mayor Robert F. Wagner, died yesterday at his farmhouse in Putnam Valley, N.Y.
He was 84 years old.
Mr.
Moscow, who had been ill for the last two years, died of complications from diabetes, said his son, John Warren Moscow, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.


Here Comes an Audible: It's 'We Want Blake!'
Once, it was Ken O'Brien or nothing as the Jets' quarterback.
But today, as a 31-year-old backup starting for the injured Browning Nagle, he heard the angry fans wishing he would go away.


The Talk of Hollywood; Everyone Has Heard; How Many Will See?
Hollywood executives across Bel Air and Beverly Hills woke up this morning to their cappuccino and customary Sunday faxes detailing the weekend box office grosses around the nation.
Attention was focused almost entirely on -- what else? -- Woody Allen's "Husbands and Wives." The film immediately provoked -- what else? -- a Great Debate.
Executives at Tri-Star Pictures, the producer, insisted the film was performing like gangbusters.
On the other hand, rival executives, including several studio chiefs, said the film was drawing thin crowds, outside of Manhattan and west Los Angeles, and several other cities, and that the publicity engulfing it -- and the positive reviews -- had virtually no impact in luring customers.
One studio chief, speaking on condition of anonymity, went so far as to call the movie a "disaster."


Grist Mill Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Harlem Dance Theater Testing South Africa
It seemed inevitable that a tour of South Africa by the Dance Theater of Harlem would be a pas de deux of culture and politics.
The very choice of the predominantly black ballet company, which opened to critical and public admiration on Wednesday night, was intended to be a statement of post-apartheid cultural enlightenment by the newly refurbished Johannesburg Civic Theater, long regarded as an elitist white venue.


You Hear That Growl? It's a Guy Named Ditka
The words came from Mike Ditka as he talked about his Chicago Bears.
They could well have come from Ray Handley, who will coach the Giants against Ditka's Bears here on Monday night.
"We're not playing very well," Ditka said.
"Yes, I'm disappointed. But what do you want me to do, grab the guy by the neck, choke him, scourge him at the cross, eulogize him and bury him? I'm not going to do that. It doesn't do any good. This is my team, our team. If they're not good enough, it's my fault. I kept them here. I have to take the responsibility."


PDK Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Fernandez Leaves Expos Feeling Totally Out of It
The baseball would emerge from Sid Fernandez's left hand and begin its high-velocity flight through the sunlight and shadows at Shea Stadium.
"It was in the light and then in the dark," said Greg Colbrunn of the Montreal Expos, "in the light, and then in the dark."


Don't Confuse China Trade and Human Rights; Next Prime Minister?
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 25 Beijing Journal on China's new economic strongman, Zhu Rongji, is illuminating.
While Mr.
Zhu's replacement of Li Peng as China's Prime Minister requires the final approval of the Chinese Communist Party's 14th Party Congress, recent developments in China suggest this appointment is imminent.


The Value of a Pound
To the Editor:
In "The Rhetoric Aside, She's No Churchill" (letter, Sept. 11), James D. Walker of St.
Paul decries the economic results of Margaret Thatcher's policies on Britain in response to an editorial comparison.
Unfortunately, his examples reverse the conversion of pounds to dollars at the time of publication: $:50,000, for example, should equal $100,000, not $26,000.


Karen Lipson, Alan Goldberg
Karen Beth Lipson, the daughter of Marjorie and Dr.
Walter Lipson of Suffern, N.Y., was married yesterday in Tuxedo Park, N.Y., to Alan Jay Goldberg, the son of Harriet D. and Victor J. Goldberg of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs performed the ceremony at the Tuxedo Club.
Ms.
Lipson, who is keeping her name, is an associate in the Washington law firm of Williams &amp; Connolly.
She graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a dentist in Suffern.
Her mother, a social worker, is the executive director of the Volunteer Counseling Service of Rockland County, N.Y.


Curfew Vote In New Jersey Stirs Concern
New Jersey lawmakers are unanimously in favor, the League of Municipalities is all for it and Gov.
Jim Florio says he supports it in principle.
But the American Civil Liberties Union says the very first New Jersey community that imposes a curfew on juveniles and holds parents responsible for enforcing it will find itself in court.
Against a backdrop of increasing teen-age violence and an epidemic of car theft in Newark, not to mention the threats posed to young people by drugs and AIDS, the New Jersey Legislature voted with not a single dissent this week to empower any or all of the state's 567 municipalities to arrest anyone under 18 who is on the streets between 10 at night and 6 in the morning unless they are going to church, school or civic functions or have other legitimate reasons for being out of the house in the evening.


Delrina Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Bridge
When there is a close choice between a major-suit game and three no-trump, the conventional wisdom is to choose the nine-trick contract if there is high-card strength to spare.
The reasoning is that the suit game may run into very bad breaks, which will have less impact on three no-trump.
The diagramed deal, played in the Spingold Knockout Teams in Toronto in July, seems to cast doubt on this guideline.
Sitting South was Barry Goren of Chicago, who has had numerous successes in the last two years.
It might appear that he was due to fail in four spades, in view of the 5-0 trump split, but he survived.


Weiss's Widow Said to Be Ready to Join Race for His Seat
A week after the death of Representative Ted Weiss, Sonya Hoover, his widow, has decided to enter an already-crowded field of candidates trying to succeed him, several people close to Ms.
Hoover said yesterday.
Ms.
Hoover has not yet formally announced her candidacy, but the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, and State Senator Franz S. Leichter said last night that she had called them yesterday afternoon to tell them of her plans.
One of Mr.
Weiss's sons, Thomas, also confirmed her candidacy.


William J. Dunn, CBS Radio Correspondent, 86
William J. Dunn, a CBS radio correspondent who covered Gen.
Douglas MacArthur and the war in the Pacific from 1941 to 1945, died on Saturday at Northern Dutchess Hospital in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
He was 86 years old and lived in Rhinebeck.
He died of heart failure after a lengthy illness, said Joe Wershba, a friend and former producer for "60 Minutes."


Talks on Rescheduling Moscow's Debt Pit U.S. and Russia Against Germany
A quarrel between the United States and Russia, on one side, and Germany, on the other, is snarling efforts of finance ministers here to postpone the repayment of the former Soviet Union's $70 billion foreign debt, senior financial officials here said today.
Russian officials, here for the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund, want to postpone for at least five years their repayments of interest and principal.
But German officials are resisting.
Half the debt is owed to German banks and German Government agencies, while very little is owed to American banks or Federal agencies here.


Food Lion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


U.S. Sushi? Tokyo Frets. Sushi Boy Says Yes.
A Japanese restaurant chain is proposing what some here see as an audacious idea -- importing sushi from the United States.
But the company behind this coals-to-Newcastle plan could run into the same type of trade barriers that have long frustrated foreign companies seeking to sell products in Japan.


Books of The Times; Full Report of a Personal Exploration
Making Love  An Erotic Odyssey  By Richard Rhodes  175 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.
Richard Rhodes's "Making Love: An Erotic Odyssey" is an unblushingly explicit, shockingly candid account of the author's sexual experiences, from his earliest childhood fantasies, through his first experiments with masturbation, his homoerotic encounters with the boys in the Midwestern orphanage he grew up in, his loss of virginity to a New York City prostitute and his lifelong search for orgasmic ecstasy.
It is written in unobtrusive, functional prose that only occasionally turns poetic: "Oh and then I was gone, bellowing, all of me rushing down and across that rigid lumen, bursting through the boundary wall between us as a spring bursts." But it seizes the reader's attention and never lets you avert your eyes.


Oilers Mollify Booing Fans With Field Goal in Overtime
Oilers 23, Chiefs 20
HOUSTON, Sept. 20 (AP) -- Al Del Greco kicked a 39-yard field goal with 13:05 left in overtime, enabling the Houston Oilers to avert an upset with a 23-20 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs today.
The Oilers (2-1) flirted with disaster the entire game, but rallied to take a 20-13 lead late in the game.
They won in overtime after Kansas City (2-1) tied the game in regulation on a touchdown by Todd McNair and won the toss, only to have receiver J. J. Birden fumble after catching a third-down pass.


In Their Own Words
VICE PRESIDENT DAN QUAYLE  In an interview yesterday on the NBC News program "Meet the Press"


So What's the Hurry for Devils?
In the desperation days of the early 1980's, the Devils were so thin in talent that they looked to their top draft choice to play a significant role immediately.
Now, they have so much depth that they are in no hurry to rush anyone, especially a defenseman, into National Hockey League action.
Herb Brooks, New Jersey's head coach, calls it "properly widening the base of the pyramid." Marshall Johnston, the director of player personnel, says that he views the proper development of young players as the key to a team with Stanley Cup aspirations.


Corrections
An article last Monday misstated the Democratic Party's platform position on homosexuals.
The platform says that homosexuals should have the same civil rights protection as other minorities, but does not advocate affirmative action for them.


Gladwin Hill, a Pioneer Reporter On the Environment, Is Dead at 78
Gladwin Hill, a journalist who in 44 years with The New York Times pioneered environmental reporting and described for a generation of readers Los Angeles's growth from an outpost to a metropolis, died Saturday evening at his home here.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Hill, a heavy smoker, died of lung cancer after a seven-month battle with the disease, said his wife, Carole Fordham Hill.


Review/Television; Diane English's New Baby Is as Flinty as the Old
Year of the woman?
Could be.
But there's already no doubt that, as far as CBS is concerned, Monday is the night of the woman.
Two women, actually: Linda Bloodworth-Thomason and Diane English.
In the evening's new lineup, "Evening Shade" at 8 and the new "Hearts Afire" at 8:30 were created by Ms.
Bloodworth-Thomason (her "Designing Women" was moved to a Friday slot).
Ms.
English will be able to claim "Murphy Brown" at 9 and a new series called "Love and War" at 9:30.


Trading Set in U.S. Mutual Fund With an Israeli Portfolio
The first American mutual fund invested in Israeli companies is scheduled to begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange next month.
Seventy percent of the First Israel Fund Inc. will be invested in publicly traded securities on the Tel Aviv stock exchange, according to Ze'ev Holtzman, director of Giza, one of two Israeli companies acting as advisers to the United States managing firm, BEA Associates.
Analyst, Israel's largest managing firm for private funds, is the other adviser.


Eagles Begrudge Broncos a Breath
Denver tried the screen pass.
It tried the shuffle pass.
It ran the draw.
Its receivers ran out-patterns, in-patterns and deep patterns.
The Denver defense tried zone coverage.
Then man-to-man.
Then sneaking up in the secondary to snuff the run.
Then the blitz.
None of it worked.


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Theater; A Retrograde Musical of Mothers and Daughters
When more and more women are assuming positions of authority in public life, there is something retrograde about a musical concerned with the traditional domestic relationship between mothers and daughters.
This might lead a political analyst to suggest that "Cut the Ribbons," the new show at the Westside Theater, is more in tune with Barbara Bush than with Hillary Clinton, that this is a musical in the family values mode.
But it would be churlish, not to say sexist, to deny the continuing relevance of the subjects under scrutiny, especially to those people being scrutinized.
"Cut the Ribbons" raises issues but does not raise its voice.
It is a mild-mannered revue, starring three diverse actresses, Donna McKechnie, Georgia Engel and Barbara Feldon.
Only a few of the nearly 30 songs (lyrics by Mae Richard, music by three composers) are tinged with satire.
Ms.
Richard prefers a soft brush to a stiff bristle.


Istec Industries &amp; Technologies Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Diamond Industry Loses Little Luster
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 4 Business Day article on the American diamond industry and New York City's 47th Street diamond district paints an incomplete portrait.
The industry, like virtually every other, has been hit by the recession.
But Department of Commerce data do not support your assertion that "sullen economic times have treated few industries as meanly."


Don't Confuse China Trade and Human Rights
To the Editor:
"One-Fisted Strength on China" (editorial, Aug. 29) is right to state that the Bush Administration has been soft on human rights issues in China.
However, I would suggest that it is better not to use the same weapon to fight two different battles: promoting free trade and improving human rights in China.


This Is Losing By the Numbers
When the team from Long Beach, Calif., was awarded a forfeit over the team from the Philippines the other day to win the Little League World Series, the score was listed as 6-0.
That made sense, since Little League games are six innings.
Major league games are nine innings, and they have 9-0 forfeits based on giving one run an inning to the winning team.
But other sports aren't quite so tidy.
Note: the N.B.A. and N.F.L. say they have no official forfeit scores.
Following are forfeits in other sports:
SPORT
SCORE
Hockey
1-0
Basketball
2-0
Football
1-0
Horseshoes
40-0
Croquet
26-0*
*In croquet, the remaining competitor must play through alone.


A 'Wild East' Revival In Serbian-Held Croatia
Tensions and reports of abuses by Serbian irregular forces are sharply on the rise again in Croatia, the former Yugoslav republic where the first major fighting took place in the 14-month Balkan war.
More than eight months after United Nations troops were sent to support a truce in the third of Croatian territory controlled by Serbs, friction is mounting between the peace force and local Serbian leaders, who have refused to disband as many as 3,000 paramilitary troops, United Nations officials said.


Market Place; Worldly Lesson For Fund Holders
INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS learned the hard way last week that their growing stakes in international securities can be unpredictable and risky.
Mutual funds, which hold most of the global investments of the small investor, devoted more time than usual to holding customers' hands as currency gyrations rocked global bond and short-term money market funds.
On several days, overseas markets were so volatile that some mutual funds were unable to attach the usual late-afternoon price to their shares; newspaper tables the next day simply had no prices for some funds.


List Central Park As Athletic Mecca
O.K, so there wasn't a triplecast, and nobody shot a fiery arrow into the air to light an official flame, but, come on folks, the events in Central Park over the weekend were merely the
first
American Athletic Games.
And if the throngs who flocked to the official venues scattered throughout the park seemed outnumbered at times by the hordes of runners, cyclists, roller bladers and other regular weekend athletes, remember: It takes time to build a sporting-goods promotion into an athletic institution.


Towns Pay to Keep Westchester's Credit Good
To the Editor:
In a Sept. 2 article about six counties in the New York City metropolitan region whose bonds have good credit ratings, you point out that New York State's Westchester County is one of the few counties with an Aaa credit rating.
You give fiscal conservatism as one reason Westchester has earned such a high rating.


Corel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New Executions for Economic Crimes Reported in Iraq
Iraq has carried out a new round of executions for economic crimes amid further signs that the economy is worsening, the currency is plunging and merchants are refusing to import needed food, according to reports from diplomats and officials in Baghdad.
The reports, which could not be independently verified, say 25 Iraqis were executed in Baghdad on Thursday for unspecified black market currency transactions.
At the same time the Iraqi dinar has plummeted, with one dollar now selling for more than 40 dinars compared with 20 in late July.
Before the Persian Gulf war, one Iraqi dinar was worth $3.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday Housing Starts . . .
Aug.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  G.D.P. (revised) . . . 2d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Durable Goods . . .
Aug.
Personal Income . . .
Aug.


World Economies


Abroad at Home; The Two Faces of George
Have we ever had two political campaigns so different in style and content?
I mean the two campaigns being waged by George Bush.
In one there is the President, reassuring authority figure, reaching out to all Americans, promising to help them in their economic distress.
This campaign, positive in tone, offers an "Agenda for American Renewal."


Winds Free 40 Aliens, Stirring Second Storm
Thousands of volunteers from all over the world have come to South Florida to help the victims of Hurricane Andrew.
But about 40 illegal aliens who were both victims and volunteers ended up with the sweetest reward of all: their freedom.
The 40 were being detained at the Krome Avenue Detention Center, awaiting asylum hearings or final deportation back to the countries from which they had come, when the storm hit.
The center, in a rural part of Dade County, lost power and phone service.


Fischer Wins Again; Match Is Half Over
In a battle of brilliant offense countered by brilliant defense, Boris Spassky finally erred yesterday and Bobby Fischer won Game 11 of their exhibition match in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia.
Fischer now leads 5-2, with 10 victories required to collect the $3.35 million winner's prize.
Thus, after two and a half weeks of play, the match has reached the halfway point.
For the last half, it is to move on to a new site in Belgrade, as yet unannounced.
Match organizers said a date for resuming play would be announced today, The Associated Press reported, with a week-to-10-day layoff likely.


Mexicans Look Askance at Textbooks' New Slant
For 20 years, Mexican fourth graders have been taught that Porfirio Diaz, the turn-of-the-century dictator, "was very bad for the life of Mexico, because the people were not given the chance to elect their leaders."
This month they began to learn that, despotism aside, Diaz achieved stability and peace, tolerated the Roman Catholic Church, built railroads, fostered industrial growth and attracted foreign investment.


Leslie Casson and Scott Cheffer
Leslie Culver Casson and Scott Gerard Cheffer, opera singers, were married yesterday in Evanston, Ill.
The Rev.
Nan Conser officiated at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Cheffer, 26 years old and a graduate of Northwestern University, is a soprano who has performed primarily with companies in the Midwest.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Casson of Westport, Conn.
Her father is the creator of the syndicated comic strip "Red-Eye."


Chaparral Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Huskies Prove a Point: This Defense Can Play
Eight months after the Huskies won a share of it all, the Washington faithful are still reluctant to put aside their national championship and move on to a new season.
You simply do not dismiss an unbeaten autumn, a Rose Bowl victory, an imposing defense and a winning streak too easily.
Who would want to?
But Saturday night, the Huskies, ranked No. 2 in The Associated Press's poll, finally might have escaped the lingering shadow of 1991.
If they needed to prove they could be just as good -- without Steve Emtman, their defensive end and brightest star -- they did, taking the legs from No. 12-ranked Nebraska for a 29-14 victory that put them in contention for another national title.


Giants Are Music To This Fan's Ear
FRED KRIMENDAHL wishes his beloved but struggling Giants could play on the same page as well as the 80 players of his beloved New York Philharmonic.
Krimendahl happens to be president of the Philharmonic.
But he has been a Giants season-ticket holder since the 1950's.


Don't Blame the Owl
The northern spotted owl -- once described by President Bush as "that little furry-feathery guy" -- is not a particularly popular little guy among timber workers in the Pacific Northwest.
Listed as an endangered species in 1990, the owl triggered a series of court cases that halted logging in millions of acres of old-growth forests.
Timber workers are furious.
They also vote.
Which is why Mr.
Bush went to Washington State last week and pledged to mend the Endangered Species Act to give "greater consideration to jobs, families and communities." It is time, he declared, "to put people ahead of owls."


Skyline Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Myra Glajchen and David Cohen
Myra Glajchen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Glajchen of Johannesburg, South Africa, was married yesterday in White Plains to David Maurice Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney P. Cohen of Boston.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner officiated at the Mansion at the Stouffer Hotel.
The bride, 35 years old, is the assistant director of social service at Cancer Care Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg and received a Ph.D. in social work from Columbia University.
Her father, a chemical engineer, was a founder of Lucid Glassworks, now Plate Glass Inc., a glazing company in Johannesburg.
Her mother is a travel consultant in Johannesburg.


U.S. ACCUSES INDIA ON CHEMICAL ARMS
The United States has protested to India over Indian sales to Mideast nations of chemicals needed to make poison gas, saying the shipments undercut efforts to stem the spread of chemical weapons, Administration officials say.
The protest came after American intelligence discovered that a shipment of the chemical trimethyl phosphite had been sent from India in July for delivery to Syria on a German vessel.
The chemical can be used to make pesticides but is also an ingredient for nerve gas.
Earlier shipments of Indian chemicals to Iraq and Iran have also raised United States concerns.


Tower of Babel on Radio Is Adding Voices
Over the last decade, WNWK-FM, a New York area radio station, has sounded like a mini-United Nations with programs in as many as 47 languages, mostly European.
Now, its new owner plans to broaden WNWK's appeal, adding more Asian and Caribbean voices in an effort to turn what had essentially been a community-services station into a more commercial enterprise.


TCBY Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Television; The Politics of Abortion And Contraception
It's abortion-rights night on TBS: two hours of prime-time programs on contraception, abortion and politics, the first of which, "Contraception: The Stalled Revolution," is worth watching because Linda Ellerbee does not settle for mere advocacy.
In a brisk and smart hourlong report, she digs into why advances in contraceptive techniques have been stalled.
She draws attention to the big profits from sales of birth-control pills, which would be reduced by a longer-working method; the drug companies' fear of another disaster like the Dalkon Shield, which harmed many users and drove its maker into bankruptcy, and their companies' reluctance to do battle with the right-wing political forces that have succeeded in linking contraception and abortion.
Ms.
Ellerbee leaves no doubt about her own position.
She emphasizes the need for a simple, inexpensive birth-control technique for poor, uneducated teen-agers and declares, "Our Government has made a choice to look the other way." Women with money, she points out, can avoid the nuisances of most birth-control techniques by paying $400 to $800 for Norplant, several plastic tubes that can be inserted into a woman's arm in 15 minutes and work for 5 years.
She discerns behind the reluctance to pursue new means of contraception a national uneasiness about sex.


Finance Officials See French Vote Calming Nervous World Markets
European finance ministers turned into cheerleaders today, proclaiming that the close vote in France in favor of European unity should calm the world's jittery financial markets.
And their efforts at reassurance got a boost from President Bush.
A day after the Group of Seven industrial nations met here and pledged to help stabilize markets, officials from the 12 members of the European Community gathered for talks, then insisted that the vote should have a calming effect.


Smoldering Anger, and Then a Fire
Fear, anger and a whiff of racism have crept into the quiet, middle-class neighborhood of Morris Cove here in recent months, where there has been simmering opposition to a city plan to move 183 low-income families into renovated, publicly owned homes in the community.
Early Friday morning, an arsonist set fire to one of the recently rehabilitated homes.
The police and fire officials are investigating whether the fire was motivated by the housing plan, but one fire official, George Boucher, a New Haven Fire Department battalion chief, played down the possibility.


Robin D. Scheer, Kenneth Ettinger
Robin Dee Scheer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond D. Scheer of Pembroke Pines, Fla., was married yesterday in New York to Kenneth Ettinger, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Ettinger of Yonkers.
Rabbi Daniel J. Isaak officiated at the Parker Meridien hotel.
Mrs.
Ettinger, 39 years old, is the director of strategic marketing at Liz Claiborne in New York.
She graduated from the Philadelphia College of Art and received an M.B.A. from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Her parents, now retired, owned Lamparas Europa, a maker of decorative lighting fixtures in Barcelona, Spain.


No Headline
"Just imagine now the joy of member countries of the community, our closest friends, who were waiting for this necessary signal from us. Imagine the joy of the other European countries, almost all of whom aspire to join us, above all those who were deprived of liberty for so long." -- PRESIDENT FRANCOIS MITTERRAND  [ A8:1. ]


Black Officials and Clergy Press Review Board Plan
Black leaders in New York City yesterday rallied support for an all-civilian agency to investigate police misconduct as they stepped up their criticism of the police officers' union and Rudolph W. Giuliani over a rowdy protest last week by thousands of off-duty officers.
In church sermons and at the African-American Day Parade in Harlem, black ministers, city officials and other civic leaders said the demonstration led by the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association had shown that there was pervasive racism in the police force that would be addressed by an all-civilian review board.


Greentree Software reports earnings for Year to May 31


Unusual Campaign To Build Literacy
A print campaign to encourage literacy among children presents familiar characters from children's literature in an unexpected way.
The campaign, created by Gianettino &amp; Meredith in Short Hills, N.J., was selected from 27 entered in a contest sponsored by Worth magazine in New York.
To help the Reading Is Fundamental organization, Winnie-the-Pooh appears in an advertisement that carries the headline "What if Winnie were pooh-poohed?" A second ad, featuring a well-known young detective, carries the headline "What if Nancy drew a blank?"


Calm Currency Response to Vote
Hunched over a bank of glowing and blinking computer terminals, Mark Slater, the head of foreign exchange trading at Merrill Lynch here, watched intently tonight for signs of tumult in the currency markets as the results trickled in for the French referendum on European unification.
Unlike trading in the last week, which saw Europe's monetary system nearly ripped apart, the currency markets remained relatively calm tonight in the wake of the narrow "yes" vote in France.
The lira did not disintegrate.
The franc did not plummet; in fact, it rose slightly against the mark.


Dividend Meetings


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Turmoil in Europe
French voters narrowly approved a treaty on European union, keeping alive the ambitious blueprint for Europe's future but underlining the depth of opposition that it has awakened.
Fears of a "no" vote had roiled world currency markets last week.  [ Page A1. ]
The narrow vote may have pushed the dream of unity further away rather than bringing it closer.
News Analysis  [ A1. ]


Charge Taken By Hewlett
The Hewlett-Packard Company said Friday that it would reduce its 1992 pretax earnings by $544 million for an accounting change involving retiree health benefits.
Under the new rule, issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, companies must estimate the expected future cost of medical benefits for retirees while they are still working and deduct those estimates from current earnings.
The previous "pay as you go" basis led to understating the earnings impact of paying retiree health benefits, the board said.


This Object Is Not Unidentifiable
Sometimes, his pupils at the Midtown Tennis Club wonder where they have seen BYRON SANDERS before.
The tennis pro has had several careers, including one as a soap-opera star.
But history will probably best remember his face as the one that was the model for Salvador Dali's dramatic painting "The Crucifixion."


Golden Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Different View Of Some Greats
They all wore it, or said they did -- from Babe Ruth to Leo Durocher to BART STARR.
And they all got paid handsomely.
Now -- and this comes under the "Only in America" category -- Jockey underwear is having a retrospective of its ads, including the famous athletes who hawked the dry goods.


Goodmark Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Where the Strike Deadens the Ball
After Jay Bell was tagged out "by a mile" at home plate in the Pirates' 6-3 loss to the Montreal Expos last Wednesday night, Don Landfried turned to his wife, seated next to him at Three Rivers Stadium, and wondered aloud whether the Pirate shortstop had seen the third-base coach's sign.
"I can't believe he was waved in," said Landfried, who attends about 10 Pirates games a year with his wife, Lauren.


Hamilton Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


With Day Care or Bonus, Hospitals Entice Hard-to-Find Workers
To 4-year-old Jenny Liu, the new day-care center at the Woodhull Hospital Center in Brooklyn is a place full of toys and books and playmates.
To her father, Zi Yang Liu, who is a laboratory technician at Woodhull, it is a safe, affordable child-care alternative that allows him to visit at noontime and take his daughter to the cafeteria for lunch.


Versailles Treaty Picks Up a Ruffian Victory
Belmont Park closed its weekend of stars yesterday with its fifth Grade I stakes in 24 hours.
And in a classic honoring the career of Ruffian, the renowned but ill-fated filly of 17 years ago, the favored Versailles Treaty maintained the significant tone by winning the Ruffian Handicap by half a length over Quick Mischief.
Six fancy fillies and mares ran the race not far from the fresh horseshoe of flowers marking the grave of Ruffian just past the finish line.
She was the great black beauty who won 10 straight races before stumbling and suffering a fatal injury in her storied match race against Foolish Pleasure, the colt who won the Kentucky Derby in 1975.


Always a Place for Superman
No matter what happens to Superman in the comic books, the Man of Steel will remain alive and well in an advertising campaign created by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York for Duracell batteries.
Superman appears in print advertisements that promote Duracells as reliable and long-lived.
"He runs like he's on Duracell," the headline says.


Allegre Only Playing Waiting Game
Raul Allegre watched the Houston-Kansas City game on television today at his home in Austin, Tex.
But his attention was focused on the Jets-49ers game at Giants Stadium, particularly on the kickers for both teams.
The Jets' Jason Staurovsky and the 49ers' Mike Cofer entered the game on the hotseat.
Cofer got off to a shaky start, missing a 36-yard attempt but kicked with a 45-yarder in the second quarter.
Staurovsky didn't attempt any field goals, but was 2 of 2 on point-after conversions.
But the Jets passed up what would have been about a 42-yard attempt in the second quarter, running instead on fourth-and-6.
They turned the ball over.


Marshall Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Choosing Schools Through Fakery; New York Parents Use Many Schemes for False Enrollment
Clara Woodson is a school guidance supervisor in Brooklyn but, she told a Jamaican mother and her little boy sitting edgily in her office last week, in an earlier life she was a detective.
So when the Jamaican woman insisted that she had recently returned to New York City from California and was living with a friend two blocks from a popular public school in Canarsie where she demanded to have her son enrolled, Mrs.
Woodson made no secret of her skepticism.
"Look at me," commanded the 65-year-old grandmother,


NBC Considering Changes In Management of 'Tonight'
Concerned with recent turmoil behind the scenes at the "Tonight" show, NBC executives have begun discussions with the program's host, Jay Leno, and executive producer, Helen Kushnick, and are "considering modifications of the show's management structure," the network said in a statement issued late Friday.
A senior NBC executive, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, said while no final decision had been made, it was expected that the network would hire a new executive producer either to replace Ms.
Kushnick, who has been Mr.
Leno's manager for 18 years, or share duties with her.
NBC is expected to ask Mr.
Leno to remain as host.
There is concern at the network that Mr.
Leno might quit if Ms.
Kushnick is dismissed.


Regulations March On, Despite a Moratorium
After more than seven months, the moratorium that George Bush imposed on most new Federal regulations has had little visible effect in reversing the sharp growth of regulation during the first three years of his Presidency, many policy analysts say.
At the same time, however, both supporters and critics of the moratorium contend that it has helped chill the regulatory climate, particularly involving rules covering the environment, where much current attention is focused.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- Colorado; Anti-Bush Sentiment Could Break Colorado's Tradition of Loyalty to G.O.P.
The last time Colorado voted for a Democrat for President was back in 1964, when Lyndon B. Johnson was the candidate.
The next time could be this November.
President Bush is trailing Gov.
Bill Clinton in this Rocky Mountain state, according to the most recent polls, and although there is still time for Mr.
Bush to catch up, it will not be easy.
He is widely seen here, even by some Republicans, as "a failed President, out of ideas and out of steam," said Thomas Cronin, a professor at Colorado College and a leading authority on the Presidency.


Tracy Geller, Andrew Spray
Tracy Lynn Geller, the daughter of Ann Bader Geller of New York, was married last night to Andrew Charles Spray, a son of the Rev.
C.
A.
F.
T.
Spray of Burgess Hill, England, and the late Mrs.
Spray.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
The bridegroom's father, an Anglican priest, took part in the service.


Business Fraud of the 90's: Falsifying Corporate Data
The names are toppling like financial dominoes: Phar-Mor, the Ohio drugstore chain; College Bound, a school-test coaching service in Florida, and Gottschalks, a retailer in California.
In the last year, each has been found to have provided regulators and investors with seriously inaccurate information about its activities.
They are part of a growing parade of companies sent to the regulatory woodshed in the 90's in what some securities lawyers and regulators say is a sharp change in the type of corporate frauds being committed -- from those involving stock trading to those involving the way public companies are run.


Nancy Altman, Peter Malkin
Nancy Sue Altman, a daughter of Rhoda Altman of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Harold Altman, was married yesterday to Peter Kenneth Malkin, the son of Dr.
Jocelyn S. Malkin and Dr.
Myron S. Malkin of Bethesda, Md.
Rabbi Aaron Panken officiated at the Roslyn Country Club in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Mrs.
Malkin is the director of legal and contract administration for MTV Networks in New York.
She graduated from Queens College.
Her father owned M &amp; H Auto Repairs in New York.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  TREATY SQUEAKS BY IN FRANCE
After a bruising referendum campaign that divided France and alarmed Western Europe, French voters narrowly approved a treaty on European union.
A1  A new battlefront on unity seems certain to open in Britain.
A8


Carl J. Megel, 92, Early President And Expander of Teachers Union
Carl J. Megel, who began teaching in a one-room schoolhouse and rose to lead the movement that spread unionism among teachers across America, died Friday at his home in Rockville, Md.
He was 92 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Ida Weitzen, David Dangoor
Ida Weitzen, a daughter of Roslyn Weitzen of Lawrence, L.I., and the late Edward H. Weitzen, was married yesterday in New York to David Ezra Ramsi Dangoor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Selim Dangoor of Stockholm.
Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Room.
Mrs.
Dangoor, 32 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and received a J.D. from Fordham University.
Her father was the chairman of the American Banknote Company in New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues -- 'Family Values'; Bush Tries to Recoup From Harsh Tone on 'Values'
A month after the Republican National Convention, much of President Bush's campaign is still directed at avoiding the harsh tone of the "family values" oratory in Houston, which party strategists have agreed was a mistake that damaged Mr.
Bush's re-election effort.
In interviews in the last few days, senior campaign and White House officials said the hostility expressed at the convention toward homosexuals, feminists, welfare recipients and women who identify with Hillary Clinton was a result of a strategy that was poorly managed and consequently ran amok.


Company Tries to Fill Holes in Local TV News
A small television production company in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., has already proved that niche news programming can be as promising a business as niche entertainment programming.
Now the company, originally called Our Town Television, but newly christened as Broadcast News Networks, wants to take its niche national.
The company's regional news magazine show, "Broadcast New York," has been successful enough in 13 television markets in New York State to inspire plans for a "Broadcast New England" and even, if the right financial and syndication partners are lined up, a "Broadcast America."


Deborah R. Perry, Joseph Shor
Deborah Renee Perry, the daughter of Dr.
Herbert S. Perry of Glen Cove, L.I., and Arleen West of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Joseph Shor, a son of Alia Hayon of Hatsor, Israel, and the late Moshe Hayon.
Rabbi Prosper Murciano performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Mrs.
Shor, 29 years old, is the graphics coordinator for The New York Times News Service.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a general and vascular surgeon in Glen Cove.
Her mother is a producer for All-Pro Video, a film and video production company in New York.


Europe's Muted Joy, and Its Misgivings  German Power Feared, Sovereignty Treasured
By only narrowly approving a treaty on European political and economic union, French voters may have shown that the end of East-West confrontation has pushed the dream of a united continent further away, rather than bringing it closer to reality.
Supporters of the treaty, signed in the Dutch city of Maastricht in December, had warned that its rejection by France could endanger the economic and political cooperation that the members of the European Community had achieved until now, including a tariff-free single market that will go into effect next year.


Bills and Notes to Be Sold By U.S. Treasury This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill and note markets, beginning with today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
Tomorrow, the agency will conduct a two-year note auction, followed on Wednesday by a five-year note auction.
By late in the day Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.86 percent, and on the six-month bill 2.89 percent.
In when-issued trading, the new two-year note was being offered at a price to yield 3.86 percent, while the five-year note was at 5.41 percent.


Sun City Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


SL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Nuclear Opening in North Korea
International inspectors have now visited North Korea's only known nuclear installations and discovered a nuclear arms program more rudimentary than expected.
The visits suggest that the North's determination to build the Bomb may be flagging, as Roh Tae Woo, South Korea's President, told The Times last week.
But doubts remain in Seoul, Washington and Tokyo.
That's all the more reason for Pyongyang to lay this vexing issue to rest.


Cimmaron Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Starting Over At Hartwick
Officials at Hartwick College in Oneonta, N.Y., were becoming alarmed at the shrinking male population (60 percent of the 1,500 students are women).
So they brought back football after 42 years.
It's not easy just to jump into Division III.
But 80 players showed up this fall, including a 36-year-old former prison guard and a former member of the Soviet Army.


Filling Void Weiss Left In District
When Democratic apparatchiks convene on Wednesday to choose a successor to Representative Ted Weiss, the winner may be the man who came to the most political dinners.
Judging by his girth, Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler has an edge.
But in politics, nothing is certain except death and taxes, as Mr.
Weiss's dying the day before the Democratic primary and the fatal doubts raised by Geraldine A. Ferraro's financial affairs demonstrated last week.
Also, nobody has a lock on an election, not even Mario Biaggi -- the former Congressman who made a sudden medical recovery after being granted a release from Federal prison for health reasons, but failed to persuade Bronx voters that his rival was just as suspect as he was.


Joan Friedman, Charles Blair 3d
Joan Marcy Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin E. Friedman of New York, was married yesterday in Champaign, Ill., to Charles Eugene Blair 3d, a son of Miriam Blair of Vineyard Haven, Mass., and the late Mr.
Blair.
Rabbi Brad L. Bloom officiated at Sinai Temple.
Ms.
Friedman, who is 42 and is keeping her name, is studying for a master's degree in accounting at the University of Illinois.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received master's degrees in art history from the University of London and library service from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior adviser at Dillon, Read &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.


They Are No Longer Giants on Defense
In their first game this season, the Giants allowed 31 points to the San Francisco 49ers.
In their second, they gave up 34 points to the Dallas Cowboys.
In their third game, Monday night against the Bears, their defense might be in trouble again, even though the Bears are not that explosive or even necessarily that good.
The Giants' defense is not what it was in the glory years of the last decade.
It is getting old, individually and as a unit.
Its tackling is sometimes shoddy, and tackling has more to do with intensity than age.


Alpine Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Essay; No More Europhoria
By a margin as slim as a mannequin's waist, France apparently voted "yes" on Sunday to a union of European currencies.
Thus, the country whose leaders invented the Common Market showed how profoundly its people were split about surrendering national sovereignty to German fiscal discipline.
The only way to stop German industry from taking over its competitors, the French had long been told, was to enmesh that Gulliver in a web of Lilliputian bureaucracy -- a form of unaccountable control in which France is pre-eminent.


British Leader Faces Revolt on Europe Union Policy in Own Party
With the treaty on European union having won a narrow endorsement from French voters today, a new battlefront seems certain to open in Britain, where Prime Minister John Major's Government is facing a spreading rebellion over European policy in the ranks of his Conservative Party.
Spurred on by last week's financial turmoil in Britain, which sent the value of the pound tumbling, those skeptical of European integration here say it is now up to them to derail the movement toward European union and drive a British stake through the heart of the treaty, which is awaiting ratification in the House of Commons.
Summit Meeting Called


Barbara Winter, Lawrence Segan
Barbara Winter, a daughter of Maureen Blitman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Leo Winter Jr. of Manalapan, Fla., was married yesterday in New York to Lawrence Michael Segan, a son of Eleanor and Irwin Segan of New York.
Rabbi Peter Weintraub officiated at the Harmonie Club.
The bride is an equity vice president at LaSalle Partners, a corporate real-estate services firm in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the president of Leo Winter Associates, a pharmaceutical research and development company in Manalapan.
Her stepfather, Howard N. Blitman, is the president of the Blitman Building Corporation and the vice chairman of the Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
She is the stepdaughter of Josie Winter.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Says Economy Is Not as Bad as People Think
Hours after his Democratic rival began broadcasting a television commercial accusing him of misjudging Americans' economic pain, President Bush told a national radio audience today that the economy was not nearly as bad as people believed.
In an interview with Rush Limbaugh, the conservative radio talk-show host, Mr.
Bush said that the economy was "poised for a dramatic recovery" and maintained that most people believed otherwise because they paid too much heed to the news media.


Perfumania Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1





Jim Hjelms Private Collections reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


SL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


1989 Memo to Baker Listed Abuses by Iraq but Urged Conciliation
Only a few weeks after the Bush Administration took office in early 1989, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d was presented with a report stating that Iraq was harboring Palestinian terrorists, continuing its chemical and biological weapons buildup and reviving its border dispute with Kuwait, according to a newly declassified State Department document made public today.
But the memo, which came six months before President Bush issued a formal order to forge closer ties with President Saddam Hussein, also urged Mr.
Baker to take a conciliatory stance in his first meeting with a senior Iraqi official a short time later.


Times Editor Named to Lead Alabama Journalism Studies
Paul Delaney, a senior editor at The New York Times, has been named chairman of the journalism department at the University of Alabama.
He will assume the post on Oct. 12.
Mr.
Delaney, 59 years old, has worked at The Times since joining the Washington bureau in 1969 to cover urban affairs.
He was subsequently a correspondent in the Chicago bureau, assistant national editor, deputy national editor and Madrid bureau chief before becoming a senior editor in 1989.


On My Mind; Our German Business
For decades, Western political leaders lived and preached a lie -- that the world had nothing to fear from a unified Germany.
They knew better.
They knew that a unified Germany, shoved into a Europe still groping for the future, would become the most powerful economic nation on the Continent.


Sir Geraint Evans, Welsh Baritone, Is Dead at 70
Sir Geraint Evans, a Welsh baritone who was best known for his portrayals of Falstaff, Figaro and Leporello, died on Saturday at Bronglais Hospital in Aberystwyth, Wales.
He was 70 years old and lived in Aberaeron, on the west coast of Wales.
The Associated Press reported that he died of a heart attack.


CHRONICLE
ARNOLD SCAASI, the designer, has been awarded the Fashion Excellence Award of the Dallas International Apparel Mart, a distinction voted to him by store owners, the press and merchandise managers.
MARY TYLER MOORE is scheduled to present the award to Mr.
Scaasi tonight at a cocktail reception at Mortimer's Restaurant in Manhattan.
Ms.
Moore herself will receive an award from the Dallas group for individual fashion style.


Making Seconds Count for Injured Children
Hanging in neat rows beneath a wallpaper border of cartoon elephants are the tools for saving young lives: tiny tubes to slip into the windpipe of a newborn struggling for air, suction devices to clear clogged noses and mouths, thin hoses to pump the stomach of a toddler who found an open bottle of pills.
In the Children's Emergency Service at Elizabeth General Medical Center, all the equipment is tailored to children, from infants to 15-year-olds.
Pediatric nurses are on duty along with doctors who specialize in pediatric emergency medicine or doctors training to become pediatricians.


Science Accessories Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile; A Primer: How the White House Budget Czar Not Only Survives, but Thrives
So how does Richard G. Darman do it?
In every society, in every age, there are courtiers who possess many enemies, but also bewitching powers that allow them to stay close to the throne.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Media; More News Also Good News For Bush: He Surges on TV
George Bush's stock may still be low in the polls.
But in the secondary market of television, it is more than holding its own.
For the last few weeks, President Bush has succeeded in dominating the news with far more regularity than his opponent, Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Since the Republican convention, not only has the President received substantially more television coverage than the Arkansas Governor, but the tone of his coverage has improved, while the tone of Mr.
Clinton's has declined.
Source of Consolation
Analysts attribute Mr.
Bush's new air strength to a more aggressive campaign that has put the power of incumbency to good use -- one week producing hurricane aid for Florida, the next saving military jobs in Texas.
At the same time, though, they say, Mr.
Clinton has helped the President to command the cameras by adopting a play-it-safe media strategy.


Classical Music in Review
Sungsic Yang  Violinist Merkin Concert Hall
The host of young virtuosos descending on the concert world has increased by one.
Sungsic Yang, winner of the 1988 Carl Flesch Violin Competition, made a strong New York debut on Saturday night, but he did not set himself apart from the crowd.
The 26-year-old Korean had complete command of his instrument, and produced an unusually tense, pure tone; as an interpreter, however, he did not display unusual depth or conviction.


Simms Provides The Spark
To Phil Simms after tonight's 27-14 victory over the Bears, it wasn't so much that the Giants' offense stayed sharp after its 28-point second half against the Dallas Cowboys a week ago Sunday as that it stayed sharp after last week's practice sessions.
"We practiced so hard, so alert," the Giants quarterback said.
"We even practiced with emotion."


An Intellectual Amid Nazi Neanderthals
To the Editor:
The speculation on whether Werner Heisenserg was a bungler or a traitor to his Nazi masters (Science Times, Sept. 1) gives us only these two choices.
However, all available evidence indicates he was neither.
Heisenberg established his reputation as one of this century's greatest theoretical physicists long before the Nazi regime came to power in Germany.
That Germany did not succeed in developing nuclear weapons during World War II does not prove Heisenberg's incompetence at all.


By Design; Easing Into Fall
This is dilemma-dressing season.
Today may be the first day of fall, but this time of year usually still feels like midsummer.
Anyone with a sense of style longs to be wearing something evocative of the new season.
But plunging into new fall woolens feels and looks wrong.
There are, though, ways to be stylish and still comfortable.
By all means, put on one of your new longer skirts.
What's a little more fabric, whiffing about your legs?
Besides, the skirt probably has a slit somewhere.
And go ahead, wear your new platform-sole shoes.
New shoes are never comfortable at first, anyway, so start breaking them in.
Chances are they are suede, but suede is now considered a year-round material.
Clothing in any cool fabric is fine -- even cotton -- but try to stick to autumnal shades.
Black is best.


Fischer So Far: Ups, Downs and Ups
After the first half of Bobby Fischer's exhibition chess match with Boris Spassky in Sveti Stevan, Yugoslavia, there is still no definitive answer to the question that has been in the background from the start: Can the American genius play top-flight chess despite a 20-year layoff from public competition?
Fischer is winning the $5 million series by 5-2, with 4 draws, which don't count; 10 victories are needed to win the match.
But the quality of his play is not marvelous, as it was when he won the world championship in Iceland in the summer of 1972.
Probably no one expected it to be.
But how should it be assessed?


Electro Scientific Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Parking Made Easier On 2 Muslim Feasts
Mayor David N. Dinkins sought yesterday to apply his ideal of New York City as a "gorgeous mosaic" to the mundane world of alternate-side-of-the-street parking.
The Mayor endorsed a proposal to include two three-day Muslim feasts among the religious holidays during which the city suspends the parking rules that require owners to move their cars for street cleaning.
A bill now before the City Council would add the two holidays -- Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha -- to the list of 22 Jewish and Christian holidays for which the rules are suspended.


5 Rutgers Players Draw Suspensions
Five Rutgers football players were suspended indefinitely today for "violation of the team code of conduct," the school said.
Coach Doug Graber said defensive backs Jay Bellamy, Tim Geckeler and Malik Jackson, defensive end Jim Guarnera and guard Kareem Williams will sit out at least this Saturday's game at Navy.


Market Place; Many Risky Bargains in European Stocks
Like one-bedroom condos in Manhattan, European stocks can be had at bargain prices.
But buyers should question some of the bargains unless they are planning to stick around a long time, analysts say.
France's half-hearted approval Sunday of the European unity treaty hardly lessened the risk that declining currencies will leave American investors with losses even if European stocks themselves rise.
And with Britain stuck in a recession, France barely growing and Germany slowing down, higher stock prices are no sure bet.


Bosnia Chief Defends Ethnic Diversity
Referring to the diverse ethnic makeup of his country as a "a living, breathing Jackson Pollack painting," the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina in his address to the General Assembly outlined a plan today to end the war in his country.
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia and Herzegovina said it was impossible to designate purely ethnic regions and denounced any plan to resolve the conflict that would reward "ethnic cleansing."


Q&amp;A
Glowing Shrimp
Q.
Some shrimp I tried to feed the cat glowed in the dark.
Is that why the cat wouldn't eat it?
A.
"Yes," said Dr.
Matthew Grober, assistant professor of zoology at the University of Idaho at Moscow.
"It probably would have gotten sick if it had eaten the shrimp."


Italy Pleased by French Vote but Faces Own Battle Over Harsh Austerity Plan
Italians greeted news of the French vote in favor of the European Community union treaty with relief and hyperbole today, but beyond the hoopla lay the sense that if the French authorities had won their political campaign, Italy's economic battle had barely been joined.
"I heaved a sigh of relief," said Prime Minister Giuliano Amato.
"Forty years of work would have gone up in smoke otherwise."


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed J.R.
Reid, forward, to a multiyear contract extension.
Continental Basketball Association
ALBANY PATROONS -- Traded Greg Grant, guard, to the Rapid City Thrillers for Michael Curry and Marcus Stokes, forwards.
Signed Andrew Adderley, Ken McFadden and Sean Gay, guards.


Status Quo in Haiti Slips Into Mere Stagnation
When 18 international human-rights observers began arriving here this month, many Haitians welcomed what they hoped would be the mission's calming effect after the year of fear and violence that followed the overthrow of the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
But with the deployment of the team from the Organization of American States, few in Haiti, be they the President's supporters or his bitter foes, expressed faith that diplomacy alone could bring a return to democracy.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the former Soviet Union's foreign debt referred incorrectly to Canada's Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister.
He is Donald Mazankowski.


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CutCo Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH  In an interview yesterday the the radio personality Rush Limbaugh in New York City.
"You asked me why people are upset. The deficits have been big under me. Why? Because we paid in this savings and loan mess for excesses. People -- private businesses did too much. They went out and loaned money that they shouldn't have loaned. And the taxpayer ends up getting burned, except I vowed we must protect every single depositor, and we've done that. Not a bailout from some institution. Protect the depositor.


P.O.W.'S WERE LEFT, TOP AIDES BELIEVED
Two former Defense Secretaries in the Nixon Administration said today that they believed in 1973 at the time American forces were being withdrawn from Vietnam that some American prisoners were still in Vietnam and Laos and were not returned by the Communist authorities.
Opening a week of sworn testimony by top Nixon Administration officials before the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, the two Secretaries -- Melvin R. Laird and James R. Schlesinger -- said it was common knowledge among officials that Hanoi had not completed its promised accounting for servicemen known to be alive in captivity, but who did not return in prisoner exchanges.  [ Excerpts, page A6. ]


Birthdays: a Matter Of Life and Death
AN approaching birthday seems to prolong life in women and precipitate death in men, according to the largest study ever done on psychological factors and time of death.
The study, based on 2,745,149 deaths from natural causes, found that women were more likely to die in the week after their birthdays than in any other week during the year, while men tended to die shortly before their birthdays.


Unions Must Once Again Go On to Organize; Lowell's Aristocracy
To the Editor:
Your Labor Day editorial on the workers of Lowell, Mass., and the museum dedicated to them, is a warmly deserved tribute.
However, the quotation from Charles Cowley, a local historian writing in 1856, is incorrect in stating there was "no aristocracy, either of wealth or talent, or of rank or position," adding: "It is simply a colony of mechanics." "A proud boast," you comment, "and warranted." But not true.
Any visitor to Lowell can see the mansions of Andover Street, proudly built and lived in by the mill owners and managers.
One can still talk to the graduates of Rogers Hall, the private school for the daughters of Andover Street.
My great-grandfather owned the Lowell Bleacheries and lived on Andover Street.
My mother went to Rogers Hall and on to Smith College.
She always loved Lowell and was proud of its renascence.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Angry at Bush, Republican Contributors Are Helping Clinton
Kathryn G. Thompson was a precinct worker for Barry Goldwater in 1964, a staunch supporter of Ronald Reagan in the 1980's, a Bush delegate at the 1988 Republican National Convention and a member of Team 100, the elite contributors to the Republican Party who each gave more than $100,000.
Last Thursday Ms.
Thompson gave a luncheon in Costa Mesa, Calif., for 800 mostly Republican women to raise nearly $100,000 for the Presidential campaign and to honor a woman that Ms.
Thompson has come to admire: Hillary Clinton.


2 of 5 Officers Plead Guilty in Drug Ring
Two of five New York City police officers arrested in an undercover investigation in Suffolk County pleaded guilty today to reduced drug charges.
Kevin Hembury, 27 years old, and Philip Carlucci, 30, both of Stony Brook, pleaded guilty to attempted conspiracy to distribute drugs before Judge George F. X. McInerney of Suffolk County.


Volkswagen Sales Gain
Europe's biggest car maker, Volkswagen A.G., said today that its worldwide deliveries rose by 2.8 percent, to 2.38 million vehicles, in the first eight months of this year.
Including Skoda, which will be consolidated by the VW group this year, deliveries fell in Germany by 3.6 percent, to 862,000 in the January-to-August period.
Deliveries in all of Western Europe rose by 2.6 percent, to 1.77 million vehicles, and deliveries in the United States dropped by 18.2 percent, to 64,000.


Unions Mujst Once Again Go On to Organize; The Marble Mill
To the Editor:
"The Mills Weren't Made of Marble" (editorial, Sept. 7), your Labor Day commentary on the Lowell National Historical Park, which has recycled a mill into a museum, portrays the harsh lives of textile workers in the 1800's.
"These mills," you write, "were not, like those in the old folk song, made out of marble nor the machines made out of gold."
I wrote "The Mill Was Made of Marble," a song about the dream of a textile worker, in 1947, when I was on the staff of the C.I.O.
Textile Workers Union, so it is not as old as you imply.


COMPANY NEWS;
Serv-Air Inc., a unit of E-Systems Inc. of Dallas, said yesterday that it had been awarded an Army contract initially valued at $100 million but expected eventually to exceed $600 million.
Serv-Air will provide maintenance, repair, logistics support, systems engineering and system modifications of Army, Air Force and Navy helicopters, avionics systems and communications equipment for the Special Operations Command.
The command will operate primarily from the Lexington Army Depot in Kentucky but also from other sites that include Pensacola and Hurlburt Field, Fla; Fort Huachuca, Ariz.; and Fort Bragg, N.C.
Serv-Air, based in Greenville, Tex., is involved in aircraft and logistics programs, operations and maintenance services.
E-Systems is a developer and producer of electronics systems and products for the military.


Miller Gains President From Anheuser-Busch
John N. MacDonough is switching beers.
The Philip Morris Companies named Mr.
MacDonough, a top marketing executive at the Anheuser-Busch Companies, as president and chief operating officer of its Miller Brewing Company division yesterday.


Integrated Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Rock; An Articulate Misfit With Rockabilly Sideburns
For a full five minutes, the audience at the Paramount on Friday night screamed, stood on chairs, filled the aisles in a rush to the front and tossed gladioluses toward the stage.
And Morrissey hadn't even made his entrance.
Morrissey, whose unused first name is Steven, commands one of rock's most fervent cult followings, including, it seems, every sensitive suburban teen-ager with a stylish haircut.
Since he emerged in 1983 from Manchester, England, as singer and lyricist of the Smiths, he has been the voice of the articulate misfit, the painfully self-conscious, long-suffering outsider who feels every slight and hates himself for caring.
He is the monarch of mope-rock, imploring, "Does anybody feel the way I do?"


DURR-FILLAUER TENDER IS COMPLETED
The Bergen Brunswig Corporation said that it had completed its $33-a-share cash tender offer for Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc. after 95.7 percent of Durr-Fillauer's common shares were tendered.
Bergen Brunswig, the nation's second-largest medical products wholesaler, said about 11.5 million Durr-Fillauer shares, including 438,487 shares subject to guarantees of delivery, had been tendered.
Durr-Fillauer stock closed up 12.5 cents at $32.875 in over-the-counter trading yesterday.
Bergen closed down 25 cents, to $18.75, on the American Stock Exchange.


Pepsi-Cola Moves to Slim Top Management Structure
The Pepsi-Cola Company removed two layers of management in a move announced yesterday to streamline its organizational structure.
The company said that the reorganization would not lead to any layoffs.
It said the change was designed to remove layers of supervision and make the headquarters staff more responsive to customers.
Pepsi-Cola is a subsidiary of Pepsico Inc., which is based in Purchase, N.Y.


COMPANY NEWS
ALASKA AIRLINES INC., Seattle, announced that it is restructuring its aircraft equipment order with McDonnell Douglas Corp., from 20 to 10 MD-90 airplanes.
ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP., has been awarded a four-year contract by the California Department of Health Services to provide Medi-Cal medical claims processing services for the approximately 4.5 million eligible Medi-Cal beneficiaries.
FANNIE MAY CANDY INC., Chicago, announced that its parent company Archibald Candy Corp. has completed the acquisition of Fanny Farmer Candy Shops Inc. from Chocamerican Inc., the U.S. holding company of Midial, S.A. of France.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.
SIKORSKY AIRCRAFT, Stratford, Conn., said it will begin negotiations immediately to provide 75 Black Hawk helicopters for the Turkish Armed Forces.


General Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Mounds of Baseball Statistics On a Disk
THE unlikely name of Phil Weintraub comes up during a baseball trivia discussion.
You pop the Total Baseball disk into your CD-ROM drive, select Browse from the menu bar, pick Subjects from the drop-down menu, type the first few letters of his last name -- "Weint" differentiates him from Weir and Weingartner -- choose Player Register or Fielding Register, and there are his statistics: Philip (Mickey) Weintraub, who played in the National League from 1933 to 1945.
His best year, battingwise, was 1934, when he hit .351 for the New York Giants.
Of course, not many baseball discussions break out within reach of a personal computer, particularly one equipped with a CD-ROM drive.
For most fans of the game and electronics, the Big League Baseball Encyclopedia, the calculator-sized device produced by Franklin, is far more convenient, as discussed here last April.


Shelter and Services: A Radical Shift in Aiding New York's Homeless
Since the early 1980's, when a reluctant municipal government first took on the burden of housing people who did not have a place to call home, New York City has defined its policies against a backdrop of vast social needs, limited money to spend, and mounting pressure from the courts and state and Federal regulators.
These demanding, and often competing, pressures helped shape the decision announced yesterday by Mayor David N. Dinkins to overhaul the city's shelter system.
Under the plan, by April the city will scrap the emergency units through which most homeless families entered the city's sprawling shelter apparatus.
The current system will be replaced with four new entry centers, which would assess each family's needs and devise social services to help them before placing them in housing.


Church Panel to Investigate Sexual Abuse Charges
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin, the Archbishop of Chicago, named a nine-member board yesterday to investigate all future charges of sexual abuse of minors by priests in the nation's second-largest diocese.
Cardinal Bernardin said the independent board, which will have a majority of lay members, was the main feature of new policies intended to rid the diocese of sexual misconduct.


Lessons From a Hurricane: It Pays Not to Gouge
The price of a sheet of exterior plywood -- a coveted commodity for patching up hurricane-battered houses -- was actually reduced on Sept. 14 at Home Depot stores supplying south Dade County, where Hurricane Andrew destroyed or damaged more than 75,000 homes.
And since the hurricane struck on Aug. 24, the price of plywood at Home Depot stores in South Florida has increased only about half as much as the market price for plywood.


Horizon Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Updated Study Planned On Arts as Industry
A landmark study of the economic impact of the arts on the New York-New Jersey region is to be updated, its three sponsors have announced.
The 1983 study, titled "Arts as an Industry," showed that arts-related businesses and cultural institutions in the region generated 117,000 jobs and a total of $5.6 billion in economic activity a year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Draft Issue: A Bomb in the Making?
At the Republican National Convention, vendors in the American Spirit Pavilion sold a bumper sticker that read: "Once you have pulled the pin from Mr. Hand Grenade, he is no longer your friend."
This year may be a preview of how the draft issue could become the Mr.
Grenade of Presidential politics for 1992 and future elections involving those who did or did not serve in Vietnam.
It has all the makings of an explosive generational issue.


Head Rolls To Calm A 'Tonight' Crisis
NBC moved to resolve a crisis on the "Tonight" show yesterday by dismissing the show's executive producer, Helen Kushnick.
In a statement, NBC said that it felt a change was needed in the show's management and that it continued to be pleased with the performance of the host, Jay Leno.


Leon Jacobson, 81, Physician for Team That Built A-Bomb
Dr.
Leon Jacobson, who was the chief doctor for the research team that created the atomic bomb, died on Sunday at the University of Chicago's Bernard Mitchell Hospital.
He was 81 years old.
He died of complications from lung cancer, said John Easton, a spokesman for the university.


These Redbirds Are Migrating
The Redbirds of the Class A New York-Penn League will move from Hamilton, Ontario, to Glens Falls for one year before settling in New Jersey in 1994, the league president said today.
New Jersey's Sussex County has been chosen as the permanent home for the team, an affiliate of the St.
Louis Cardinals, but the Redbirds needed a temporary home while a new ball park is built, Leo Pinckney, the league president, said.


Espey Manufacturing &amp; Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Criminal Gangs Muscle In on Indian Politics
As vehicles waited for a train to pass a railroad crossing near here recently, a group of gunmen drove up to a car and fired at an opposition politician, Mahinder Singh Bhatti, killing him instantly.
The unidentified gunmen also killed an associate of the lawmaker and wounded his guard before escaping.
Politicians say the killing of Mr.
Bhatti, a senior leader of the Janata Dal party in Uttar Pradesh state, who was accused by state officials of having links to Indian criminal gangs, reflected the increasingly important role that criminals and their associates are now playing in politics in India.


Game 3 Isn't Strike 3, Says Coslet
With more than three quarters of the National Football League season left to play and his team listing from three consecutive losses, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet says he will stay the course and keep bailing until he can fix the problems.
The Jets were battered by San Francisco on Sunday, losing by 31-14 in their home opener at Giants Stadium.
That was worse than what Pittsburgh did to them the week before, which was worse than what the Falcons did to them the week before that.
As the losses have mounted, the Jets have searched for solutions and have found there are no easy answers.
Coslet, in his third season with the team, continues to keep his head, refusing to panic.


U.S. Also Guilty In Money Crisis, Europeans Say
After a week of hearing American officials complain about high German interest rates, European officials struck back today, saying the weak dollar and low American rates also contributed heavily to the crisis in world currency markets.
"Interest rates in Germany are too high, and U.S. rates are too low," said Spain's Finance Minister, Carlos Solchaga.
Mr.
Solchaga made his assertion that the Federal Reserve should raise interest rates at a news conference this morning in his capacity as chairman of the chief policy-making committee of the International Monetary Fund.


Syncor International reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Support Grows For Vitamins As Roadblocks To Heart Disease
TO the delight of heart disease researchers, a provocative theory linking vitamin consumption to protection from heart disease is holding up and gathering strength.
Although many questions still remain, experts are growing increasingly optimistic that they may have the key to a simple and safe preventative and treatment that could save tens of thousands of people from heart attacks and death each year.
The theory has its roots in a puzzling question: how can cholesterol, a substance that is a constituent of every cell's membranes and that is completely inert when mixed with cells in the laboratory, elicit bumps and lesions on the slick linings of artery walls?


Concrete Repairs Its Own Cracks
SCIENTISTS are developing a type of concrete that can repair its own cracks.
The concrete's healing components are coated, hollow fibers that are filled with specific chemicals and distributed throughout the cement.
When the self-healing concrete cracks, it breaks open the stiff coating of a nearby fiber that then releases its chemicals, usually adhesive or polymer compounds, to fill in the area, said Dr.
Carolyn Dry, who designed the new concrete and is an associate professor of architecture at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
BankAmerica said it would acquire $7.5 billion of deposits from First Gibraltar Savings, a Dallas-based savings and loan association, and First Union said it would buy Dominion Bankshares, a $9.4 billion banking company based in Roanoke, Va.  [ Page D1. ]
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company earned more than $1 billion in pretax profits last year, Investment Dealers' Digest reported, citing a memorandum the private firm filed with the S.E.C. in connection with issuing $200 million of debt securities.  [ D1. ]
Microsoft was sharply criticized by three top computer industry executives at an industry conference in California.  [ D3. ]
I.B.M. announced 12 new models in its PS/2 personal computer line and expanded customer service.  [ D3. ]
Wall Street applauded Primerica's deal to buy 27 percent of Travelers.
Travelers' stock surged $3.125, to $20.625.  [ D3. ]
Philip Morris named John N. MacDonough, a top marketing executive at a rival, Anheuser-Busch, as president and chief operating officer of its Miller Brewing Company division.  [ D4. ]
Pepsi-Cola streamlined its organizational structure, removing two layers of management.  [ D4. ]
Nike's first-quarter profits rose 7.1 percent, and its stock rose 75 cents, to $76.375.  [ D4. ] International
The French franc, the pound, the lira and the peseta dropped relative to the German mark in a clear sign that France's narrow approval of the European unification treaty on Sunday has not ended the economic upheaval of the last week.  [ D1. ]
European officials contended that the weak dollar and low American interest rates contributed to the crisis in currency markets.
The Bush Administration disagreed.  [ A17. ]
European leaders' soothing words, calculated to calm edgy voters and edgier financial markets, will not soon repair the trauma suffered by the European currency system.  [ A17. ]
Trade negotiations between Washington and Beijing to conclude a pact by Oct. 10 are expected to be only the beginning of years of tough trade talks for China.  [ D27. ] The Economy
A bill to regulate cable television prices moved forward as Senate opponents agreed to a vote today.  [ D2. ]
A growing cadre of bankers and and executives are supporting the Clinton-Gore campaign with money and endorsements.  [ A24. ] Markets
New York City plans an issue of its popular "mini bonds" with a face amount of $5,000 for small investors in October.
Prices fell in the Treasury market.  [ D23. ]
Big Board short sales were at a record between mid-August and mid-September, showing bearish sentiment among some professional investors.  [ D18. ]
Stock prices slipped in light, cautious trading dominated by uncertainty over Europe's proposed monetary union.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 6.22 points to close at 3,320.83.  [ D6. ]
Natural-gas prices continued surging, with the contract for October delivery up 12.4 cents to $2.452 for 1,000 cubic feet.  [ D24. ]  Both the dollar and gold fell.  [ D24. ] Today's Columns
European stocks appear to be bargains, but analysts caution that a decline in European currencies against the dollar could offset gains for American investors.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
With the huge military industry shrinking, the idled factories and 300,000 lost jobs seem to be inflicting permanent damage on the American economy.
Louis Uchitelle: Business Scene.  [ D2. ]
Marketers are going the oldies-but-goodies route, with second- chance promotions for brands like Breck hair care and Johnnie Walker Scotch.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D25. ]


Glimpse of Goldman, Sachs: Pretax Profit of $1.15 Billion
A published report yesterday confirmed what many have long believed about Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company: the private investment banking firm is highly profitable.
Indeed, it earned more than $1 billion in pretax profits last year.
The company's five-year financial history was published in yesterday's Investment Dealers' Digest, which said the rare glimpse came to light through a memorandum that Goldman, Sachs was required to file as part of an effort to raise $200 million through an issue of debt securities.


Classical Music in Review
The Western Wind Vocal Ensemble  Merkin Concert Hall
Topical programs have long been the strength of the Western Wind Vocal Ensemble, a group with a seemingly boundless repertory, or at least a boundless curiosity about programming possibilities.
For its first concert of the season, on Sunday evening, the six singers of the Western Wind joined forces with a group of musicians who played exotic ancient instruments to commemorate the 500th anniversary of the expulsion of the Jews from Spain with a program of Sephardic music.


A New Mac Family for Your Home
APPLE COMPUTER INC. has introduced a new family of low-cost Macintosh computers for use at home.
The new Macs are called Performas, and they are the vanguard of what Apple executives say will be a series of "consumer" products aimed at first-time buyers.
The Performas will be sold only in department stores, office supply stores and consumer electronics stores, but not in traditional computer stores.
The segmented distribution of the new models is a risky step for Apple, as it can cause confusion.
A shopper who inquired about the Performas at his local computer store last week was told by an insistent sales clerk that the computers did not exist.


David Bathurst, 54, a Former Christie's Chairman
David Bathurst, a former chairman of Christie's who resigned in 1985 after admitting he had falsified auction results, died in Scotland on Sunday.
He was 54 years old and lived in London.
He had a heart attack while shooting on the moors in Scotland, said Christopher Burge, the president of Christie's in New York.


CHRONICLE
The culinary gossip mills on both sides of the Atlantic have worked overtime this summer on the matter of who will replace DANIEL BOULUD as executive chef at Le Cirque.
SIRIO MACCIONI, the owner of the restaurant, spent much of the past few months in Europe considering chefs from Girardet in Switzerland, L'Auberge de l'Ill in Illhaeusern, France, Louis XV in Monte Carlo, L'Ambroisie in Paris and a host of other highly regarded candidates.
The envelope, please.
And the job goes to SYLVAIN PORTAY, 31 years old, a native of Evian-les-Bains, France, who for the past five years has been a chef de cuisine at Louis XV in Monte Carlo, working with ALAIN DUCASSE.
"He was the chef when Ducasse got his three stars," Mr.
Maccioni said.
"Now we will see how he can handle cooking in New York. It's not the same as Monte Carlo."


P.O.W.'S WERE LEFT, TOP AIDES BELIEVED
Two former Defense Secretaries in the Nixon Administration said today that they believed in 1973 at the time American forces were being withdrawn from Vietnam that some American prisoners were still in Vietnam and Laos and were not returned by the Communist authorities.
Opening a week of sworn testimony by top Nixon Administration officials before the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, the two Secretaries -- Melvin R. Laird and James R. Schlesinger -- said it was common knowledge among officials that Hanoi had not completed its promised accounting for servicemen known to be alive in captivity, but who did not return in prisoner exchanges.  [ Excerpts, page A6. ]


Extinct Bird and Kiwi
The extinct moa and the modern kiwi, both flightless birds and both inhabitants of New Zealand, have long been considered close cousins that evolved along parallel tracks.
But a new study of the genes of both birds suggests that kiwis are more closely related to such Australian and African birds as ostriches than they are to New Zealand moas.
The discovery, reported by an international team of microbiologists in the current issue of The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, is likely to force a reassessment of the evolution of flightless birds.
Dr.
Alan Cooper of Victoria University in Wellington, New Zealand, and colleagues in the United States, France and Germany, extracted a mitochondrial gene (12S rRNA) from carcasses of four species of moas and 12 species of other flightless birds to make their comparisons.


David Bodian, 82, Leading Force In Development of Polio Vaccines
Dr.
David Bodian, a medical scientist and teacher whose work helped lay the groundwork for the Salk and Sabin polio vaccines, died Friday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 82 years old and lived in Baltimore.
He died of Parkinson's disease, said Johns Hopkins University, with which Dr.
Bodian had been associated since 1939.


SciMed Life Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lori Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Observer; No Afford in This Future
Susan T. of Amsterdam Avenue is interested in "affordable housing." Her curiosity was piqued by Donald Trump a few months back when he was talking about one of those grandiose many-thousand-unit housing projects that engage the world's Trumps.
At that time Mr.
Trump said that, if the public would subsidize it, he would include "affordable housing" in this Babylon planned for Manhattan's West Side.
Just a moment, my good Trump, said Susan T. (Here I paraphrase her letter to me.) What's this with the "affordable housing"?


Continent Weighs Hopes and Fears About Having One Big Central Bank
Like squabbling parents anxious not to disturb the children, European officials unhinged by Europe's sudden currency crisis have lowered their voices.
But soothing words calculated to calm edgy voters and edgier financial markets will not soon repair the trauma of a week that began with the fracturing of the European currency system and ended with French voters approving by the narrowest of margins a single currency for Europe.
The delay may not be entirely a bad thing.
For while the financial follies undermined prospects for a speedy transition to a common currency controlled by a common central bank, the crisis itself was precipitated by the model for that vision -- Germany's very independent Bundesbank.
And skeptics are now in a better position to force an open debate on whether democratic Europe can afford to surrender its economic fate to the hands of a few unelected central bankers -- or, indeed, whether it can afford not to.
Controlling the Flow
Central banks, like the Bank of France and the Bank of Japan, are in charge of their national supplies of money.
They may not actually print it: in the modern world, money largely consists of deposits in checking accounts.
But they can effectively control how much is available to borrow, and at what interest rate.
And that in turn has enormous influence on the demand for everything from refrigerators to shopping malls.


2 Gambinos Are Seized In Florida
Ending an intense manhunt, law-enforcement officers crashed through the door of a secluded motel suite in South Florida late Sunday night and arrested two men reputed to be members of John Gotti's crime family, who had jumped bail of $5 million in Manhattan three weeks ago.
The two brothers, John and Joseph Gambino, who are distant cousins of the late Carlo Gambino, a former head of the Gambino family, were taken unarmed and without a fight at 11:45 P.M. and are expected to be returned to face an array of racketeering, drug trafficking and murder charges in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


Politics; Seeking to Fill Weiss's Shoes
BELLA S. ABZUG, 72
The former Congresswoman, has a big advantage: she survived the county committee selection process twice before.
But she has not represented the West Side as an elected official for 15 years.
As a result, whatever hold she might have on county committee members may stem more from sentimentality than from political loyalty.
Consequently, Ms.
Abzug and her rivals agree that her chances of returning to Congress would be much better if the choice was left to the voters, not to party functionaries.
RONNIE M. ELDRIDGE, 61
The popular Councilwoman, with deep political roots on the West Side, is a former party district leader who was director of the state Division For Women under Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Perhaps even more than Ms.
Abzug, Ms.
Eldridge would have an edge if the selection were made by popular vote.
She is regarded as a second choice of many county committee members and hopes to emerge as the coalition candidate -- and the one woman -- who can block Mr.
Nadler.


Rescuing An Orphan From Peril By the Sea
BOB SCHOELKOPF and his wife, Sheila Dean, happily packed their camper here a couple of Saturdays ago.
A week of carefree wanderings around Maine's rugged beauty was near, their first vacation in 12 years.
The phone rang.
Delaware calling.
Not good. (Think about it. When's the last time you got good news in a phone call from Delaware?)


2 Big Banks Set Plans To Expand
Continuing the industry trend toward fewer but larger banks, the BankAmerica Corporation announced plans yesterday to acquire $7.5 billion of deposits from First Gibraltar Savings, a Dallas-based savings and loan, and the First Union Corporation said it would buy Dominion Bankshares, a $9.4 billion banking company based in Roanoke, Va.
Both BankAmerica, which operates large banks in seven states, and First Union, which will now have large banks in six states, are old hands at acquiring other companies.
Analysts expect them to move quickly to improve the profits of their new acquisitions by cutting costs.
Each bank has smaller operations in other states as well.


Business Scene; The Mothball Era In Arms Industry
THE Lockheed Corporation's factory complex in Burbank, Calif., is nearly empty now.
With military work declining in the post-cold-war era, Lockheed shifted warplane production to newer plants to keep them busy.
The most talked-about activity at the nearly deserted Burbank complex takes place in a corner of an otherwise unused building: a group of companies -- potential parts suppliers for a future electric car -- have borrowed floor space to assemble the sort of car they would like to help manufacture.
Across America, weapons factories stand empty or partly empty.
Some, like the Lockheed complex in Burbank, date back to World War II and are no longer suitable for conversion to modern production of civilian products.
But others are new, like the $100 million California plant that the Rockwell International Corporation built to produce the B1-B bomber, which has been canceled.
Together with thousands of former employees, the old and the new are in effect mothballed.


Top '92 Horse? No One Can Hold the Lead.
Woody Stephens, the senior eminence of American trainers, knows a Horse of the Year when he spots one.
But he stood at Belmont Park yesterday, furrowed his brow and admitted that he hadn't spotted one yet in 1992.
"Not even after all those big races they ran here over the weekend," he said.
"But maybe it's just as well. They keep beating each other, and we won't know who's Horse of the Year until somebody wins the big one in the Breeders' Cup. And maybe that's the way it should be."


Lincoln Center Appoints Directors for 2 Departments
Lincoln Center appointed new directors in two departments yesterday.
Jane S. Moss, a freelance arts consultant who has worked for several musical and theatrical organizations, is to become vice president for programming on Nov. 2.
And David Rivel, the director of executive projects at Lincoln Center, is to become vice president for marketing and communications.
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, presented their nominations to the board last week, and the appointments were confirmed at a board meeting yesterday.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Big East
Parity is the order of the day in the Big East.
The days of domination by the University of Connecticut or Seton Hall are in the past.
Schools like St.
John's, Pittsburgh and Villanova are making a strong bid for the conference title this year - and the automatic berth to the national tournament that goes with it.


Corrections
The Weather Report on Sept. 12, 13 and 14 misstated the water levels recorded in the New York City reservoirs on Sept. 11, and misstated the normal figure for the day.
The reservoirs were 74.3 percent of capacity on Sept. 11.; normal for that day is 78.9 percent.


Artra Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


With Office Space Glut, Philadelphia Is Sour on Proposed Federal Building
Five years ago, when new office buildings seemed to be rising on every downtown corner here, business leaders cheered the Federal Government's proposal to build a huge office tower that would consolidate Federal workers now scattered in different buildings and, in the process, create construction jobs and spruce up a dreary part of town.
But as the local economy has soured, so has the enthusiasm for the project.
With a 17.5 percent vacancy rate in the city's downtown office buildings, real estate experts and urban specialists now say that the last thing Philadelphia needs is a new Federal office building.
The city and taxpayers would be better served, they say, by Government leasing of some of the surplus space available at deeply discounted prices.


No Headline
The very existence of the European Monetary System is in doubt.
WILLIAM LEDWARD, an economist in London.  [ D8:2. ]


Bridge
When a suit is blocked, beginners are taught to unblock it as quickly as possible.
But on occasion the converse is true, and the suit provides a vital line of communication.
On the diagramed deal, reported by Dave Treadwell of Wilmington, Del., from a Regional Swiss Teams in Hunt Valley, Md., in August, it was the defenders who should have been doing the unblocking.
Sitting South was Marty Nelson of Annapolis, Md., and he took a shot at three no-trump after East opened with a weak two-bid in spades.
After a heart lead he held up his ace until the second round and worked on clubs, starting with the king.
East gained the lead twice in clubs, first with the ace and later with the ten, and attacked spades each time: too late.
South cashed two club winners and reached this ending:
[ DIAGRAM ]
This rare and elegant position is a double stepping-stone squeeze.
When the last club was led, at least one defender had to keep two diamonds.
South could then cash the diamond king and give the lead to the appropriate defender, scoring the diamond ace in dummy at the finish to make a game that was defeated in the replay.


CHRONICLE
In case you didn't know it, skiers, you are one group that ought to be thinking about global warming.
That, in part, forms the basis of a marketing theme for a new ski model by Lunatic Fringe, a division of K2 Skis.
Lunatick Fringe says it will donate 5 percent of the net wholesale price of each pair of skis sold to three groups supporting the preservation of the world's rain forests and indigenous people: Rainforest Action Network, Cultural Survival and Africa NGO Environment Network. (Suggested retail price of the skis is $535.)


Earnings of Nike Increased By 7.1% in the First Quarter
Nike Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter profits rose 7.1 percent, but heavy spending on advertising during the Olympics caused profits to fall below investors' expectations.
Nike's stock price dropped $2 immediately after the earnings were released, but as the day progressed, it rebounded as investors focused on Nike's high level of orders for the spring.
The shares closed on the New York Stock Exchange at $76.375, a gain of 75 cents.
Nike executives defended the heavy Olympic advertising spending, saying the results are already evident.
"Our U.S. business was robust during the critical back-to-school season just completed, and worldwide futures orders for spring delivery were at record levels," said, Philip H. Knight, the chairman of Nike.
The company sold one million pairs of $65 basketball shoes during the back-to-school season, making it the nation's best-selling shoe for the season.


He's Bigger Than the Average Fan
Who is Tony Hoty and why has he invaded our living rooms?
Hoty, the star of CBS's new pro football promotional campaign, is the regular-guy actor who delivers spiels about this or next week's games, who talks back to Ray Handley, and whose tag line is always, "I'm a big fan."


Ccair Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Beyond Georgia's Strife, an Economy That Is Coming Apart
Georgia's extravagant political and ethnic problems disguise what may be a more fundamental economic crisis, which is only worsened by instability and strife.
Georgian officials are so agitated by the threats to the integrity of the state, from a continuing insurrection by the deposed President, Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, to secessionist efforts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, that it is difficult to get them even to discuss the economy.


Wall St. Likes Travelers' Move to Sell a Stake
Wall Street responded with applause yesterday to the weekend announcement that the Primerica Corporation had agreed to buy 27 percent of the Travelers Corporation.
Such a deal would give Travelers a wave of new cash, as well as a vote of confidence from an outside investor.
The stock of Hartford-based Travelers was up sharply yesterday, rising $3.125, to $20.625.
Analysts said the arrangement would put the giant multiline insurer in a better position to contend with weakness in the commercial real estate market and would reassure rating agencies and wary customers of the company's long-term strength.
As for Primerica, its stock rose 25 cents, to $41.125, on the Big Board.


Chairman Quits At Telecom
The Telecom Corporation, a Dallas-based maker of equipment for the food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries, announced yesterday that Thomas M. Gaubert had resigned as chairman, chief executive and a director effective last Friday.
The company said the resignation had been prompted by recent Federal indictments involving Mr.
Gaubert.
Larry Marek, a company spokesman, would not provide details of the indictments yesterday, saying the charges were of a personal nature and did not relate to the company


Inquiry Held Into Fight With Officer
A grand jury is investigating a fight last Wednesday on a Brooklyn subway train involving a Brooklyn teen-ager and an off-duty police officer who was returning from a raucous protest at City Hall.
Yunas Mohamed, 18 years old, of Bushwick, was arrested on charges that he slashed the face of Officer John Coughlin, who was in civilian clothes on his way to work in the 83d Precinct.
The facial wound required a hundred stitches.


Weak Currencies Keep Falling
Europe's weaker currencies continued to erode in value as the markets bet that the current uncertainty would lead to further devaluations before order is restored.
Page D1.


Unions Must Once Again Go On to Organize; The Work Went South
To the Editor:
Never in the history of this country has there been a group of people so closely approximating an aristocracy as the tightly knit Boston bankers and textile tycoons who in the mid-1800's dammed the Merrimack River, dug the canals and built huge multistory mills along the river from Lawrence, Mass., to Manchester, N.H.
Many of the families, Lowells, Lawrences, Coolidges, were related.
They were great industrial visionaries, who thought big and built big.
Until about 1914, the year of the famous Lawrence strike, the political control of the mills was almost absolute.
As your Sept. 7 editorial states, the Lowell museum is a tribute to the people who worked in the mills, but it is also a reminder of the industrial mayhem and financial chicanery that the bankers and mill managers perpetrated on the people of the Merrimack Valley.
In the Depression, without so much as a goodbye, most took their money and went South.


Critic's Notebook; The Presidential Debate That Wasn't
So tonight is the night America will not be tuning into a Presidential campaign debate.
The cancellation of what was to have been the first of three such debates may be counted a victory for George Bush, since it probably means there will be only two debates, at most; a total victory for the President would mean no debates at all.
On the other hand, this debateless evening may be considered a victory for Bill Clinton, since it makes plain that Mr.
Bush would just as soon avoid an encounter of the close kind.
Either way, it is a defeat for the nation's voters.
A debate is no miracle truth bringer.
Any fan of the noisier talk shows knows that assertiveness, rudeness, speed, mindless blather and sheer volume can overwhelm quiet good sense and candor.
But in a season of set pieces, a television debate could offer one of the few hopes of unprogrammed revelation.
It holds out the possibility that the candidates, accustomed to delivering bromides on the stump and toying with interviewers in the studio, will be forced to grapple with an issue or two.
It is also television's best chance to make up for its many failed opportunities.


Man Guilty Of 3 Slayings Gets 75 Years
His voice even but edged in defiance, Alejandro Henriquez stood before a Bronx judge yesterday and said that a jury had wrongly convicted him last month of killing a young woman and two girls.
But after the victims' families spoke of their sorrow -- including one mother's suicide attempt -- the judge sentenced Mr.
Henriquez to 75 years to life in jail, the maximum punishment possible.
"Mr. Henriquez is now in his early 30's," Edward J. Talty, the prosecutor, said as he asked the judge to show no leniency.
"He should never be allowed to breathe the same air as decent people."


EUROPEANS SAY FRENCH VOTE FORCES DELAY IN UNITY PACT; SEEK TO QUIET PUBLIC FEARS
The European Community's foreign ministers said today that after the narrow vote by which the French electorate endorsed a European unity treaty there was no realistic chance the accord would take effect at the start of next year as they once had hoped.
After four hours of difficult talks, the foreign ministers also publicly acknowledged for the first time that they would have to take further measures to quell the widespread disquiet over the treaty throughout Europe, as reflected by the discordant campaign and close vote in France.


A Strategy to Survey The Vast Unknowns Of Life on the Earth
SCIENTISTS have explored the physical world from the nucleus of atoms to the far stretches of galaxies, yet the realm of living things on earth remains so unexplored that biologists are "close to traveling blind," argues Dr.
Edward O. Wilson of Harvard University.
About 1.4 million species of plants, animals and microorganisms have been given scientific names, Dr.
Wilson estimates.
How many species live on earth?
Scientists have no idea, he writes: "The number could be close to 10 million or as high as 100 million."


Japanese Communist Disgraced at 100
At the age of 100, Sanzo Nosaka is easily Japan's most famous and respected Communist, a founder of the Japan Communist Party and the man who made it a prominent, if never very influential, player in the country's political scene.
On Sunday, Mr.
Nosaka's legendary career in Japanese politics -- he survived arrest, imprisonment and exile -- came to an abrupt and bizarre end.
Seven decades after he helped begin the party in Tokyo hideaways, his successors claimed to have discovered new evidence that he was actually a traitor to the cause, and dismissed him as its honorary chairman.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices showed strength today in Tokyo.
At the end of the trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 216.48 points, or 1.2 percent, at 18,282.72.
The index had gained 97.65 points, or 0.54 percent, in the morning trading session.
Trading has been light so far in a week that will be interrupted by a national holiday on Wednesday.
On Monday, the Nikkei surrendered early gains and closed with a loss of 100.56 points, or 0.55 percent, to 18,066.24.


Houston Ballet Cancels New York Appearances
The Houston Ballet has canceled its scheduled season at City Center, from Nov. 18 to 22, for financial reasons.
In a statement announcing the cancellation, issued jointly with the ballet troupe, Judith Daykin, executive director of City Center, said: "Although the cost of performing at City Center is reasonable, the Houston Ballet felt a New York season at this time would jeopardize their solid fiscal position and ensuing artistic plans during the tough recessionary climate."


Making the World Cup Free of Unruly Fans
There is no island of Sardinia in the United States.
No fences to separate rival factions in the stands of America's great stadiums.
No alcohol bans for cities playing host to important sporting events.
So Edgar Best, appointed yesterday as the senior vice president for security by organizers at World Cup USA, will have to decide, with great planning and caution, where to place potentially troublesome national soccer teams such as England, Germany and the Netherlands during the 1994 tournament in the United States.


Blount Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Weaker Currencies Fall Again
Europe's weaker currencies continued to erode in value today in a clear sign that France's narrow approval of the European unification treaty on Sunday has not ended the economic upheaval of the last week.
The French franc, the British pound, the Italian lira and the Spanish peseta all dropped relative to the German mark.


Excerpts From Remarks by 2 Ex-Pentagon Chiefs on M.I.A.'s
Following are excerpts from testimony today before the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs by James R. Schlesinger, who served briefly as Director of Central Intelligence in 1973 and as Secretary of Defense from 1973 to 1975; and by Melvin R. Laird, who was Secretary of Defense from 1969 to 1973.
Mr.
Schlesinger's remarks were provided by the Federal News Service and Mr.
Laird's by Reuters: JAMES R. SCHLESINGER
Q.
You have said that you're convinced that some people may have been left behind.
Are you referring to Laos or Vietnam or both?


Heilig-Meyers Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cabletron Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


HARTMARX TO RAISE $30 MILLION IN STOCK SALE
The Hartmarx Corporation, a leading apparel maker, said that it would raise $30 million to pay down debt by selling 5.7 million shares of common stock at $5.25 a share to Traco International N.V.
Hartmarx said Traco would receive representation on the company's board of directors, though Traco would have restricted rights to buy, sell or vote Hartmarx's shares.
Traco would also receive a three-year warrant to purchase an additional 1.6 million common shares at $6.50 a share.
After the announcement, Hartmarx's shares lost some of the value they had gained on Friday, when the company reported that it was selling its specialty store division to a Chicago investment firm for a $43 million note.
The stock lost 62.5 cents a share yesterday, closing at $4.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Executive Changes
ENHANCED IMAGING TECHNOLOGIES INC., Irvine, Calif., a visual-image products company, appointed Andrew G. Hofmann chief operating officer.
FLEET BANK OF MASSACHUSETTS, Boston, said Leo R. Breitman, president and chief executive, would assume the position of chairman of the bank and retain the responsibilities of chief executive.
John P. Hamill was named president.
MEDSONIC INC., Farmingdale, L.I., a maker of medical ultrasonic and pollution-control products, named Peter Gerstheimer chief financial officer.
SHAWMUT NATIONAL CORP., Hartford, named Thomas R. Rice senior vice president for investor relations, and Bharat Bhatt executive vice president for credit administration.


SAKS GIVES J. C. PENNEY SOME CREDIT OPERATIONS
J.
C.
Penney Inc.'s business unit, JCPenney Business Services Inc., said it signed a 10-year contract to process Saks Fifth Avenue's credit card operations.
JCPenney will provide billing, account inquiries, collection and account-record maintenance services for private-card operations at Saks's 50 department stores, as well as its three Armani A/X units.
Saks, a New York-based chain, will continue to finance the receivables and control credit policy with an executive credit management team.
Saks is expected to save about $1 million a year with the contract.


Surge in Natural-Gas Prices Takes Them to 7-Year High
The month-old surge in natural-gas prices continued yesterday as prices registered one of their biggest one-day advances in the futures market, with the contract for October delivery rising 12.4 cents to settle at $2.452 for 1,000 cubic feet.
Gas prices have now risen 60 cents, or 33 percent, since Hurricane Andrew tore through prime gas-production fields in the Gulf of Mexico four weeks ago, temporarily knocking out 5 percent of the nation's daily gas output.


Subway Snarl for Roosevelt I. Commuters
Subway riders on Roosevelt Island and drivers on the East Side of Manhattan found their trips home snarled last night, but for different reasons.
As a result of two power failures yesterday at the Roosevelt Island subway station, on the B and Q lines, all service was cut off after 6:30 P.M. between the island and Manhattan and between the island and Queens, said a Transit Authority spokesman, Bob Slovak.
Service was still out at 11 P.M., Mr.
Slovak said, and the cause of the power failures had not been determined.


Potent Guardian Of Chromosomes: A Muscular Gene Halts Cancer
A CANCER cell as it progresses is a harrowing thing to behold.
Its chromosomes, once so tidily packaged and rigorously controlled in the nucleus, begin to buckle and teeter and flout the body's laws.
Some chromosomal segments start to replicate themselves over and over again, forming small circles of aberrant genetic messages; others jump position from one realm of the DNA molecule to another, and sometimes entire chromosomes may disappear from the cell altogether.
And as the chromosomes dance to their own demented rhythms, they gain the malignant power to grow without check and to roam heedlessly from one organ to another.


Unions Must Once Again Go On to Organize; My First Job
To the Editor:
"The Mills Weren't Made of Marble" (editorial, Sept. 7) brought back memories of my first job, in 1915.
I was 14 years old.
I was a messenger boy in the Merrimack Manufacturing Company in Lowell, Mass.
I was paid $4.52 a week. The overseer, a boss, got $24.50 a week.


Blue Jays Playing Follow the Leader
Amy Vanderbilt, in all her prose on etiquette, probably never included a chapter on baseball.
Dave Winfield has not been as shy.
Toronto's designated hitter, and now that city's designated interpreter of baseball as it ought to be, signed with the Blue Jays organization for one reason: to win.
And last month he surmised that it would be a lot easier for him and the rest of the Blue Jays to do that with the help of the fans in the stands.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.02
5.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.86
5.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.92
2.89
5.25
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.95
5.92
7.34
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.32
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.38
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.35
6.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Inquiry Held Into Fight With Officer
A grand jury is investigating a fight last Wednesday on a Brooklyn subway train involving a Brooklyn teen-ager and an off-duty police officer who was returning from a raucous protest at City Hall.
Yunas Mohamed, 18 years old, of Bushwick, was arrested on charges that he slashed the face of Officer John Coughlin, who was in civilian clothes on his way to work in the 83d Precinct.
The facial wound required a hundred stitches.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Giving Familiar Brands a Second Chance
"THERE are no second acts in American lives," F. Scott Fitzgerald once proclaimed.
Perhaps so, but a growing number of marketers apparently hope that there are at least second acts for American brands.
Increasingly, consumer product companies are restaging or reintroducing brands that are familiar to consumers but have had lagging sales.
The companies realize that brand franchises are becoming too important to abandon and that they continue to grow in value, as demonstrated by the prices paid in recent transactions involving the Martini &amp; Rossi spirits brands and RJR Nabisco's cold cereals.


INSIDE
Gambino Brothers Captured
Officers crashed into a South Florida motel to arrest two reputed members of John Gotti's crime family who had jumped bail of $5 million.
Page B1.
Mexico-Vatican Rift at End
After well over a century of strain and disagreement, Mexico and the Vatican reconciled and formally restored full relations.
Page A3.
Uneasy Peace in El Salvador
The next step in El Salvador's peace agreement, a purge of military officers linked to repression, has added to already rising tensions.
Page A3. 2 Banks Extend Their Reach
Continuing a trend toward fewer but larger banks, BankAmerica made an acquisition in Texas and First Union bought a Virginia bank.
Page D1.
The Potency of Birthdays
A large study found that women were more likely to die in the week after their birthdays, and men shortly before theirs.
Science Times, page C3.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  PEACEKEEPING ON A BUDGET  President Bush had much to say about upending agencies to meet the needs of the post-cold-war era.
But his speech to the General Assembly skirted pledges of dollars or troops to prop up his promises.
A1  The U.S. remains the biggest debtor on the United Nations ledger.
A14


Review/Theater; 'Fatal' Is Back in Femme Fatale In Everett Quinton's Star Turn
No doubt every visitor to "Brother Truckers," the new Ridiculous Theatrical Company extravaganza at the Charles Ludlam Theater, will have his own favorite Everett Quinton costume.
I'm partial to the black-and-yellow-check outfit that Mr.
Quinton, in the starring role of the East Hampton hostess and garbage-removal queen bee Lyla Balskin, wears while shopping in Manhattan.
The dress not only matches the geometric design scheme of the greasy spoon in which Lyla makes a pit stop between Gucci and Bergdorf's, but it also comes with matching purse, gloves, stockings and, best of all, a couple of gargantuan neck flaps that recall the more lighthearted ecclesiastical fashion trends of the early Middle Ages.


After '10,000 Mistakes,' Biosphere Is in Hot Pursuit of Credibility
THE leaders of a $150 million experiment in human life support are struggling to save it from scandal, accusations of fakery and what they now admit were a series of administrative and scientific blunders.
The private project in the foothills north of Tucson, Ariz., began a year ago with considerable fanfare as four men and four women sealed themselves inside a 3.15-acre greenhouse, proclaiming it a utopian planet-in-a-bottle where everything would be recycled for two years.
The structure was billed as the first large habitat for humans that would live and breathe on its own, as cut off from the earth as a spaceship.


Discount Auto Parts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


New York City to Sell 'Mini Bonds'
New York City is going to the little guy again.
It announced yesterday its second offering of "mini bonds" meant for small investors.
The bonds, which will be sold in October, have face values of just $5,000.
The first sale in February was very successful, with the city eventually selling $100 million worth, twice what it had planned to offer.
This October's goal is $75 million, but that could rise.


Placing Emphasis on Treatment, Dinkins Plans to Revamp Shelters
With more than a hundred homeless families backed up in New York City welfare offices each night, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced an overhaul of the city's shelter system along the lines recommended by a mayoral panel that studied the issue earlier this year.
The Mayor thus embraced a series of proposals that until now he had held at arm's length, saying in May that he needed 18 to 24 months to study them.
And in so doing, he adopted the plan of the panel, headed by Andrew M. Cuomo, and appeared to go against the wishes of his own social services Commissioner, Barbara J. Sabol.


Fairfield Communities reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jets Fly in Reverse, Hard as It Is to Do
It has been a baffling start to a Jets season that began with so much promise and is now in danger of disintegrating.
There was the emergence of Browning Nagle, the big-play quarterback of the future, in training camp.
A 5-0 preseason start.
The defensive changes (shifting the strongest players to the weakest spots on the defense), that were supposed to give the pass rush more bite.
Blair Thomas rededicating himself to being a running back worthy of a No. 2 pick in the first round of the draft.


Rivals Angry and Awed In Microsoft's Shadow
Three top computer industry executives publicly attacked the Microsoft Corporation's business practices at an industry conference that began here today, but their challenges to the industry's most influential competitor were tinged with awe as well as anger.
"They're big and powerful, but what is more important is that they're smart," Philippe Kahn, chief executive of Borland International, said in a speech.
Borland is a software publisher that competes directly against Microsoft in markets for spreadsheets and computer languages.


U.S. Branch Leaves Ethiopian Orthodox Church
American leaders of one of Christianity's most ancient branches, the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, met here today to declare themselves independent of their mother church in Addis Ababa.
The move, which the leaders said was taken reluctantly, was in protest of the recent appointment in Ethiopia of a new head of the church, Patriarch Abuna Paulos.


After 17 Years, NASA Prepares for a Return Trip to Mars
SEVENTEEN years after the last American flights to Mars, a spacecraft is set to depart on a $900 million mission of renewed exploration of the one other world in the solar system where humans might conceivably make a home away from Earth.
"America is going back to Mars," said Dr.
Wesley T. Huntress, director of solar system exploration for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, putting the simplest interpretation on the importance of the new mission.


Talks Are Resumed on Ending Violence in Ulster
Senior officials of Ireland, Britain and the British province of Northern Ireland met here today in talks aimed at ending 23 years of violence that has killed more than 3,000 in the six counties of Northern Ireland.
This round of talks was the first in which a leader of one of the main Protestant parties demanding continued British rule in the province came to predominantly Roman Catholic Ireland to discuss political change since the island was divided in 1922, with the 26 southern counties forming an independent state and the north remaining part of Britain.


European Leaders Promise To Heed Voters' Concerns
Clearly chastened by the closeness of France's vote on Sunday to approve a treaty on European Community union, Western Europe's leading governments tried today to revive the region's flagging unity drive by pledging to pay greater attention to the concerns of ordinary citizens.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and President Francois Mitterrand of France agreed to meet in Paris on Tuesday to discuss ways of making the European Community more answerable to public opinion.
Prime Minister John Major of Britain said the French vote reflected widely held fears of loss of national identity.


Did Knicks Hear Deal? No, but Roberts Talks
He vetoed the trade earlier this month, but Stanley Roberts of the Orlando Magic may change his mind and agree to a proposed three-team deal involving the Knicks, the Magic and the Los Angeles Clippers.
Roberts's attorney, Oscar Shoenfelt, issued a statement yesterday to confirm that he and Roberts met with Clippers officials over the weekend in Los Angeles.


Donaldson Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Werner Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Chrysler Makes 2 Media Moves
The Chrysler Corporation has made two major moves involving media.
The auto maker invited its three agencies to develop proposals for consolidating media planning and buying on its $400 million to $420 million accounts.
And Chrysler has decided not to renew a cross-media marketing program with Time Warner Inc., partly because of controversy surrounding the Warner Brothers rap artist Ice-T.


Classical Music in Review
'Il Barbiere di Siviglia'  New York City Opera New York State Theater Lincoln Center
As a way of hooking in an audience, Rossini may have been wise to pack so much demanding music into the first scene of "Il Barbiere di Siviglia." But from a singer's point of view, that was a little cruel: a Count and a Figaro, for example, hardly have time to get the feel of the theater before the first must sing a passionate cavatina and the second is thrust into the quick patter of "Largo al factotum."


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about the Olympic flag's arrival in Atlanta for the 1996 Summer Games misstated A. D. Fraser's position with the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games.
He is chief operating officer.


Unions Must Once Again Go On to Organize
To the Editor:
In "What Happened to the Working Class?" (Op-Ed, Sept. 7), Nelson Lichtenstein makes a persuasive and impassioned case for the rebirth of the American union movement by a return to "the language that once mobilized millions." I was surprised that he doesn't include the fundamental principle of unionism: Organize!
Professor Lichtenstein notes that the percentage of workers in unions has fallen for decades and that unions lose more representation elections than they win.
Perhaps he assumes this would be reversed when unions returned to their historic agenda and workers found them more attractive.
But low levels of membership and organizing are at the heart of labor's crisis, a situation not easily changed.


Folk Remedy Demand May Wipe Out Tigers
ILLEGAL tiger hunting to supply tiger bones for the Chinese folk medicine trade could bring about the extinction of an already endangered species, a leading conservationist says.
In a statement issued recently by the headquarters of the World Conservation Union in Gland, Switzerland, Peter Jackson, chairman of the organization's Cat Specialist Group, reported that poachers in one Indian game preserve alone killed 20 tigers in the last two years.
Since there are only an estimated 7,000 tigers left in the wild throughout the world, the poaching trend could bring about their extinction, he said, despite a Chinese program that is breeding tigers in captivity for slaughter.


Jacques Pic; Chef, 59
Jacques Pic, the renowned chef of the Ardeche region of southern France, died of heart disease on Friday, his family announced Saturday.
He was 59 years old.
His restaurant, called simply Pic, near the town of Valence, was one of the few regularly awarded three stars in the authoritative Michelin Guide.
Its specialities included truffle tarts garnished with foie gras and sea perch or salmon with caviar.


Forward With Europe
For Americans, the news from France is close but clear.
European unity lives, and that is in the best interests of the United States, the 12 members of the European Community and global trade.
France's 51-to-49 percent "yes" vote on the Maastricht treaty does not guarantee ultimate triumph.
But it averts what could have become a slide into nationalist discord.
The road ahead is pitted with rocks and craters: the thinness of the margin, monetary tension and skepticism in countries that have yet to vote.
Community leaders will have to find ways to make rolling reassessments.
Yet for the moment they can keep rolling forward.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  NEW SHELTER PLAN FOR THE HOMELESS
With more than 100 homeless families backed up in city welfare offices each night, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced an overhaul of the city's shelter system along the lines recommended by a mayoral panel that studied the issue earlier this year.
The Mayor thus embraced a series of proposals that until now he had held at arm's length, saying he needed 18 to 24 months to study them.
And, in so doing, he went against the wishes of his own welfare Commissioner, Barbara J. Sabol.
A1  WHO WILL SIT IN CONGRESS?
In a process that is part Machiavelli and part Marx Brothers, 962 Democratic county committee members who are almost never called on to do anything will meet tomorrow night in what amounts to a convention to pick the next Congressman from the overwhelmingly Democratic district Ted Weiss served.
A1.


Uncovered Short Sales Edge Up on Big Board
Continuing a trend that has persisted through much of 1992, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered reached an all-time high between mid-August and mid-September though only by a slender margin, the New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday.
With the latest increase, which was the sixth consecutive monthly rise this year, short interest on the exchange has risen a whopping 31 percent since mid-March.


Democratic? Only in Name
Few Congressional districts are more big-D Democratic than the newly configured Eighth District of New York, which stretches along Manhattan's Upper West Side and into Brooklyn.
This year, probably no district in the country will choose its representative in a less democratic way.
The death of Representative Ted Weiss of New York the day before last week's Democratic Party primary has spurred a free-for-all over the choice of his successor.
At least six candidates want the job.


With U.S. the Biggest Debtor, President Finds U.N. Skeptical
President Bush's words of support for United Nations peacekeeping in his speech to the General Assembly today, coupled with a vague promise to "insure adequate American financial support," was greeted with skepticism by United Nations budget officials who last week issued figures showing that the United States remains the organization's largest debtor.
What is new this year about the United Nations' perennial financial crisis is not how much money America owes, but the additional burden from the lands of the former Soviet Union, which, beset by deepening economic woes, have been unable to contribute anything toward the organization's costs so far, officials say.


Oxford Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Monarch Avalon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Aladdin City Journal; Animals' Universe Dashed by Wind
The answer to the big question, says Julio C. Perla, is yes.
"There are a lot of monkeys out there," he says.
"But none of them are ours."
Mr.
Perla is curator of the Monkey Jungle which, along with Parrot Jungle, Coral Castle and several other South Florida tourist attractions, was battered by Hurricane Andrew and is struggling to clean up and reopen.


Giants Come Out of Hibernation and Beat Bears
The Giants won. Effectively. Cleanly. And finally.
The defense, which seemed so confused as the team lost its first two games of the season, played smartly and hit hard.
The offense, with Phil Simms passing and Rodney Hampton and Jarrod Bunch running, moved the ball well and made big third-down plays.


Davis Water &amp; Waste reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Louis R. Breslin; Lawyer, 88
Louis R. Breslin, a retired partner of the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, died on Friday at his home in Watertown, N.Y.
He was 88 years old and also lived in Manhattan and in Shaftsbury, Vt.
Mr.
Breslin died of complications resulting from emphysema, said George J. Gillespie 3d, a Cravath partner.


Decorum Fades in Battle for Weiss's Seat
When friends of Representative Ted Weiss went to pay their respects to his widow, Sonya, on Sunday night, they expected to find her sitting shiva in the family's living room on the Upper West Side.
Instead, she was sequestered in a bedroom, beginning her last-minute campaign to succeed him, poring over the names of the hundreds of Democratic county committee members who will choose a nominee.
Blocks away, City Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge was holding an open house to promote her own candidacy in her apartment on Central Park West, trying to pump as many hands as possible, while visitors said her husband, the columnist Jimmy Breslin, darted about in his bathrobe, railing at the perfidies of the party leaders who might control his spouse's fate.


Board in California Approves Scholarship Fund for Whites
The governing body of the University of California has unanimously accepted a bequest from a school teacher that will provide scholarships for poor whites only.
The donation, estimated at $513,842, comes from the estate of Marguerite E. Hornbeck, an alumna of the University of California at Berkeley who never forgot her impoverished childhood.


Public Words, Publishing Questions; Lawsuit Pits a Writer Against Literary License
To some people (the editors of Harper's magazine, for example), an ellipsis, the three-dot mark of punctuation in a text that indicates words have been omitted, is a trifling thing, dispensable.
To others, like Gordon Lish, ellipses are crucially informative, and their required use in precise communication is an indisputable principle, which if not worth dying for is at least worth suing over.
Indeed, Mr.
Lish, a novelist, an editor and most pertinently, a teacher of fiction writing, a man who has said he once quit a job over the inappropriate insertion of three commas into a letter, is suing Harper's, over, among other things, ellipses.
Mr.
Lish, 58 years old, an editor at Alfred A. Knopf, the author of four novels and editor of the literary magazine The Quarterly, has long been a strident advocate of the experimental narrative voice, both in his own work and that of others', and from his end the suit has taken on the aspect of high art defending itself against crass commerce.


Bush, in Address to U.N., Urges More Vigor in Keeping the Peace
President Bush told United Nations members today that Washington was ready to support a greatly expanded role for peacekeeping missions and to adapt the United States military to better assist in such operations.
But despite his stated willingness to promote the United Nations' role in preserving the peace, Mr.
Bush did not offer ground troops for the 12 peacekeeping operations under way.
Nor did he offer any new money for such tasks, or promise to pay the $733.1 million in dues and arrears that Washington owes to the United Nations.


Books of The Times; The Wife and Mistress Of Viennese Celebrities
The Bride of the Wind  The Life and Times of Alma Mahler-Werfel  By Susanne Keegan  Illustrated. 346 pages.
Viking. $25.
Gustav Mahler called her "the light of my life," without whom he would "have gone out like a torch deprived of air." The painter Oskar Kokoschka hailed her as his "second-born spiritual double," his "bride of the wind." And the novelist and poet Franz Werfel said she was the "breath of my life, earthmother, fount of all peace."


BRIEFS
Debt *
Amoco Canada Petroleum Co.
Ltd., a unit of Amoco Corp., filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $800 million of debt securities.
Underwriters may include Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
*
Commonwealth Edison Co. is offering $200 million of 8.375 percent first mortgage bonds due 2022 at 98.474 to yield 8.516 percent, through Paine Webber.
Callable in 10 years, the bonds are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Genesis Health Ventures Inc. filed a registration statement with the S.E.C. relating to the proposed offering of $25 million of first mortgage bonds due 2007.
*
Ivex Packaging Corp., Lincolnshire, Ill., filed with the S.E.C. for up to $165 million of senior subordinated notes due 2002, through Lehman Brothers.


Boy, 15, Is Fatally Stabbed at School in Brooklyn
A 15-year-old sophomore and varsity football star at South Shore High School in Brooklyn was fatally stabbed yesterday by a classmate wielding a dagger in a hallway fight, the police said.
Moments later, a dean and a security guard at the school seized and disarmed a 16-year-old suspect.
The victim, Damion Ennis, of 670 East 82d Street, Brooklyn, was stabbed once in the chest at 1:35 P.M. in a struggle that spilled from a third-floor hallway into a stairwell of the sprawling, white-brick school at 6565 Flatlands Avenue in Canarsie, the police said.
He died an hour later at Brookdale Hospital.


Patterns
Morris: Beyond Jewelry
One day last week, Robert Lee Morris was showing a visitor around his new showroom and jewelry factory on the top two floors of a historic building in SoHo and outlining his plans for the future.
Now that he has designed his last jewelry collection for Donna Karan, he finds himself free to take on new projects, he said.
"I gave Donna an image that she can continue to evolve, but it took so much of my time," he said.
"Now I can concentrate on myself."


Unions Must Once Again Go On to Organize; How Park Originated
To the Editor:
In "The Mills Weren't Made of Marble" (editorial, Sept. 7), you suggest that Paul Tsongas "put forward" the idea for the Lowell National Historic Park.
Actually, Senator Tsongas was an opponent of our concept in the beginning.
He was helpful years later, after the project received wide recognition.
I developed the concept for the national park and the Boott Mill Museum in the late 1960's and early 70's for the Lowell Model Cities Education Component when I was hired to explore innovative approaches to education, the topic of my Massachusetts Institute of Technology dissertation.
A design plan, done with Susan Southworth, incorporated my idea of reusing the abandoned mills and threatened canals as a cultural and educational resource.


Who's on 3d? Donnels? Probably Not
It was supposed to be a time for Chris Donnels to showcase himself as the Mets' third baseman of the future.
Dave Magadan was out with a broken wrist, supposedly unable to play for the remainder of the season.
Donnels was there.
Third base was his.
He would hit .260 or .270 or so, drive in a few runs, showcase his reflexes and work on his range.
The Mets would stop worrying about what would happen if Magadan, a free agent after this season, didn't return.
No need for them to look for a candidate at second, where Jeff Kent is young and unproven, Willie Randolph is aging and unsigned, and next year's starter is still a big question mark.


Rite Aid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Bill on Cable Regulation Moves to a Vote Today
Supporters of a bill that would regulate cable television prices advanced their cause today as Senate opponents abandoned hope of tying the measure up in procedural knots and agreed to a vote on Tuesday.
The agreement by Senate Republicans to schedule a vote without objection eliminates a nagging fear of Democratic advocates of the measure: that their three-year battle would be undone at the last moment by parliamentary stalling.
A similar bill was killed in the Senate in 1990 as a result of procedural delays.


Inquiry Held Into Fight With Officer
A grand jury is investigating a fight last Wednesday on a Brooklyn subway train involving a Brooklyn teen-ager and an off-duty police officer who was returning from a raucous protest at City Hall.
Yunas Mohamed, 18 years old, of Bushwick, was arrested on charges that he slashed the face of Officer John Coughlin, who was in civilian clothes on his way to work in the 83d Precinct.
The facial wound required a hundred stitches.


TIFFANY BLAMES JAPAN'S ECONOMY FOR SALES DROP
Tiffany &amp; Company, the jewelry maker and gift store chain, reduced its sales and earnings projections for the third quarter after its principal Japanese distributor, Mitsukoshi Ltd., said it would buy less merchandise in response to the soft Japanese economy.
William R. Chaney, Tiffany's chairman, said Mitsukoshi's decision would prune his company's third-quarter sales by about $15 million and suggested that analysts' earnings estimates were now too high.
Estimates range from 39 to 55 cents a share, according to Bloomberg Business News.
Although Tiffany announced its revised outlook after the market closed yesterday, its stock price dropped $2.50 a share, to $24.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Trade's Long March; Current U.S. Talks With China a Step On a Journey Expected to Take Years
As the United States and China prepare for what are likely to be nonstop negotiations to conclude a trade pact by Oct. 10, economists and Government officials say that this is only the beginning of years of tough talks for China as its trading partners demand it open its highly protected economy.
Now that China has emerged from decades of near-isolation to become a trading power, the United States is demanding in effect that it hasten the process of dismantling a huge apparatus of protection for its industries, most of it informal and all but impenetrable to outsiders.


Text of Europeans' Statement at the U.N.
Following is the text of a statement issued today by the foreign ministers of the members of the European Community, convened as the General Affairs Council:
The General Affairs Council met in extraordinary session in New York on Sept. 21.


Sports of The Times; Sweet Lou Should Take A Long Walk
HERE'S my advice to Lou Piniella: after today's game at Riverfront, he should take a nice long walk around Cincinnati and think about whether he really wants to lose his mind working for Marge Schott and grappling with a lout like Rob Dibble.
Lou has two options for his walk.
He can walk through midtown to the fading old section called Over the Rhine, now a neighborhood for migrants up from Appalachia.
Or Lou can cross the Ohio on the charming little bridge that Roebling used as a model for the Brooklyn Bridge.
Now you're in Kentucky, son, and that ain't bad.


Review/Music; American Symphony Adds Twist to Concerts
At a time when nearly every musical institution is in the midst of rethinking its mission and strategy, one new model of programming experimentation began at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon with Leon Botstein's first concert as music director of the American Symphony Orchestra.
The orchestra, founded by Leopold Stokowski, has been in dire need of redefinition, and Mr.
Botstein has worked out an intriguing new approach: the thematic concert organized around ideas.
The concert becomes a sonic essay rather than a collection of free-standing musical pieces.
Mr.
Botstein, the president of Bard College and a historian as well as a conductor, literally plans to be the curator of his six concerts this season, prefacing them with lectures and even coordinating them with events at museums and other cultural institutions.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the New York Mets and the coming expansion draft misstated the rules that protect certain minor-league players from being chosen by the major leagues' two new teams.
Minor leaguers who have never played in the major leagues are exempt if they signed contracts at age 18 or younger and have less than four seasons' experience or signed at age 19 or older and have less than three seasons' experience.


Review/Television; Stateside City Slickers At Medical School In the Caribbean
Offbeat, quirky, eccentric: television aimed at younger audiences these days will try anything to avoid seeming ordinary.
In "Going to Extremes" (Tuesdays at 10 P.M.), we find what ABC calls "an unusual and eclectic group of young medical students who venture far from home in their quest to become doctors." Fox's "Flying Blind" (Sundays at 10 P.M.) introduces a nice college graduate with a wry sense of humor to "a wild collection of characters" from downtown Manhattan, the network says.
If this keeps up, normal may come to seem positively off the wall.
Set in a fictional Caribbean island named Jantique, "Going to Extremes" is filmed entirely in Jamaica.
Several American medical students, unable to get into stateside schools, are attending a university founded by Henry Croft (Roy Dotrice), a maverick doctor who is eager to "blow the doors wide open on the medical establishment." Henry's staff includes Dr.
Michael Norris (Carl Lumbly), the Jantique-born chief administrator, who warns the students that "living here will not be an easy adjustment."


Democratic Leader Quits Post in Rhode Island
Under pressure from Gov.
Bruce Sundlun, the chairman of Rhode Island's Democratic Party resigned Sunday after acknowledging that he had done personal business with a company that had been hired for certain state contracts and that had contributed to party coffers.
The chairman, Mark S. Weiner, who was the chief fund-raiser for Governor Sundlun in this year's primary, maintained that he had done nothing wrong when he collected $21,000 in sales receipts from Employee Benefits Services, including $3,000 for work in Rhode Island.


Neiman-Marcus Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Mexico and the Catholic Church Restore Full Diplomatic Ties
Mexico and the Vatican re-established full diplomatic relations today after a break of more than 130 years, completing a reconciliation based on the Government's restoration of legal rights to religious groups earlier this year.
In a statement issued in Rome, the Roman Catholic Church said, "For Mexico, as well as the Holy See, today begins a new chapter under the sign of mutual respect and trust."


Sweden Lowers Bank Rate
The Swedish central bank lowered its short-term rate for commercial banks to 50 percent from 500 percent today, a day after the Government and opposition announced an austerity plan that would raise taxes and cut welfare.
The central bank had raised the rate to the record high on Wednesday in an effort to keep the Swedish currency, the krona, from being devalued as capital flowed toward the German mark during the European currency chaos.
The stratospheric rate shut down virtually all lending, but the 50 percent rate is still likely to virtually freeze credit.


Nike Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


For Better Business, Prostitutes Leave Manhattan for Jersey City
Along corners of Manhattan where prostitutes have long gathered, flagging down cars and following passers-by, prospective customers now cruise around and around, discovering the obvious: many women have left.
Not coincidentally, across the Hudson River in Jersey City, it's possible to find scenes reminiscent of Times Square 10 years ago: women in tight mini-skirts and high heels standing conspicuously outside motels, waving at passing cars.


Sophistry in Detroit
What drives along highways, runs on gasoline and carries passengers?
Put the question to first-graders, and they'd answer "car." Put the question to Senator Donald Riegle, Democrat of Michigan, and he'll say "truck."
No, Mr.
Riegle doesn't need remedial education.
But he could use a reminder that Federal law isn't supposed to take thousands of dollars from ordinary citizens in order to shower windfall profits on a powerful constituent -- in this case the automobile industry.


Lima Journal; Shining Path Women: So Many and So Ferocious
Only a few months ago, Peruvians knew her as one of the country's prima ballerinas, slim and beautiful.
But after Maritza Garrido Lecca was captured this month with Abimael Guzman Reynoso, leader of the Shining Path guerrilla group, the gracefulness of dance was lost.
Peruvians were shocked to see her on a police videotape with raised fist and a fierce, hardened stare, shouting, "Communism will take over the world!"


Symbol, Substance and the Police
The ugly riot by New York City police officers in front of City Hall last week undermined public confidence in the Police Department and leaves a potentially dangerous standoff between Mayor David Dinkins and the police union.
De-escalating the confrontation will be the first task of whoever is selected as the new police commissioner succeeding Lee Brown.
The new commissioner can immediately send two strong messages.
First, that the department rejects all forms of racism and lawlessness within its ranks.
Second, that the police union's grievances remain minor compared with the city's needs.


Planned Purge of Military Raises Salvador Tensions
The imminent purge from the Salvadoran Army of high-level officers with records of repression -- an important part of the peace treaty reached on Jan. 16 -- has added to already rising tensions between the two former sides in the civil war.
United Nations peacekeepers discount the possibility that army unhappiness will lead to a coup attempt, and say that most of the political tension is linked to other aspects of the peace plan, particularly possible snags in the rebel demobilization because of delays in carrying out the Government's commitment to provide land to the former insurgents.


Four Freedom Seekers Await Final Word


Auto Theft in New York Can Be Reduced
To the Editor:
News of Newark's automobile theft problems should not overshadow New York State's own struggle with this unyielding and costly crisis.
Last year, 140,000 automobiles were stolen in New York City, working out to 383 cars a day or one auto every 3 1/2 minutes -- at a cost of more than $700 million annually.
This is a problem that cannot be ignored.


Edward Warburg, Philanthropist And Patron of the Arts, Dies at 84
Edward M. M. Warburg, a philanthropist and benefactor of the arts, died yesterday afternoon in Norwalk Hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 84 years old and lived in Wilton, Conn.
He died of heart failure after he was admitted to the hospital four days earlier for heart disease, said his son, David.


Classical Music in Review
Long Island Philharmonic  Staller Center for the Arts State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
The Long Island Philharmonic, like many other small orchestras, has lately faced financially rough times.
But it opened its 14th season on Saturday night with an upbeat announcement of a balanced budget and a new two-year contract with its music director, Marin Alsop.
And Ms.
Alsop made a reasonably strong, if by no means flawless, case for her orchestra in works by Bach, Stravinsky and Tchaikovsky.


Designers Look to Spring, With an Eye on Comfort
Having completed their collections for the fun-in-the-sun season, also known as cruise and resort, designers are deeply immersed in fashion's next step: spring.
European spring clothes will make their debut early next month in Milan, followed in rapid succession by London and Paris.
The opening gun for major Seventh Avenue houses will sound off in November.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Quayle Sends Baby Card but Is Rebuffed
The country's most famous fictional baby -- Baby Brown of television's "Murphy Brown" -- received a "welcome to the world note" and a stuffed, presumably Republican, elephant yesterday from a surprise admirer: the Vice President of the United States.
"You've helped start an important discussion on ways to strengthen our traditional values," said the handwritten note, sent in care of the television show's star, Candice Bergen, on the day of this year's season premiere.
Mr.
Quayle was far less conciliatory in May, when he said that Miss Bergen had cheapened "family values" by glamourizing Murphy Brown's single-motherhood.


Stanley Ross, 78, Dies; Edited El Diario for 7 Years
Stanley Ross, a former journalist specializing in Latin American and Caribbean affairs, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Washington.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 78 years old.
His family said he died after a long illness. Further details were not released.


Reuben Kadish, 79, a Sculptor Of Works Evoking the Ancient
Reuben Kadish, an American sculptor whose rough-hewn figures and monumental heads often evoked the art of ancient civilizations, died on Sunday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Vernon, N.J.
He died of complications from chronic leukemia, said his son Julian.


Yankees Make First Of Their Many Lists
The Yankee hierarchy spent most of yesterday in Tampa, Fla., debating the future.
The National League's expansion draft was the topic, and the executives exchanged lists touting the 15 players they deemed most desirable for the organization to protect.
Because the Yankees have one of the deepest farm systems in the major leagues, yesterday's dialogue was sure to be laced with dissenting opinions.
Both major and minor league players can be chosen in the expansion draft.
The arguing among the Yanks will likely continue and the names will likely change until the club submits its final list before Nov. 17, the day of the draft.


Maalox Moved From BBDO
BBDO New York experienced a "Maalox moment" last week when Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. in Collegeville, Pa., moved the Maalox antacid account, with billings estimated at more than $15 million, to Angotti, Thomas, Hedge Inc. in New York.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Barrie Hedge, president at Angotti, confirmed reports of the change in trade publications this week.
He said the switch, after less than a year at BBDO, "was not motivated by a creative decision," but rather by "a desire to consolidate." Angotti already handles Rorer's Perdiem laxative and Ascriptin analgesic accounts, with combined billings estimated at more than $10 million.


Finish Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


If the Shoe Floats, Follow It
A SEVERE storm two years ago has given scientists unusual tools for studying the currents of the Pacific: shoes.
The shoes went from mere footwear to tools of science on May 27, 1990, when the freighter Hansa Carrier ran into heavy weather en route from South Korea to the Pacific Northwest and 21 cargo containers were lost overboard.
Five of the containers were filled with 80,000 Nike products, many of them buoyant.


Middle Ground Is Sought On Police Review Board
The City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, who opposes Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to create an independent agency to investigate police misconduct, said yesterday that he had begun to seek a compromise that he hoped would calm the intense emotions surrounding the issue.
He said an unruly demonstration by thousands of police officers last Wednesday had "changed the political landscape" of the issue, giving the bill's proponents a sudden and significant political boost.


Russia Balking at Liability for the Entire Former Soviet Debt
The issue of how and when the former Soviet Union's $70 billion foreign debt will be repaid became further tangled today as Russian officials said their Government was not willing to be liable for the entire debt.
Roughly half the debt is owed to Germany and a German Government official expressed surprise and dismay this evening, saying he thought the question had been settled.
"It seems to me as if the Russian side was raising additional issues," he said.


Concerns On Melting Of Polar Ice Are Eased
A STUDY of the flow of the ice off Antarctica's western region supports the theory that at certain times there has been sporadic, perhaps chaotic discharge of that great ice sheet, but suggests that this is unlikely to occur as a quick response to global warming.
A number of analyses have indicated that in the warm period between the last two ice ages, 120,000 years ago, the oceans were 20 feet higher than they are today, and many scientists believe this was chiefly caused by the discharge of ice from west Antarctica.
The new study seems to show that the ice sheet has collapsed, then reformed several times in the past million years.


New York Needs More Schools Like Stuyvesant, Not Fewer
To the Editor:
As New York City debates the merits of a new $150 million home for Stuyvesant High School (news article, Sept. 8), I think it's important to keep in mind the recent recommendations of the Chancellor's Task Force on Science Education and to re-examine the notion that "giftedness" in science is a rare, innate attribute.
Our task force report urges New York provide every student access to high-quality science education.
This is often interpreted as a suggestion to eliminate or reduce resources for the specialized schools offering intense curriculum in science, but nothing could be further from the truth.


Review/Film; Reflections on and of Gay Concerns
Bryan (Todd Stites) is blond and gay.
The dark-haired Brian (Terry Curry) describes himself as bisexual.
They meet in a bar one night, go back to Bryan's place, have unsafe sex, sleep for a little while and then wake up to get to know each other.
P.
J.
Castellaneta's "Together Alone" is the record of their discoveries.
The film, opening today at the Film Forum, is an earnest, carefully choreographed dialogue, set entirely in one room, in which the two young men debate their conflicting values, recall key events in their lives and slowly, reluctantly reveal themselves.
They talk about sexual identity, role-playing, homosexual and heterosexual relationships, the gay liberation movement, feminism, loneliness and Emily Dickinson.
Giving a desperate edge to everything that's said is the possibility of AIDS.


Sanitation Department Is Honored for Innovation
New York City's Department of Sanitation, more accustomed to brickbats than bouquets, has won national recognition and a $100,000 prize for the improved performance of its fleet of 6,200 garbage trucks, street sweepers and salt spreaders.
A major reason for its success: Decisions about repairs, maintenance and equipment design are now being made with substantial input from blue-collar mechanics, not just desk-bound white-collar workers.


Eating Well
MUCH of the advice that nutritionally concerned Americans strive to follow is based on decisions made by committees.
The advice is a compromise that takes into account the opinions of the committee members as well as what the participants believe is practical and politically acceptable.
So, recommendations to reduce fat consumption to 30 percent of calories and to eat no more than six ounces of meat a day are not necessarily the best advice, but what the Government or other institutions feel is the most pragmatic.


Theater in Review
The Mystery of Anna O  John Houseman Studio Theater 450 West 42d Street Clinton Through Oct. 4 By Jerome Coopersmith and Lucy Freeman; directed by Yanna Kroyt Brandt; associate director/dramaturg, Margot Breier; set by John Farrell; costumes by Tay Cheek; lighting by Heather Rogan; choreographed by Amy Coopersmith; production stage manager, Uriel Menson; stage manager, Susan Hinkson; music by Anthony Brandt.
Presented by Playmarket, Inc., and Annette Moskowitz and Alexander E. Racolin on behalf of Play Producers, Inc.
WITH: Bernard Barrow, Ariane Brandt, Barbara Hilson, C. C. Loveheart, David Mazzeo, Bobbi Randall, Peter Tate and Marilee Warner.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.10
5.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.90
5.19
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.92
5.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.05
5.95
7.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.34
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.38
8.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.36
6.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Gretzky Is Sidelined Indefinitely
Wayne Gretzky did not retire today, but the announcement by the Los Angeles Kings that he will be out indefinitely -- possibly the entire season -- because of a herniated disk in his upper back could be the first step in that direction.
Gretzky, hockey's career-leading scorer and the Kings' captain, will not undergo surgery at this time, according to Dr.
Robert Watkins, the team's spine specialist.
But Watkins did term the injury "one in a million" and said that Gretzky would be treated with medication and exercise.


At Last, a Dinkins Homeless Plan
Yielding to pressure after months of waffling, the Dinkins administration has embraced a plan that could bring order and dignity to New York City's chaotic programs for homeless families.
The Mayor took office promising to do more for the thousands of families -- typically single mothers with two or more children -- forced onto the streets because of drugs and poverty.
For years such families have been crowded into squalid hotels and shelters or even forced to spend nights on desks and chairs in welfare offices.


Knicks Reel In A Bumper Catch
When the Knicks lost to the Bulls in the seventh game of the Eastern Conference semifinals last season, it was felt by some that New York was one or two players away from winning that game.
While that one player might simply have been Michael Jordan, the Knicks felt -- or hoped -- otherwise.
And instead of getting one or two new players, they will have seven.
It's like the Knick management of Dave Checketts and Ernie Grunfeld went fishing not with a pole but with a net.
And the catch has been terrific.


A Dulles Doctrine Might Apply in Kuriles
To the Editor:
Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin's inability to hand over the disputed Kurile islands to Japan recalls that the United States was in a somewhat similar situation in 1952 when the peace treaty between Japan and the United States ending World War II in the Pacific was being negotiated (front page, Sept. 10).
John Foster Dulles, the United States special envoy and later Secretary of State, offered a remarkable doctrine: residual sovereignty.
He applied this to the Ryukyu Islands, the chain extending southward from Kyushu.
These islands were held by the United States, but Mr.
Dulles proclaimed that residual sovereignty over them was held by Japan.


Johannesburg Journal; In Police's Deadly Custody: Pathologist's 'I Accuse'
In the weeks since Dr.
Jonathan Gluckman broke a career-long silence to accuse the South African police of torturing and killing suspects in custody, the 77-year-old pathologist has become a late-blooming celebrity.
Reporters frequent his waiting room.
Admirers stop him to shake his hand.
Cabinet members solicit his opinion.
Weirdos phone him at home to threaten his life.


David B. Huxley, 76, Financier and Official
David B. Huxley, a retired financier in New York City and a former British official in Bermuda, died on Sept. 6 at his home in Wansford, England.
He was 76 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Where Debate Was to Be, Clinton Shows Up for Rally
In the face of mounting Republican attacks on his character and record in Arkansas, Gov.
Bill Clinton today used a rally at the site of what was to have been the first Presidential debate to say that President Bush is "ducking" the debates because he cannot defend his record.
"I showed up here to debate today," he told several thousand students at Michigan State University.


Metropolitan Diary
Scene:
A recent tennis tournament.
Location:
Under the stands.
Time:
Waiting for a break in the play to enter the stadium.


Labor Dispute Slows Operations at County Courthouse
On the 16th floor of the Westchester County Courthouse, a grieving mother waited for five hours today for the beginning of a pre-trial hearing for the man accused of killing her son.
On the 10th floor, an anxious couple waited all morning for a bail hearing for their son.


Theater in Review
A Moon for the Misbegotten Pearl Theater Company 125 West 22d Street Chelsea Through Oct. 24 By Eugene O'Neill; directed by Allan Carlsen; set design, Robert Joel Schwartz; stage manager, Todd Gajdusek; costumes, Lyn Carroll; lighting, A. C. Hickox; sound, Donna Riley; fight director, Rick Sordelet.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company, Shepard Sobel, artistic director; Parris Relkin, general manager.
WITH: Arnie Burton, Joanne Camp, Frank Lowe, Paul O'Brien and Hank Wagner.


Political Leaders in Japan Accused of Mob Links
Government prosecutors presented evidence in court here today that some of the nation's top political leaders had formed a secret alliance with mobsters to raise money for the governing Liberal Democratic Party and silence right-wing protesters.
The prosecutors made the charges at the opening of a trial of three business executives involved in a bribery scandal that has engulfed Japan's political establishment since last spring.


Critic's Notebook; French Give Twist To Festival Of Dance
A French festival intent on celebrating Spanish dance might well wind up looking like an animated travel poster.
Yet the success, not immediately apparent, of the current Lyons Dance Biennial lies exactly in the ability of its artistic director, Guy Darmet, to steer clear of stereotypes.


2 ARSON ATTACKS WORRYING TEHERAN
Demonstrators set fire to a police station and municipal vehicles on Monday in a poor neighborhood of south Teheran, and the authorities described the incident as retaliation for the demolition of unlicensed shacks.
But residents said the protest was mounted by opponents of the Government.
Four children suffered serious burns and eight people were arrested, said residents of the neighborhood, Yaft-Abad.
They said more than 50 people protested "at a separate location" minutes after bulldozers tore down 30 brick houses on Arshadabad Street.


Smoked Salmon and Spinach Easily Turn Risotto Into a Meal
YOU can add just about anything you like to the basics of a good risotto.
With a little salmon and a lot of vegetables, a risotto can be transformed from a side dish into a substantial one-dish meal.
Even though each serving of this risotto includes only 1 1/2 ounces of smoked salmon, the salmon's flavor is so intense it pervades the generous serving of rice and vegetables.


Thomas I. Fitzgerald, 85, Lawyer And a Democratic Party Official
Thomas I. Fitzgerald, a lawyer and former Manhattan Democratic Party and court official, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
His family declined to give a specific cause of death.


Billy Crystal, in Directorial Debut, Stars as Obnoxious Stand-Up Comic
"Mr. Saturday Night" starts out by letting the audience know exactly what, or whom, it is up against: Buddy Young Jr., a corrosively funny stand-up comic who will stop at nothing for the sake of a laugh.
Buddy's brand of humor is so emphatically in-your-face that he feels equally free deriding close relatives ("my daughter, the paper cut") and total strangers ("I'd like to show you something that you probably haven't seen in a very long time: your feet").
Nasty as Buddy is, it's hard to resist him.
Besides, he's already his own worst enemy.
Billy Crystal, who is making his directorial debut with "Mr. Saturday Night" and co-wrote it (with Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel), knows a great deal about this character.
He can pinpoint everything from Buddy's mother's cooking (the basis for a vivid title sequence by Saul and Elaine Bass, complete with cabbage stuffing) to his choice in latter-day loungewear (a Nipsey Russell-Joey Bishop Pro-Am sweatsuit).
Having fine-tuned his performance as Buddy for nearly a decade on television, Mr.
Crystal makes the man instantly recognizable, and often scathingly funny, as a Borscht Belt-style comic whose flair for wisecracks has wildly distorted every other aspect of his life.


I.M.F. Head Scolds U.S. And Bonn for Deficits
Laying out an economic rationale for the politically difficult step of cutting budget deficits, the head of the International Monetary Fund scolded the United States and Germany today, saying their large budget deficits hurt world growth.
Opening the formal sessions of the annual meeting of the monetary fund and the World Bank, Michel Camdessus, the fund's managing director, used the moral suasion of his office to press Washington and Bonn to cut their deficits.
He said the move would improve investor confidence, ease inflationary pressures and reduce long-term interest rates.


'Long Night' Ahead Seen in Meeting to Nominate Weiss Successor
In a high school auditorium with four adding machines, two laptop computers, enough paper ballots for eight rounds of voting and 24 vote-watchers standing by, nearly 1,000 Manhattan Democrats will gather tonight to nominate a new Congressman -- or woman -- in a ritual of democracy little used and even less understood.
Under party rules and state law, the mission of the county Democratic committee is to nominate a successor to Representative Ted Weiss, who died last week.
But no one is quite sure how it all will work, since such gatherings happen so rarely.
Or as one former committeewoman, the author Gloria Steinem, put it yesterday, "It's a Dracula committee: It only lives when someone dies."


This Is Not 'Normal' . . . This Is.
According to a new study, normal body temperature ranges from 96.0 to 99.9 degrees Fahrenheit, with an average of 98.2 degrees.
Page C12.


Keep 'Em Rolling, Rolling, Rolling
P.
J.
Ward checked the watch dangling from a cord around his neck: It was 6:30 A.M., two minutes before the next M15 bus was due.
Still, commuters coming off the Staten Island Ferry and waiting for a ride uptown were not about to miss their chance to complain.
A few of them recognized Mr.
Ward as one of the Transit Authority's new route managers, responsible for a bus line in much the same way as station managers are in charge of subway stops.
"Where's the bus?" called a man in blue coveralls.
"It's supposed to be here." Others joined in, shouting that they were running late for work.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Encircling Arkansas, Bush Opens Harsh Attack on Clinton's Record
Trailing in polls around the nation, President Bush today unleashed a harsh critique of Bill Clinton's record as Governor of Arkansas and depicted him as a man who could not be trusted to lead the country.
A combative, sometimes strident Mr.
Bush derided Mr.
Clinton as a "man who has the gall to go around America and promise the moon, when on issue after issue, the sky has fallen in his own backyard."


Presbyterian Group Clears An Accused Church Leader
The Rev.
W.
Clark Chamberlain, who was elected to a leading position in the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) last June and then immediately resigned when a sexual-harassment complaint was filed against him, has been cleared of all charges by a church committee.


Danes Will Vote Again on Europe, But Treaty May See Some Changes
The Danish Prime Minister announced today that his country's voters, who touched off the current political crisis in the European Community when they narrowly rejected the proposed European union treaty in a June referendum, would be asked to vote again in mid-1993.
This means that the treaty, which was originally supposed to come into force on Jan. 1, could not be approved in whatever form until the middle of next year at the earliest.
Denmark is the only one of the 12 members of the European Community that has formally rejected the accord, which was agreed to last December in the Dutch city of Maastricht.


COMPANY NEWS
BOEING CO., Seattle, said it had received a $345 million order for two more 747-400 jetliners from Taiwan-based EVA Airways.
MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP., Washington, announced that it intends to purchase the remaining 49 percent of MCI Services Marketing Inc., a consumer sales and service unit of the company.


Los Angeles Schools Chief Quits Amid Union Pressure
The Los Angeles School Superintendent, Bill Anton, resigned today under intense pressure from the teachers' union following budget cuts that are causing despair within the school district, the country's second-largest.
After slipping his one-page resignation letter onto the desks of school board members, Mr.
Anton had bitter words this morning for the teachers' union, which he said has exerted undue influence as the district has tried to distribute the pain of cutbacks.


Gas-Price Rally Accelerates, As October Contract Surges
The stunning post-hurricane rally in natural gas prices accelerated anew yesterday, with the contract for October delivery adding 19.4 cents to settle at $2.646 per 1,000 cubic feet on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The gain was the biggest for the spot-month contract since Hurricane Andrew temporarily halted 5 percent of the nation's gas output in the Gulf of Mexico during the week of Aug. 24.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
CHOOSING A CANDIDATE IN AN UNUSUAL RITUAL
In a high school auditorium with four adding machines, two laptop computers, enough paper ballots for eight rounds of voting and 24 vote-watchers standing by, nearly 1,000 Manhattan Democrats will gather tonight to nominate a new Congressman -- or woman -- in a ritual of democracy little used and even less understood.
B3.
NEW SECURITY MEASURES FOR SCHOOL
Metal detectors will be put into use next week at South Shore High School in Brooklyn, school officials announced yesterday, following the death Monday of a South Shore student who was stabbed by a classmate in a hallway fight.
B3.
PRESSURES FORCE HOMELESS PLAN
Behind Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to press forward with an overhaul of the homeless shelter system, after months of apparent indecision and internal administration bickering, are a set of pressures that grew steadily in recent weeks.
B3.
Police officer indicted.
B4.
REGION
DISORDER IN THE COURTS
As lawyers, prisoners and tense family members waited -- and waited -- for action in their cases, lawyers for Westchester County and corrections officers awaited for a judge's ruling in a dispute that has drastically slowed the operations of the courthouse in White Plains.
"It has delayed justice, delayed the process," said Judge Joseph K. West, the supervising judge of the criminal courts for the 9th Judicial District.
"I don't take sides on whether the correction officers should or should not get a raise. But we need to have normalcy here and we're not getting it at this time." B5.
SUING FOR CLEANER AIR
Six environmental groups said yesterday that they intended to sue the Transportation Departments of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, arguing that the agencies have ignored Federal laws requiring them to reduce auto pollution, putting $20 billion in Federal transportation aid at stake.
B5.
FREE TO A GOOD HOME: NUCLEAR FUEL
The new owners of the Shoreham nuclear power plant on Long Island are looking for ways to get rid of $36 million worth of radioactive fuel.
Among the options: shipping it to France for reprocessing or to Mexico, where it could be used in a reactor that is to start operating next year.
B5.
A SKATER FIGHTS FOR HER RIGHTS
For Laurie Palmer, skating down the street on her Rollerblades has been an aerobic release from her duties as a mother, grandmother and intensive-care nurse.
Now, it seems, it may also become an exercise in civil rights.
Ms.
Palmer was arrested last month in Manchester, Conn., and charged with disorderly conduct because she refused to skate on the sidewalk of a four-lane road.
B5.
Official accused of sexual harassment.
B5.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman A1
Chronicle B8


GROUP REDUCES ITS STAKE IN TAJ MAHAL HOLDING
A group, including the chief executive of Trans World Airlines, Carl C. Icahn, has cut its stake in the Taj Mahal Holding's class B common shares to the equivalent of 19.4 percent.
Taj Mahal Holding was formed in December 1990 to serve as the beneficial owner of a general partnership interest in Trump Taj Mahal Associates.
The partnership operates the Trump Taj Mahal casino-hotel and convention center complex in Atlantic City.


Ruling on Free Agency Is Put Off for One Day
Keith Jackson of the Philadelphia Eagles and three other National Football League players will learn on Wednesday whether they will become instant free agents.
United States District Court Judge David Doty listened to arguments by lawyers representing the players and the league this morning before taking the case under advisement.
He did not announce a decision today, but a ruling was expected by Wednesday.


Campus Journal; After the Storm, Makeshift Education
A kitchen may not be the best place to drill 20 college freshmen in the finer points of reading comprehension, but Fred Wolven would be the first to admit that it is better than being out on the patio, where he had to hold his first post-hurricane class at Miami-Dade Community College's Homestead campus.
Here at what was the center of one of the fiercest storms of the century, education takes on a whole new perspective.
Homes, cars, classrooms and much else have been damaged, and ingenuity is the key to surviving.
Mr.
Wolven, a professor of English, keeps the freezer door open on a refrigerator-freezer in his converted classroom, hoping it will cool things, now that the class has grown to 20 as the storm survivors straggle in.


Bank Money Market Yields And C.D. Rates Off in Week
Yields of bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit fell in the latest reporting week, which ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication that tracks interest rates.
Analysts at the publication said, however, that the decline was not as sharp as in the previous weeks.
They said one explanation could be that banks believed the Federal Reserve might have placed further rate cuts on hold.


6 Environmental Groups Intend To Sue States on Car Pollution
Six environmental groups said yesterday that they intended to sue the Transportation Departments of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, arguing that the agencies have ignored Federal laws requiring them to reduce auto pollution.
At stake is almost $20 billion in Federal transportation aid to the three states that has either been recommended or allocated for the next six years.


60-Minute Gourmet
FRENCH children of my generation were nourished on hearty country stews.
Served with a thick chunk of bread and maybe some red wine diluted with water (the dilution depended on one's age), it was the sort of meal of which memories are made.
Stews were usually a way of cooking less expensive cuts of meat like beef neck or brisket and older chickens or the hens known as poule in French.
To my taste, a well-cooked and tenderized piece of sinewy meat can be more flavorful than cuts that cost three times as much.


Fighting in South Lebanon
Three Lebanese guerrillas belonging to the pro-Iranian Party of God were killed in a clash overnight with Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon, security officials here and an Israeli Army spokesman said today.
The firefight ended a monthlong lull in violence in the area.
Within an hour, the Israelis shelled three villages that are strongholds of the Party of God, the officials said.


Books of The Times; One Affair With Movies And One of Sacrilege
Screening History  By Gore Vidal  Illustrated. 97 pages.
Harvard University Press. $14.95.
Live from Golgotha  By Gore Vidal  232 pages.
Random House. $22.
It's hard to imagine a more defiant essayist writing about America today than Gore Vidal.
On almost every page of "Screening History" there is an observation worth admiring, whether it is about Hollywood and television, politics and history, or the paranoia and hypocrisy of the commercialized American dream.


Celebrating Their First Autumn


Book Notes
Salman Rushdie
When bookstores and libraries around the country begin observing Banned Book Week on Saturday, a week of activities and attention focusing on censorship around the world and through the ages, one of the most well-known modern writers on the list of unfortunately celebrated authors will be Salman Rushdie.
Mr.
Rushdie has lived in nomadic secrecy since February 1989, when his novel "The Satanic Verses" was declared blasphemous to Islam by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran and a multi-million dollar reward was offered for his execution.
Mr.
Rushdie is venturing into the public more and more these days, doing impromptu readings at bookstores, addressing conventions on freedom of expression and human rights, conferring with Government officials in various countries.
But everywhere he goes, he is surrounded by an elaborate security net and every public appearance, say the British authorities in charge of protecting him, poses a true threat to his life.


Steven J. Massey, Law Professor, 43
Steven J. Massey, a law professor at New York Law School, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 43 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Kathleen.


The Sweet Cycle, From Blossom to Berry to Jam
FROM mid-June through late October, New England jam makers follow a natural progression that begins with tiny batches of wild strawberry preserves and ends with jars of brown apple butter.
As jam makers, we know that contrary to appearances, we cannot find jam, which is both a product and a process, in the supermarket.
To find it, we must set out early and stay up late, spending mornings picking, afternoons cooking and canning, and evenings cleaning up.
The making of jam begins with a search for fruit.
Low to the ground, among early summer flowers like lupines and irises, the most intense fruit of the jam-making season tantalizes.
Wild strawberries, small enough to evade all but the most determined harvesters and easily mistaken for drying leaves, are difficult to gather in quantity but beyond comparison in quality.
Later, cultivated strawberries, available at pick-your-own farms, are large enough to fit between picking fingers and spring free with gentle pulls.
Even if the picker is choosy, avoiding white-tipped berries not fully ripe and dark red ones just overripe, boxes are quickly filled in luxurious mounds.


U.S. Is Appalled by the Execution Of A.I.D. Employee in the Sudan
Relations between Washington and the Sudan, once an important American ally in Africa, have steadily deteriorated since the coming to power of Muslim fundamentalists in 1989.
But the execution of a Sudanese employee of the United States' foreign aid agency appears to have shocked American diplomats already familiar with wide-ranging rights abuses by the Sudanese.
Donald Peterson, the United States Ambassador in Khartoum, said today that Andrew Tombe, 34 years old, a 10-year employee of the Agency for International Development in the southern regional capital of Juba, had been convicted of treason by a military court and executed about 10 days ago.
Mr.
Tombe was accused of working for a rebel group dominated by Christians and animists that is trying to wrest control of the south from the northern, Muslim-dominated government.


Test Results on Heart Drug Cause Slide in Gensia Stock
Gensia Pharmaceuticals Inc., a company that develops drugs for the treatment of cardiovascular disease, lost more than one-third of its market value yesterday after it said early tests on Arasin, its flagship drug, did not completely prove its effectiveness in preventing heart attacks during bypass surgery.
Following the announcement the price of Gensia's shares plummeted, falling by $13.50 a share, to $22, in hectic over-the-counter trading.
Gensia was the most actively traded issue on the Nasdaq system yesterday, with more than 6.9 million shares changing hands.


BUSH VETOES BILL MAKING EMPLOYERS GIVE FAMILY LEAVE
President Bush tonight issued an unusual late-night veto of a politically contentious bill that would require larger companies to grant at least 12 weeks of unpaid leave to any employee to deal with a birth or adoption, a parent's or spouse's sickness, or other family emergencies.
Nearing the end of 15 hours of campaigning, Mr.
Bush said in a written statement that he supported the concept of family leave but was rejecting the legislation because the financial burden it would impose on business would further dampen the growth of the economy and new jobs.


Arab Kills an Israeli Policeman in Jerusalem
A Palestinian wearing an Israeli Army shirt and carrying a military-issue rifle shot and killed a paramilitary policeman on the northern outskirts of Jerusalem today in an attack that the police said was the first of its kind in the city.
"This is a very serious attack," said the Jerusalem police chief, Haim Albaldess.
"There has not been such an attack in Jerusalem in which terrorists arrived and shot at the security forces." Palestinian assailants have stabbed policemen in Jerusalem, but none have used firearms.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Penalties Mar Rangers-Maple Leaf Tie  Nikolai Borschevsky had two goals and was a scoring threat all night as the Toronto Maple Leafs tied the Rangers, 4-4, in a penalty-filled exhibition game last night in Toronto.
Brandon Convery and Guy Larose also scored for the Maple Leafs.
Darren Turcotte, James Patrick, Doug Weight and Peter Andersson scored for the Rangers.
Referee Richard Trottier kept a steady flow of players heading to the penalty box.
There were 33 minor penalties, three misconducts and one major.
New York was 2 for 12 on the power play; Toronto was 2 for 15. (AP) GOLF  Defending Champ Leads in Met PGA  Ron McDougal of Century, the defending champion, shot a two-under-par 69 to share the lead with Bob Longo of Seawane and Mark Burrell of the New York Health and Racquet Club after the first round of the $55,000 Izod/Cadillac Met PGA Championship yesterday.
Larry Rentz of Winged Foot, the 1990 Met Open champ, was one shot back at 70 in the 54-hole event being played over the 6,950-yard, par-71 Black course at Bethpage (L.I.) State Park.
A field of 144 pros will be trimmed to the low 60 scorers and ties for tomorrow's final round.


Women's Household Labor Goes Unrewarded
To the Editor:
The denial of women's labor is a curious phenomenon.
Why is it that a woman is thought to be either "at work" or "at home," and that working at home means performing office tasks?
Why isn't child raising considered to be the difficult, albeit rewarding job that it is?
It was mentioned repeatedly at the Republican Convention and in your Sept. 2 news article on mothers' roles that a woman was either "at work" or had chosen to stay "at home." "At home" had the connotation of being invisible.
As Anna Quindlen has written: "When men do dishes, it is called helping. When women do dishes, it is called life" ("Abhors a Vacuum," column, Sept. 9).


Michael J. Floersheim, Commodity Trader, 54
Michael J. Floersheim, an international commodities trader, investor and philanthropist, died on Sunday at his home in Zurich.
He was 54 years old.
He apparently died of a heart attack, his family said


Hold the Funeral. Giants' Season Still Lives
The Chicago Bears are at best a decent team.
But by upsetting them Monday night in Soldier Field, the Giants proved something about their own ability, their determination and perhaps their chances for the rest of the season.
The Giants' 27-14 victory was obviously important because they had lost their first two games of the season.
But it was also important because of a series of contributions by fired-up players and a number of big plays that showed that an aggressive team with desire can win games.


Theater in Review
The Depression Show  One Dream Theater 232 West Broadway TriBeCa Through Oct. 10 By Thomas Keith and Jane Young; directed by George Hewitt; music by Marc Steinberg; lyrics by Mr.
Keith and Ms.
Young; choreography by James Adlesic, Ms.
Young and Mr.
Keith; production designed by Ronald Gottschalk; musical direction by Michael Shenker; production stage manager, David Alan Comstock.
Presented by Young Dog Ensemble.
WITH: James Adlesic, William Flatley, Brian Keane, Thomas Keith, Randy Lilly, Christine Malik, Pamela Newkirk, Marc Reeves, Michael Shenker, Gwen Torry-Owens and Jane Young.


Behind The No. 2 Feature In Playboy
Robert F. Kennedy and John F. Kennedy said no.
Jimmy Carter said yes, and then mentioned "committing adultery in my heart," which threw his Presidential campaign into turmoil.
Bruce Springsteen says he's not ready yet, and Saddam Hussein is proving to be one tough interview to get, but Playboy is still trying.
In the last 30 years, 360 subjects have submitted to the ordeal known as the Playboy interview, the second-most popular feature in the magazine.
It began with interviewing Miles Davis in 1962, and it has its 30th anniversary this month with an interview with Betty Friedan.


Food Notes
Tracking the Sephardim
"Sephardic Cooking," by Copeland Marks (Donald I. Fine, $24.95), is the product of an odyssey that took the author to Jewish communities from Portugal to India.
The subject is especially appropriate this year, the 500th anniversary of the expulsion of the Jews from Spain and their settlement throughout Europe, North Africa and the Middle East.
The book briefly explains the history of the Jews in each country covered.
Mr.
Marks said that in some countries, like Libya, virtually all the Jews have immigrated to Israel.


What Ought We Do?
To the Editor:
Regarding what to call the first 10 years of the next century (letter, Sept. 13): My mother, Mabel Davenport, was a member of the Class of 1900 at Hunter College.
She and her classmates were called the "Noughty-Noughts." You could change the spelling a bit and it might still work out.
LAURIE EADIE Chatham, Mass., Sept. 13, 1992


Review/Television; Trying To Succeed At a 90's Marriage
Marriage, television-style, is a perilous concept.
Older couples, in the manner of Archie and Edith Bunker, are mired in wisecracks.
Guys like Jerry Seinfeld are almost always bachelors.
Smart and attractive women, from Mary Richards to Murphy Brown, stay single.
Poor Rhoda Morgenstern got married and her show was canceled.
Nevertheless, "Mad About You," the new NBC series having its premiere tonight at 9:30, is giving marriage a whirl, hoping to make a cogent point or two about love in the 1990's.
Maybe.
Created by Paul Reiser and Danny Jacobson, the show stars Mr.
Reiser, formerly a stand-up comic and star of television's "My Two Dads," and Helen Hunt, who plays opposite Billy Crystal in the film "Mr. Saturday Night." Mr.
Reiser and Ms.
Hunt play Jamie and Paul Buchman, married for five months and still wondering what to do with some of their wedding presents.
He makes documentaries; she's in public relations.
He's cautious: she's impulsive.
They live in a Manhattan apartment and she gets nervous about leaving windows open: cat burglars and that sort of thing.


Credit Markets; New Treasury Bidding Rule Costly for U.S. in Note Sale
The first test of the Treasury's new auction system yesterday did not go well for the Government, according to bidders, analysts and the auction details released by the Treasury.
Despite a record low yield for the two-year note of 4 percent, the Treasury may still have paid more than it had to.
But some traders argued that the Treasury could be expected to pay a premium, considering the uncertainty surrounding the test.
They said that the Treasury was likely to benefit in the long run after dealers and traders get used to the system.


Orioles Don't Compile A Winning Formula
Baltimore Manager Johnny Oates didn't need a degree in algebra or calculus to figure out the Orioles' chances of catching the Toronto Blue Jays.
The math, he surmised, is simple: Unless the Orioles were able to win the first of a three-game series against the Blue Jays tonight and just about every game after that, their chances of winning the American League East stood somewhere between slim and none.
"Mathematically, it's not a must; realistically, it is, as is tomorrow night and the next night," Oates said before the game.
"I was never a math major, but I do know that we have to win right here to have a shot."


Optimistic About Taylor
When Lawrence Taylor was stretched out on the grass of Soldier Field on Monday night, he did not stir and appeared seriously injured.
For Taylor, the bruised right shoulder was indeed serious.
He missed seven plays before returning.
He finished the game and in the postgame locker room he was chipper.
Today, Coach Ray Handley of the Giants said Taylor was fine, and that he expected him to take part in practice Wednesday.
He said the bruise was to a muscle, not bone.


Philadelphia Unions Facing Deadline Today on Contract
Almost every day, Mayor Edward G. Rendell repeats a campaign pledge that he will endure a strike, if necessary, to make the city run efficiently and within its budget.
It may be necessary.


COMPANY NEWS: Merck as a Benchmark; Taking the Measure Of the Biotech Field
The youthful biotech industry continues to expand at a clip most businesses can only envy in 1992's slow growth economy.
But it is still several years away from profitability, according to an annual survey released yesterday by the accounting firm Ernst &amp; Young.
G.
Steven Burrill and Kenneth B. Lee Jr., the San Francisco-based authors of the survey, said the total number of biotech companies grew 11 percent, to 1,231, in the year ending June 30.
Industry employment expanded to 79,000, an increase of 13 percent.


Tortillas Gain Aficionados in U.S.
At the outskirts of this city's largest Mexican community, just east of downtown, is the world's largest tortilla factory, where blaring machines and uniformed workers cut, press and bake more than 1.2 million dozen flour and corn tortillas a day.
Although the factory operates around the clock and recently expanded production to 24 lines from 8, it still cannot meet the explosive demand here and nationwide.


Senate Panel Backs Tame Bill on Trade
After calls last winter for legislation to limit sales by Japanese auto makers, and after months of often spirited debate in Congress, the Senate Finance Committee today approved a bill that would make no important changes in American trade law.
Instead, the bill would revise hundreds of antiquated Customs Service rules, allowing the Federal agency to accept computer data instead of endless paper forms.


2 High School Students Injured in Attack
Two La Guardia High School students were injured yesterday, one of them seriously, when a group of eight young men attacked them as part of a continuing dispute, the police said.
The police arrested eight men in the attack, in which one student was hit with a pipe and another was slashed with a machete, said Capt.
Lewis Mannetta of the 20th Precinct.


NYNEX AND ROCHESTER TELEPHONE PLAN VENTURE
The Nynex Mobile Communications Company and the Rochester Telephone Corporation will form a "cellular supersystem" that will link cellular phone users across upstate New York, the two companies said yesterday.
The system will include the cellular markets in Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, Utica-Rome and New York Rural Service Area One, which includes Jefferson, St.
Lawrence and Lewis counties.


CHRONICLE
SVETLANA ALLILUYEVA, Stalin's daughter, is living in obscurity in a charity hostel on a shabby west London street, The Evening Standard reported yesterday.
Mike Bassett, director of the charity running the hostel, told the London newspaper that it is a place for "people with quite severe emotional problems." Miss Alliluyeva, 66 years old, who has refused to make a living from being the daughter of Stalin, moved there recently and is using her married name, Lana Peters.


BRITAIN, IN A SHIFT, CUTS INTEREST RATE TO HELP ECONOMY
Britain cut its benchmark interest rate one point today, to 9 percent, making clear that it has abandoned its effort to stabilize its currency and will concentrate instead on reinvigorating its weakened economy.
The action marked a reversal of Britain's basic economic approach, which until last week involved an effort to raise interest rates to fight inflation and prevent a devaluation of the pound.


Court Clears Way for 'Damned in U.S.A.'
A Federal appeals court in New Orleans lifted an injunction yesterday and cleared the way for the distribution of a British documentary about censorship in America that was under legal attack by the Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon, an anti-pornography crusader who was interviewed in the film.
The ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit means that the Emmy Award-winning film "Damned in the U.S.A.," which includes sexually explicit material, can be shown today at the eighth annual Boston Film Festival and in other theaters around the country.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Campaign Trail; On Quayle's List: a Rapper and a Record Company
Vice President Dan Quayle has set his family-values sights on what he sees as a new demon in the entertainment world.
Having fired a few values volleys at Murphy Brown -- and taken a few hits in return -- he now is targeting a rap performer, Tupac Amaru Shakur, and his record company, Interscope Records of Los Angeles.


Homeless Timetable; Under Pressure, Efforts to Overhaul Shelter System Take On New Urgency
Behind Mayor David N. Dinkins's decision to press forward with an overhaul of the homeless shelter system, after months of apparent indecision and internal adminstration bickering, are a set of pressures that grew steadily in recent weeks.
The number of homeless families in shelters reached an all-time high, the state threatened sanctions if conditions did not improve, a judge was getting increasingly angry, and the Mayor himself seemed increasingly aware of the potential political risks of inaction.


In Their Own Words
GOV. BILL CLINTON In a speech yesterday at Michigan State University at East Lansing.
"I'm not surprised that instead of showing up here today to make the case that the next four years ought to be like the last four, Mr. Bush is instead flying to states all around my native state to tell them what a bad Governor I've been. I'll tell you what: I bet you anything he won't point out that Arkansas ranks first in the country in job growth this year.


Screening For Arms At School
Metal detectors will be put into use next week at South Shore High School in Brooklyn, school officials announced yesterday, following the death Monday of a South Shore student who was stabbed by a classmate in a hallway fight.
South Shore was not among the 40 high schools that were part of a program in which security guards with hand-held detectors made surprise visits to schools to screen students for weapons.


Bulgaria Closes Reactor
Bulgarian officials shut a reactor at the nuclear plant in Kozlodui after a short circuit caused a small burst of flame, plant officials said today.
A plant spokesman said no radioactive material was involved in the incident, which affected the newest 1,000-megawatt reactor.
The aging Soviet-designed plant provides 40 percent of Bulgaria's electricity.


Russian Appeals to U.N. To Safeguard Minorities
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia appealed to the United Nations today to consider setting up international trusteeships to oversee the move to independence by former Soviet non-Slavic republics to prevent them from discriminating against minorities.
"Previously, victims of totalitarian regimes and ideologies needed protection," Mr.
Kozyrev told the General Assembly.
"Today, ever more often one needs to counter aggressive nationalism that emerges as a new global threat."


Rollerblading Leads Woman to Court
For Laurie Palmer, skating down the street on her purple and black Rollerblades has long been an aerobic release from her duties as a mother, grandmother and intensive-care nurse.
Now, it seems, it may also become an exercise in civil rights.
Ms.
Palmer, who is 40 years old, was arrested last month in Manchester, where she lives, and charged with disorderly conduct because she refused to skate on the sidewalk of a four-lane road.
It was her third clash with the police over her sport of choice; the first two, also in August, resulted in a pair of traffic tickets, which she is also protesting.


Coke Chooses An Ad Agency
Coca-Cola U.S.A. said yesterday that the Atlanta office of its flagship agency, McCann-Erickson, had been awarded the advertising account for Nordic Mist, the new line of flavored sparkling water aimed at younger consumers.
Billings were not disclosed.


Starts of Housing Up 10.4%; Largest Gain in 18 Months
In a report less robust than it appeared, the Commerce Department said today that builders broke ground on new homes in August at an annual rate of 1,237,000, or 10.4 percent higher than in July.
That was the fastest pace since March, the first gain since May and the biggest gain in 18 months.


I.B.M. TO MAKE MAINFRAME SOFTWARE FOR WORK STATIONS
I.B.M. plans to make mainframe-class software for its line of small work station computers.
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it would make a version of its transaction-processing software, used by banks and other financial institutions, for its popular RS-6000 work stations, which are powerful desktop and desk-side computers.


Coslet Turns His Back On What He Has Seen
Forget about last year's trip to the playoffs.
Forget about the 5-0 preseason.
Forget about Sunday's loss to San Francisco.
That is all Coach Bruce Coslet wanted his 0-3 Jets to remember on their day off yesterday.
"They have to have a real short memory and just focus on the tasks at hand: this play, this down, this snap count, this start," said Coslet.
"Just take it one at a time. Just play football."


I.R.S. Publishes New Rules On Employers' Tax Deposits
Beginning next year, under simplified rules published by the Internal Revenue Service today, about three-fourths of all businesses will be able to deposit with Washington just once a month the taxes they withhold from employees' paychecks.
The new rules are intended to redress the dizzying complexity of the existing system of calculating payroll tax deposits -- a system so convoluted that in any given year nearly one business in three fails to comply.
Under the current system, some companies have to file as often as eight times a month.


Market Place; 'Junk Bonds' Come Back And Defaults Are Down
Discredited and discarded just a couple of years ago, "junk bonds" are back.
With $29.5 billion in new public issues sold so far this year, investment firms expect to easily surpass the record junk bond sales of $31.9 billion set in the giddy market of 1986.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Truth's Several Sides; Bush's Attack on the Clinton Record Is Accurate, at Least as Far as It Goes
Much of President Bush's damning description today of Bill Clinton's record as Governor was accurate, but as with all things political, Mr.
Bush's account gave only half the story.
There are countervailing figures and plausible explanations for many of the harsh statistics the President described, conditions borne of Arkansas's endemic poverty, its citizens' historical disdain for government and the sharp statutory limits the state places on its chief executive.


A Diamond-Coated Tool Etches the Tortuous Path of New Technologies
Last spring, the Kingsbury Corporation had an unhappy customer.
The metal-cutting machinery Kingsbury had built for an Alabama maker of brass water-meter housings had failed to perform as well as the company had promised.
"The brass just chewed up the carbide tools the machinery used," recalled James L. Koontz, president and chief executive of Kingsbury, a Keene, N.H., machine tool company.


Executive Changes
BEAR, STEARNS &amp; CO., New York, named Frederick P. Leuffer managing director and senior oil analyst.
CHASE MANHATTAN BANK OF FLORIDA N.A.,Miami, a unit of Chase Manhattan Corp., appointed Fernando Pinto de Moura executive vice president.
He is also a senior vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A.


Tough Time for Private Manager of Public Schools
Championed as an agent for change, Education Alternatives Inc. arrived this summer at Baltimore City Public Schools bent on helping to overhaul a district that many say needs repair.
But the Minneapolis company, the first to go into the business of managing public schools for profit, has faced nothing but trouble.
Angry parents picketed one school over the company's plan to place special-education students in regular classrooms, although the company had received a waiver from the state to do so.
Teachers at another school have boycotted training sessions with the company until they get more answers about long-term plans.
And the company has been buffeted by community skepticism because of its brief managerial track record.


INSIDE
A Surge in 'Junk' Bonds
High-risk "junk" bonds, which provided much of the financing for the takeover boom of the 1980's, are making a comeback.
Page D1.
The Mighty Currency Trader
As last week proved, the power of currency traders can overwhelm the power of Governments, even when Europeans join forces.
Page D1.
Dinkins vs.
Giuliani


Europeans Urge the U.N. to Act More Aggressively to Prevent War
The 12 European Community countries warned today that unless the United Nations becomes more adept at resolving disputes before they erupt into conflicts, it risks becoming overloaded with costly peacekeeping operations.
The community welcomed President Bush's strong endorsement of the United Nations peacekeeping role in a speech Monday to the General Assembly.
But in a joint declaration today before the assembly, the 12 countries emphasized what the United Nations can do to stop wars from breaking out rather than having to clean up later.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; 'Murphy Brown' Feud: When Art Replaces Life
Perhaps Dan Quayle should pick on someone in his own dimension.
Knowing that he would be attacked Monday night on the CBS sit-com "Murphy Brown," Mr.
Quayle tried to be a good sport, even going so far as to send a stuffed elephant to the show's controversial new baby.
But as the evening's events illustrated, competing against a fictional character is a formidable task for a real person, even one as powerful as the Vice President.


Israelis Mull Return of Golan, Then Resist Harder
Selling the Israeli public on the possible need to give up part of the Golan Heights is proving to be more of a challenge for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin than it had seemed when he raised the idea two weeks ago.
At first, most Israelis accepted the Prime Minister's land-for-peace proposal with surprising equanimity, apparently trusting that former General Rabin was not about to strike a Golan deal with Syria that would compromise national security.


Why Currencies Move Faster Than Policies
On a dull day, hundreds of billions of dollars' worth of marks, yen, dollars and other currencies change hands, as speculators bet on the direction of currency markets and money managers seek opportunities overseas.
On a busy day, volume can top a trillion dollars.
That is a lot of money.
And as last week proved, the combined power of all of these traders can overwhelm the power of governments, even when all of Europe is trying to act in concert.
The events provided a bitter reminder to central bankers and finance ministers that the power of Governments to control economies and currencies has eroded.
Failing by Trying Too Hard
The changes have been gradual, and by no means do they show that governments have lost all economic influence.
But when governments try to accomplish too many things, such as Britain's effort to both prop up its currency and stimulate its economy, they can fail to do either.
Britain has now decided it will try to grow, regardless of whether that weakens the pound.


Egghead Names New Chairman
Ronald P. Erickson, an original investor in Egghead Software Inc., the largest computer software retailer in North America, has been named chairman.
He succeeds Stuart M. Sloan, who joined the company in 1989 along with Matthew J. Griffin, the president and chief executive, to try to stem $12.1 million in losses posted in the 1989 fiscal year.
The company since has had 11 consecutive profitable quarters.


Birth Defects in South Texas Prompt Call for U.S. Registry
An unusually high number of infants born in South Texas with severe neurological problems has prompted calls for a national registry to track birth defects and help researchers eliminate their causes.
As far as birth defects go, "I think of us as being in the intellectual dark ages," said Dr.
John Harris, an epidemiologist who is chief of the California Birth Defects Monitoring Program, which is widely considered to be the best state program in the nation.


P.O.W.'s Not Knowingly Left In Indochina, Kissinger Insists
Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger said today that top officials of the Nixon Administration did not knowingly leave American prisoners of war behind in Vietnam and Laos when United States troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in 1973.
On the second day of a new round of Senate committee hearings, Mr.
Kissinger rejected suggestions that the Nixon Administration, falling deeper under the shadow of Watergate, had made a political decision to turn its back on the unfinished business of Vietnam.


Islanders Lose Game, Player
For the Islanders, the 5-3 loss to the Devils at Nassau Coliseum, their third consecutive exhibition defeat, was bad enough.
The medical report was even more discouraging: they will be without rookie defenseman Vladimir Malakhov for at least another week and perhaps much longer.
Malakhov, who has not recovered from groin discomfort, is a six-year veteran of the Elite League of the former Soviet Union who played for Olympic and national teams there.
He signed this season for more than $400,000 and was expected to play a major role for the Islanders.


Dan Lacey, Editor, Is Dead at 42; Analyzed Unemployment Trends
Dan Lacey, an authority on changes in the American work force, especially on the wave of cutbacks made by companies in recent years, died on Monday in Westlake, Ohio.
He was 42 years old.
Mr. Lacey died of a heart attack, said his wife, Margaret.


U.N. Assembly Expels Belgrade Over Its Role in Bosnia Fighting
The United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly tonight to expel the Belgrade Government from the seat previously occupied by the defunct Yugoslav federation.
The vote came after Milan Panic, Prime Minister of the new, truncated Yugoslavia, said he was struggling to promote peace against "militant nationalists who defy our orders."


CHRONICLE
There is something about hot weather that inspires MEL TORME to think about Christmas.
When he wrote "The Christmas Song," which is better known by its lyrics, "Chestnuts roasting on an open fire," than by its title, "It was one of the hottest July days imaginable in California," Mr.
Torme recalled the other day.
"I wrote it almost as a way to cool down."


Wine Talk
The Zinds and the Humbrechts have been involved with wine here in Alsace for hundreds of years, but their company, Domaine Zind-Humbrecht, has been around only since 1959.
Today, Leonard Humbrecht; his son, Olivier, and about 150 friends and relatives celebrated the opening of a new winery here for their company.
Zind is the maiden name of Leonard's wife, Jeannette, and for generations the picture-book villages on the eastern slope of the Vosges Mountains in northeast France have been home to both families.


What's Normal? Would You Believe 98.2?
YOUR normal temperature is 98.6 degrees. Right? Wrong.
Normal temperatures for individuals ranged from 96 to 99.9 degrees Fahrenheit, and the mean was 98.2 degrees (36.8 degrees centigrade), in a new study from the Veterans Affairs Medical Center and the University of Maryland in Baltimore.


AT TEA WITH: Ozzy Osbourne; Family Man. Fights Fat, Is Good With Kids.
OZZY OSBOURNE will always be remembered for his uncontrollable appetite.
Once, on stage, he bit the head off a dead bat thrown by a fan. (He says he thought it was a rubber toy.) In a meeting with record executives, he bit the head off a live dove. (He says he was drunk and feeling unappreciated.)
Today, though, the pioneering heavy-metal singer from Britain isn't even picking at the scones that his wife, Sharon, has ordered up with tea to their suite at the Helmsley Palace in mid-Manhattan.
Besides watching his waistline, Ozzy is suffering from a lingering cold, fatigue from a year of almost nonstop touring and myriad other minor maladies, like fallen arches and a torn toenail.


About New York; A Middleman's Ventures in the Can Trade
From the ranks of the down-and-out scufflers who range through the city picking up empty soda and beer containers an elite has emerged, a group of people called two-for-oners who have found a way to earn as much as $60,000 to $70,000 a year by redeeming discarded cans.
While most of the city's can and bottle scavengers eke out the flimsiest subsistence by gathering and turning in a few hundred aluminum, plastic or glass empties a day, the two-for-oners have left homelessness behind by becoming middlemen.
Each night they buy thousands of cans at a price of 5 cents for two cans and redeem them the next morning for the full 5-cent deposit per can.


Somalis Rediscover Hope in a Handful of Seeds
As the sound of artillery thudded across the Somali countryside here early last year, Sharif Abdul Nur abandoned his thatched clay hut, gathered his 40 camels and pregnant wife and headed for the bush to seek safety and sustenance.
He returned home five months ago, bereft of camels; 33 were stolen, he said, and the family ate the other seven in desperation.
His young wife, Arhaba Ahmed, his fourth, was bearing his 20th child.
Since then, Mr.
Nur, three of whose children died of hunger, has been surviving on a few handouts and, thanks to his good name, credit.


Murray Eagerly Enlists In Platoon
This is how Jeff Torborg makes out the Mets' lineup: First, he puts Eddie Murray's name at the No. 4 spot.
Second, he writes in the starting pitcher at the bottom of the list.
Then, he turns to a long list of rookies and call-ups and platoon players and starts scratching his head.


Mike Utley Joins In With Sports Legends
"Life goes on," MIKE UTLEY said last night.
"My advice to people is to find something that you like to do and do it."
Utley has done it.
The former Detroit Lions lineman, paralyzed after being injured in a game with the Los Angeles Rams last year, was on hand for the seventh annual Greatest Sports Legends dinner held at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel last night.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; MORE PEROT HINTS ON RENEWED RACE
More than two months after he announced that he would not seek the Presidency, Ross Perot seems to be inching closer to changing his mind.
Using his favorite forum, a televised interview, Mr.
Perot said today that he was considering renewing his quest for the White House and that his decision in July to drop out of the race was a mistake.


Straight Talk About the Draft
Vice President Quayle is in no position to disparage either Gov.
Bill Clinton's record of avoiding military service in Vietnam or his failure to speak candidly about it.
And President Bush has no grounds for attacking Mr.
Clinton either about military service or candor when his own running mate is so vulnerable.
The same political liability burdens both Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Quayle.
Each used legal options to avoid serving in Vietnam, thus profiting from their country's unjust system of choosing who had to fight that unpopular war.
And like many Americans who duck or oppose military service, each has trouble talking straight about it.


Yawning at The Bomb
It has taken the Senate 14 months to begin consideration of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.
Yet what do some resistant Republicans want to do?
Filibuster, further delaying ratification.
That's the latest example of Washington's remarkably diffident attitude toward the large and potentially dangerous array of nuclear arms that remain in the former Soviet Union.
Soviet disunion catapulted three republics into the ranks of nuclear powers overnight.
If the U.S. is to prevent instant proliferation, it needs to take several urgent steps:


Bitter Dinkins-Giuliani Battle Veers From Politics to Race
With New York City's mayoral election 14 months away, Mayor David N. Dinkins and his likely Republican rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, are squaring off in an unusually bitter and racially charged political battle that began last week when Mr.
Giuliani spoke before thousands of angry police officers at a demonstration near City Hall.
Mr.
Giuliani and the Mayor or his aides have accused one another of appealing to racial bias for political advantage.
Each side has also suggested that the other is pandering to its natural political base, sacrificing racial harmony in the process.
Comparison With Duke
The dispute, which has raged for a week, has now taken an even nastier turn.
In an interview on Monday on a radio station with a predominantly black audience, the Mayor's top political adviser, Bill Lynch, compared Mr.
Giuliani with David Duke.


Transactions
Basketball
National Basketball Association  CHICAGO BULLS -- Announced that Cliff Levingston, forward, has signed to play for Paok in Greece next year.
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Acquired Mark Jackson, guard, and a 1995 second-round draft pick from the New York Knicks and Stanley Roberts, center, from the Orlando Magic.
In exchange, New York received Charles Smith, forward, and Doc Rivers and Bo Kimble, guards, from the Clippers.
Orlando received the Knicks' 1993 first-round draft pick and the Clippers' 1993 or 1994 first-round draft pick.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Signed Melvin Robinson, center.


A Journey From Here To Horse of the Year
You can get rich in racing in the next five weeks if you happen to own a horse who can win the Super Derby ($750,000) at Louisiana Downs this Sunday, or the Turf Classic ($500,000) at Belmont Park the next week, or the Jockey Club Gold Cup ($850,000) at Belmont the week after that.
The gold rush will take you ultimately to Gulfstream Park in Florida on Oct. 31 for the Breeders' Cup championships, where you can bag anywhere from $1 million to $3 million for one race.
And if you win $3 million by winning the Classic, the world's richest horse race, you also may go home with something potentially more valuable in breeding: the title Horse of the Year.


Cable Bill Approved By Senate
Congress sent President Bush a controversial bill today to regulate soaring cable television prices, daring him to carry through on his veto threat in the face of large votes for the measure in both the House and Senate.
The Senate approved the measure today, 74 to 25, an unexpectedly wide margin that included a majority of the Senate's Republicans.
The approval came despite intense lobbying against the measure by cable television companies, Hollywood movie studios and the White House.  [ Roll-call, page D2. ]


Charles H. Shattuck, 81, Shakespearean Scholar
Prof.
Charles H. Shattuck, a Shakespearean scholar and an authority on the performance of the playwright's works in the United States, died on Monday at his home in Urbana, Ill.
He was 81 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Assault Weapons Are Designed for Murder; Criminals' Choice
To the Editor:
When the headline "Assault Weapons Aren't the Problem" caught our eye on the Sept. 1 Op-Ed page, we weren't surprised to find that the heart of the article beneath it was an attack on a study we made in 1989.
Gary Kleck comes to the conclusion that all the fuss about assault weapons in America is misguided.
Mr.
Kleck, a professor of criminal justice at Florida State University, argues that assault weapons are different from other firearms in appearance only.
He submits that "millions of people" use the weapons innocently for self-protection, target shooting and "killing animals preying on herds or crops."


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The North Carolina Eastern Municipal Power Agency dominated the tax-exempt market yesterday with a $1.45 billion issue of power-system bonds consisting mostly of refunding bonds.
Underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company tentatively priced the issue to yield a maximum of 6.57 percent for a bond due in 2021.


Met and Its Musicians Agree on New Contract
The Metropolitan Opera and its orchestral musicians, represented by Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, have announced an agreement on a new three-year contract.
The agreement, announced on Friday, is to take effect on Aug. 1, 1993, when the current contract expires.


Derailed Train Keeps L.I.R.R. Line Out of Service


Personal Health
CANCER of the prostate is unquestionably a disease of older men.
It is rare in men under 50, but by the age of 65 to 70 nearly one man in seven has a detectable prostate cancer that could someday threaten his life.
Now second only to lung cancer as a cause of cancer deaths and second only to skin cancer as a diagnosis among men, prostate cancer will eventually strike 1 man in 11 in this country.
But as this disease becomes more common as well as more deadly, medical scientists are questioning whether age and a rising life expectancy alone are the reasons for the grim statistics.
They point to the fact that in most Asian countries, prostate cancer is rare.
But in postwar Japan, which has experienced striking changes in living and eating habits, the rates have been rising.
And when Asian immigrants move to a country where the rates are high, their risk of developing prostate cancer rises.


Surviving In Florida On Charity
Just about every morning since shortly after Hurricane Andrew ruined their home and their antique business, Rose and Rufino Acosta have been starting their day with a hot breakfast at one of the Army's tent cities.
Mr.
Acosta, a tall, husky man in his mid-30's, bought his jeans and yellow work boots with vouchers from the American Red Cross.
He got his orange baseball cap and green T-shirt from the Salvation Army, the same place the couple picked up toothpaste, shampoo and canned goods.


Germany's Well-Defended Mark
For all the political pressures on the Germans to lower their high interest rates to help revive the world economy, few bankers, politicians or others here show any sign of doubt that they are doing the right thing by keeping them high to keep the mark sound.
The German central bank and most German political leaders say high interest rates are still necessary to keep inflation from undermining the soundness of the mark and eventually spreading and ruining the rest of the European economies, as it threatened to do in the last period of monetary and political turmoil in the 1970's.


Ex-Assemblyman Accused of Sexual Harassment
A one-time aide to a former Manhattan Asssemblyman charged yesterday that the Assemblyman, Mark Alan Siegel, had sexually harassed her and that her complaint was dismissed when she took it to the Assembly.
The former aide, Charmian Neary, 33 years old, made her comments before a hearing of the Governor's Task Force on Sexual Harassment at Hunter College.


U.S. May Be Ready to Discuss Ban on Warplanes Over Bosnia
The United States is considering taking part in a proposed ban on military flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina like the one that is now imposed over parts of Iraq, a senior Administration official said today.
President Bush has made no decision on the proposal, the official said.
It would represent a significant expansion of United States military involvement in the Balkan war, which is now limited to supporting the shipment of relief supplies.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  BRITAIN CUTS INTEREST RATE
Britain cut its benchmark interest rate one point, to 9 percent -- removing doubts that it has abandoned its effort to stabilize its currency, and it will concentrate instead on reinvigorating its economy.
A1  DANES TO GET A SECOND CHANCE
Danish voters, who narrowly rejected the proposed European union treay in June, will be asked to vote again in mid-1993.
A16


Ex-Priest Accused of Sex Abuse Is Extradited
James R. Porter, a former Roman Catholic priest, was flown to Boston from Minneapolis today after he was arrested on charges of sexually molesting 32 children three decades ago in Massachusetts.
Mr.
Porter, who is 57 years old and now married, was charged with 46 counts of indecent assault, sodomy and committing unnatural acts.
Paul Walsh, the District Attorney of Bristol County, who discussed the indictment in a news conference today in New Bedford, Mass., said he expected the case to be extremely difficult to win in court because of the length of time that has passed since the assaults are said to have occurred and because the case raises a number of novel legal issues.


Yeltsin Aide Warns Of Monetary 'Crash'
Squaring off against hostile lawmakers, Russia's top economic planner warned yesterday that the monetary system faced the prospect of hyperinflation and a "complete crash" unless the central bank closed off a torrent of state credit to ailing industries.


No Headline
"I know some people will say I'm exploiting those with alcohol and drug problems. But tell me, how is what I'm doing any different from what commodity traders do when they buy crops at low prices from farmers in distress?" -- CHRIS JEFFERS, a can-redemption middleman in New York.  [ B6:4. ]


A Market That's Educated, Affluent and Homosexual
AFTER listening to Republican Party attacks on homosexuals as having made "a wrong choice," many of America's largest marketers are making a different choice.
Rather than being daunted by the campaign rhetoric, they are instead accelerating efforts at aiming sales messages at gay and lesbian consumers.
Blue-chip companies like Benetton, CBS, Hiram Walker, Philip Morris, Seagram and Time Warner are pursuing that unconventional strategy for the same reason that polls indicate few voters appear interested in Republican appeals to "family values" -- the economy.


Investigators Identify Dozens of Officers Involved in Demonstration Near City Hall
Acting Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday that the Police Department had identified more than 50 rank-and-file officers who participated in the unruly demonstration of off-duty officers last week outside City Hall, including some who broke from the larger crowd and blocked the Brooklyn Bridge.
Mr.
Kelly said it was unclear how many officers might be disciplined because of the difficulty of spotting people in the act of committing a crime.
But a law-enforcement official involved in the investigation said that at least eight officers who were caught on videotape acting in a "questionable manner" could face disciplining.


Sports of The Times; It's Simms's Football Once More
WHEN he's wearing his Giants uniform, Phil Simms always seems to have a football in his hands.
Even when he was simmering on the sideline last season, he was always holding a football, tossing it, flipping it.
As if that football were part of his passing hand.
And for a quarterback, it should be.
But last season Phil Simms knew it was really Jeff Hostetler's football.
Even when Hoss was hurt, it was still Hoss's football.


Japanese G.N.P. Gains A Scant 0.3% in Quarter
In a sign that Japan's recession is biting, the nation's economy grew a paltry three-tenths of 1 percent in the second quarter of this year, the Government reported today.
But the weak economic report did not stop the Japanese yen from strengthening today against the dollar and European currencies.
Tokyo trading closed with the dollar worth 122.67 yen, down 1.33 yen from Monday's close.


Federal Charges for Officer Linked to Big Cocaine Ring
Charging that he and other officers helped a drug gang evade capture in Brooklyn and that they opened up a wholesale drug operation in their precinct, a Federal grand jury in Manhattan yesterday indicted Michael Dowd, a former New York City police officer whose arrest led to several widespread investigations of ties between police corruption and drug trafficking.
A fellow former officer, Kenneth Eurell, was named as an unindicted co-conspirator, strongly indicating that he would turn against Mr.
Dowd and be a star witness at any trial and presumably before a mayoral commission that is starting an investigation into allegations of police corruption in the city.
Details on Diaz Group
The Federal indictment, announced yesterday by Otto G. Obermaier, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, provided details on how police officers in the 75th Precinct in Brooklyn helped reputed Dominican drug dealers in what Mr.
Obermaier called the Diaz Organization, or La Compania, sell more cocaine by choosing locations that they knew would not be raided by the police.
According to Federal authorities, the gang's operations stretched from northern Manhattan to the Long Island suburbs.


Bridge
Some private bridge games are of long standing, and some feature high-quality play.
One that ranks near the top in both areas has been played in Westchester for several decades.
The regular players are Charles Greeley, Walter Rothschild, Herbert Schwarz and Warren Tenney, some of whom are octogenarians.
On the diagramed deal Greeley sat East, defending six spades, a sensible contract.
On the bidding North knew that his partner was short in clubs and that the hands would mesh well.
South won the opening diamond lead and led the spade queen for a finesse.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Congress voted to regulate soaring cable television prices, sending the controversial bill to President Bush and daring him to carry out his threatened veto in the face of commanding votes for the measure in both the House and Senate.
But consumers are unlikely to see an immediate effect from the bill.  [ Page D1. ]
Builders broke ground on new homes in August at the fastest pace since March.
The annual rate of 1,237,000 was 10.4 percent higher than in July and was the biggest gain in 18 months.  [ D6. ]


PROBLEM FOUND IN ENGINE OF NEW CHRYSLER CAR LINE
A serious engine problem was discovered in the ChryslerCorporation's new midsize cars, stopping the production line and forcing repairs on 1,600 vehicles, the auto maker said yesterday.
The problem, which could cause a piston rod to break apart and stop the engine cold, was discovered last week in post-production testing of one of the LH series cars built in Bramalea, Ontario.
The problem was traced to worker error.
Chrysler is counting on the LH models -- the Chrysler Concord, Dodge Intrepid and Eagle Vision -- to help lift its sagging financial fortunes.


Assault Weapons Are Designed for Murder
To the Editor:
Gary Kleck sees the good-versus-evil attitude of gun control advocates as "only oratory" aimed at the National Rifle Association ("Assault Weapons Aren't the Problem," Op-Ed, Sept. 1).
He has nothing to say about the oratory generated by the N.R.A. that is so often peppered with distortions and false claims.
That is understandable, as his entire argument reflects the kind of approach found in any issue of the American Rifleman or American Hunter, the two magazines published monthly by the National Rifle Association.
And like so many of the articles in those journals, Mr.
Kleck's analysis of the gun control problem distorts the evidence on some key points.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 18
Sept 11
Sept 20
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
6.9
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.1
Gasoline stocks
206.1
204.2
213.3
Distillate stocks
130.3
129.5
135.7
Crude imports, daily
6.9
6.6
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.2
2.3
2.5
Crude stocks
326.9
325.6
334.3
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
89.3
90.5
89.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Pop Life
Back to the Mainstream
Peter Gabriel's new record, "Us" (Geffen), is pure 90's material.
Not only does it mix standard pop instrumentation with instruments and musicians from around the world, but it's wrenchingly confessional.
The subject: analysis, naturally.
Mr.
Gabriel, over the last six years, has traded in a big pop career for the pop margin, starting a record company that deals with world music, writing a sound track ("The Last Temptation of Christ"), establishing the Human Rights Now tour and working with various human rights agencies.
"Us" is his foray back into pop.


Review/Television; Who Snoops on Whom and How
"Private Matters," tonight's edition of "48 Hours," is all about snooping: companies snooping on prospective employees, spouses snooping on each other, talk shows snooping on everybody.
After lively if familiar segments about investigators using high-powered cameras, electronic tapping equipment and computers to pry on the unwary for commercial or domestic reasons or just for fun, the program focuses on a photographer for supermarket tabloids who is tracking down Delta Burke, the star of the new television show "Delta," with the intention of catching her looking unattractive.


Amy Fisher To Enter Guilty Plea
Amy Fisher, the 18-year-old who the police say tried to kill the wife of her lover last spring, agreed today to plead guilty to a lesser charge, her attorney said, avoiding the threat of a lengthy and lurid trial for attempted murder.
Eric Naiburg, Miss Fisher's lawyer, said the Merrick teen-ager would plead guilty to reckless assault, which carries a sentence of 5 to 15 years, in the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco, 38, and "would cooperate in the investigation of all other persons involved in the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco." Under the agreement, she would be eligible for parole after three years.


A Sweep of Doubleheader Thrills Only the Diehards
Every cheer was heard.
So was every groan.
The Yankees were lucky if even 500 people were at Yankee Stadium when the first game of their doubleheader with the Tigers began yesterday.
Fans cracked one-liners that were actually heard, the chances for a stray foul ball increased immeasurably and the stadium was so deserted even Manute Bol would have found enough leg room in any section.


Public &amp; Private; Bad And Blue
Over the years some of us have often given police officers the benefit of the doubt.
When three cops were acquitted of assaulting Juan Rodriguez in Brooklyn, when Nicholas Bartlett was shot to death by officers in Harlem, when Luis Baez was killed after he brandished what turned out to be a putty knife at police, we could always remind ourselves of one undeniable fact: It's a tough job.
But today some of us have nothing but doubt about some members of the New York City Police Department, doubt about whether arrogance, immaturity and bigotry have taken them over the line from protectors to punks.


Shoreham's Nuclear Fuel May Be Headed Abroad
The new owners of the Shoreham nuclear power plant on Long Island are considering sending the plant's radioactive fuel on an international trip.
The question is where.
La Hague in Normandy, France, where it would be reprocessed into new fuel, is a leading candidate.
Another is Veracruz, Mexico, where it could be used in a reactor that is to start operating next year.
If those trips fall through, the fuel could be sent on an extended camping trip in Shoreham's own backyard, in concrete and steel casks, until the United States establishes a permanent repository for spent fuel.


Grand Central's Cinderella Room Awaits Its Prince
THROUGH years of neglect, Grand Central Terminal, once humbling and inspiring like a majestic church, was allowed to become shabby, dirty and increasingly unappealing to the half-million subway and train riders who pass through each day.
Balconies were covered up with billboards, temporary structures broke up the open spaces, and the 12,000-square-foot central waiting room became a haven for the homeless and was boarded up.
Metro-North Commuter Railroad, which operates the building owned by the Penn Central Corporation, wants to change all that.
As part of its effort to restore Grand Central, it wants to encourage commuters and tourists, as well as New Yorkers, to linger awhile: to eat dinner there, to buy takeout food or just to sip cappuccino and watch the parade of people.
After several years of preparatory work, the railroad, a division of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, will soon choose a restaurateur to take over the waiting room, a soaring space with marble floors, stone walls and gold chandeliers that could become one of the most stunning retail spots in the city.
Whoever is chosen will have an opportunity, in such a highly visible spot, to influence taste and trends.
The person "is guaranteed to be a high-profile player with serious volume in one of the world's most famous buildings," said Clark Wolf, a food consultant who is helping Metro-North evaluate its plans.
On the other hand, the winner could just lose big.
It will cost at least $2 million, and perhaps twice that, to transform the empty space.
And while the lunch potential in Grand Central seems lucrative, filling a big restaurant at night could be tough.
It's not clear whether train and subway riders will delay their arrival home to stop for a drink or dinner.
And creating a place that will draw hundreds of people at night to an area with little entertainment nearby is always difficult.
After some preliminary cuts, Metro-North has come up with a list of four finalists, all New York restaurateurs: Sheldon Fireman, owner of Trattoria Dell'Arte and Hosteria Fiorella; Michael (Buzzy) O'Keeffe, owner of the River Cafe and the Water Club; Andrew Silverman, an owner of Prix Fixe and Steak Frites, and Tony May, the owner of San Domenico, whose partner is Glen Rosengarten, who founded the Food Emporium supermarkets.
The restaurateurs submitted written plans, and then presented them personally to Metro-North officials last week.
Jeanne Giordano, the director of the Grand Central Terminal Development Office, said it would be at least six weeks before a selection is made.
The new complex may open by next fall.
The winner could help alter the way visitors first experience the city.
The perception among some that New York is a dirty, dangerous place may come partly from dispiriting gateways, whether Penn Station, the Port Authority bus terminal or Grand Central.
Changing the first impression might help set a different tone.
Several years ago, Metro-North announced a 10-year plan to renovate Grand Central.
Slowly, it has stripped away structures added to the station over decades.
The huge Kodak sign that hung over the main concourse was torn down, exposing a lovely, long marble balcony.
A Merrill Lynch trading booth in the center of the room is gone, as is the 13-foot-high advertising clock.
Work began three years ago on the waiting room, which sits on both sides of a corridor from the entrance on 42d Street nearest Park Avenue.
The room was vital to the station when it opened in 1913 as a center for long-distance travel.
Gradually, though, it was abandoned by train riders, who had less need for it when long-distance trains were rerouted to Penn Station.
By the end of the 1980's, the waiting room was a camp for hundreds of homeless people.
They were evicted and the room was boarded up.
Now, that huge space, still hidden behind painted plywood barriers, has been cleaned up at a cost of $4.3 million.
The tarnished chandeliers turned out to be gold plate, not brass.
The once-dingy marble and stone walls are now cream colored.
Despite 60-foot ceilings, the room manages to feel warm and inviting.
Although Metro-North officials knew they wanted a retail operation in the space, "it wasn't until the look of the place started to come back that it became clear what it should be," Ms.
Giordano said.
"It was very European looking, like a food hall."
For those who have become wary of the station, the idea of eating there might seem strange.
But since its inception, food has been a part of Grand Central.
The Oyster Bar, for instance, has flourished for much of the last 79 years.
There may be a market for more, although no one really knows how many of the people who rush through each day will slow down to eat or buy food.
In one study, Metro-North found that one in five commuters said they would like to be able to buy freshly prepared foods at the terminal.
Generally, the four restaurateurs have proposed selling food at a variety of price levels, from white tablecloth dining to takeout sandwiches.
Some have ambitious plans to create a fancy food store in addition to a restaurant.
Mr.
Silverman, who has been a chef and restaurant owner since attending the Culinary Institute of America in the late 1970's, would call his space Centro.
On one side of the hallway that divides the waiting room would be a 375-seat cafe designed in materials like steel, oak, alabaster, marble and slate, with tall Beaux Arts-style street lamps.
Lunch in the cafe would cost about $12.
On the other side, Mr.
Silverman would put a 50-foot circular coffee bar.
Around the room would be counters selling fruit and vegetables, mints, chocolate, prepared foods and sandwiches, with areas where food could be eaten.
He would plan special events for the space, too, like cooking classes and wine seminars.
"It's just a great opportunity," he said.
"It's probably the second-most-talked-about building in the nation, besides the White House."
Mr.
Fireman, a native New Yorker who is mostly known for his Italian restaurants, says he wants to create a distinctly American restaurant on one side of the space.
"We want a menu that gives you an opportunity to eat there every day," he said.
"Not designer-y food." His menu would carry things like calf's liver, crab cakes, shrimp cocktail, lamb chops, shoestring potatoes and hot fudge sundaes.
The other side of the space would have an inexpensive Italian cafe with pastas, focaccia and the like, as well as a juice bar and a newsstand.
Although Metro-North wants takeout food, he's resisting the idea.
People "aren't going to schlep food home on a train," he said.
The design for the American restaurant uses lots of wood and upholstered chairs.
"I didn't want the East Side and flash," Mr.
Fireman said.
"This is a universal place."
Mr.
O'Keeffe, who already owns a small restaurant called the Cafe at Grand Central, which overlooks the station from a balcony, prides himself on starting restaurants in difficult places and making them work.
When he found the spot that is now the River Cafe, a sparkling haven on the Brooklyn waterfront, it was desolate.
The Water Club on the East Side, he said, had been a rat-infested, crime-ridden parking lot.
On one side of the Grand Central space, Mr.
O'Keeffe said he would have a big cafe that would be open early for breakfast.
"You can come naked or in black tie," he said.
"This is New York. But no muscle shirts. It's too contrived." There would be a communications center for faxing and such, and another restaurant with entrees as expensive as $27.
On the other side of the space would be a concierge, a range of takeout food, a chocolate factory, an ice-cream parlor, a newsstand, a charcuterie and a produce and flower shop, all in wrought-iron kiosks.
Mr.
May imagines the space as a fancy-food emporium with both packaged and prepared items, like Harrods in London, and a cafe in the center.
On one side would be a restaurant with "anything from hot bagels to caviar," said Mr.
May, who has owned several Italian restaurants and once managed the Rainbow Room.
On the other side would be a retail food center with baked goods, fruit and vegetables, charcuterie and pastries, around a central seating area.
He'd like to make beignets, the holeless doughnuts from New Orleans, a breakfast staple -- a suggestion also made by Mr.
Silverman.
All kinds of service would be available.
"You could order flowers for your wife's birthday and six steaks, and we'd deliver them on the trains," he said.
Metro-North and M.T.A. officials will choose a winner with help from an advisory committee that includes Drew Nieporent, owner of Montrachet and an owner of the TriBeCa Grill; Tom Margittai, an owner of the Four Seasons; Stephen Fass, formerly associated with the Marketplace at Macy's Cellar; David Rockwell, an architect who has designed many restaurants; John Belle, the restoration architect for the building, and Mr.
Wolf.
"What we're trying to discover is who has the capacity and the resources," Mr.
Wolf said.
The details of the proposals are less important.
"There isn't a restaurant that opens that doesn't change," he said.
"This is the beginning, not the end."
The project, though, is hardly without risks.
Michael Weinstein, president of the Ark Restaurants Corporation, which owns large restaurants in Union Station in Washington, was originally interested in the Grand Central project but withdrew when he decided that it might be too expensive.
Mr.
Weinstein said he believed it might be too difficult to make the space both a retail food store and a restaurant.
"If you're going to be Zabar's, be Zabar's," he said.
"If you're going to be a restaurant, be a restaurant."
Limited access to the loading docks for delivery during the day, he said, would have made the preparation of fresh food throughout the day especially difficult.
And it isn't clear, he said, as it was in Washington, what will be going into the other retail spaces in Grand Central.
Ms.
Giordano, who was hired three years ago to oversee the retail transformation of the terminal, said it originally had stylish stores, and she hopes to revive that.
She has already persuaded designers like Donna Karan and Michael Kors to use it for fashion shows and parties.
Some changes are tiny but welcome, like the foreign exchange currency windows that just opened.
A new bookstore, too, is on the way.
Some parts of the project, though, await financing.
The vast central ceiling, designed with the image of the zodiac, is a muddy green.
Eventually, Ms.
Giordano hopes it will be restored to the original robin's-egg blue.


Small Change for Peacekeeping
President Bush was right to offer warm praise for the United Nations' peacekeeping forces around the world.
The blue beret, as he suggested to the General Assembly, is indeed "a symbol of hope" from Cyprus and Lebanon to Cambodia and Croatia.
Yet he did not offer the two things the peacekeepers need most: hard cash and uniformed American volunteers.
In January, the Security Council asked Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to report on better ways of preventing and ending wars.
He recommended that U.N. members make available standby forces that could be rapidly deployed by the Security Council to deter chaos, famine and aggression.


Senate Fails to Override Veto Of Bill on Voter Registration
The Senate today failed to override President Bush's veto of a bill that sought to increase voter turnout among the poor and the elderly by allowing citizens to register as they renew their driver's licenses or apply for welfare, unemployment, disability or Social Security benefits.
The President vetoed the bill nearly three months ago, but Democratic leaders decided to wait until the middle of the Presidential campaign to challenge Mr.
Bush on it in order to maximize the political effect of their action.
Democrats accused Mr.
Bush of seeking to restrict the political power of those who most need Government help.


AZERBAIJANIS OPEN A MAJOR OFFENSIVE
In a move intended to force Armenian residents to flee the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, the armed forces of Azerbaijan have mounted a new large-scale offensive from the south and east of the territory and say they are advancing on all fronts.
A spokesman for the Defense Ministry in Baku confirmed that the operation began on Saturday and acknowledged that casualties on both sides had been very high.


Review/Opera; Domingo and Vaness Star in 'Hoffmann' To Open Met Season
"Les Contes d'Hoffmann" is usually thought of as just an entertaining succession of bizarrely nightmarish love stories, tales of Hoffmann's passions.
But Offenbach was more sly in his ambitions: this opera tries to unveil the nature of opera itself.
It is a catalogue of operatic stagecraft and personae, an anthology of vocal types and melodramatic plots.
By opera's end, Hoffmann's loves are combined into the figure of Stella -- a singer who has just finished a performance in another operatic love story, "Don Giovanni."
Few operas could provide more resonance for the opening night of the Metropolitan Opera season, an evening in which the audience and the object of its affections traditionally celebrate each other.
And so it was on Monday, as the country's premier company began its season: "Hoffmann" acted as a sort of mirror for the glittering audience, reflecting its passions and tastes on this most self-conscious night.


PERUVIAN LEADER SEES END TO WAR
Reflecting a growing optimism about recent blows to the Shining Path guerrilla group, Peru's President predicted today that the rebel organization considered the most dangerous in Latin America would be "eradicated" within two or three years.
"Obviously we expect there will be actions and attacks we cannot avoid," President Alberto K. Fujimori said in a news conference at the presidential palace.
"But they will not be organized. In a few months we could destroy their organization."


New Kind of Dodger 'Blue'
In a season of torn photographs and broken dreams, there is one snapshot that might stand alone as a kind of testimony to a slapstick summer at Dodger Stadium.
It happened just this week, in the early evening of another September night, as players began their ritual pre-game jog in the outfield grass.
On the giant video screen beyond left field, a tape of glorious moments from the past rolled to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the ball park.


RUSSIANS WARNED OF MONETARY PERIL
President Boris N. Yeltsin's chief economic planner opened a new round of grappling with the hostile Parliament today with a warning that unless his spartan monetary policies were restored, the Russian monetary system faced a "complete crash."
The warning by Yegor T. Gaidar, the embattled Acting Prime Minister, served notice that he did not intend to let his economic course be torpedoed by a torrent of new credits issued by the new director of the Central Bank, Viktor Gerashchenko, who was appointed in June by the Parliament.


Knicks Get Trade, Thanks to Roberts
After weeks of waiting, the Knicks finally made the trade they wanted.
In a major three-team deal that was completed yesterday afternoon, the Knicks acquired forward Charles Smith, point guard Doc Rivers and shooting guard Bo Kimble from the Los Angeles Clippers.


Recycling Facing Test in Poorer Areas
Hector Valentin eagerly lifted the lid of a blue bin in the parking lot of the St.
Nicholas Houses in Harlem.
He peered inside, hoping to discover a 1990's kind of valuable: recyclable cans, bottles and plastics.
But it was empty.
A few days after New York City expanded its recycling program to all of Manhattan, the 2,500 tenants of the housing project at 215 West 127th Street had not begun using the blue containers.
And Mr.
Valentin, the superintendent of the project, said he could not predict when pilgrimages to the bins would become as much a part of residents' daily rituals as checking their mailboxes or brushing their teeth.


Dinkins Gives 8 Arts Awards
The Mayor's Awards of Honor for Arts and Culture were given on Monday evening to eight New York City organizations and individuals.
Mayor David N. Dinkins presented the awards at Gracie Mansion as part of National Arts Week, offering praise for the arts as "one of the great channels for New York's indomitable energy."


With Sales Flat, Coke Has Clear Plan
Against the backdrop of a gloomy third-quarter sales forecast made to analysts yesterday in New York, the Coca-Cola Company is going New Age.
Following a host of competitors, Coke announced plans yesterday to sell Nordic Mist, a flavored sparkling water.


A BANKING INQUIRY CLEARS 3 OFFICIALS
The special counsel investigating the House bank has told three members of President Bush's Cabinet that they are not under criminal investigation for writing overdrafts when they were Representatives.
But a fourth Cabinet officer who served in Congress, Labor Secretary Lynn Martin, has not heard from the counsel.
The four officials had written dozens of overdrafts at the House bank when they served as members of Congress.
The three who have reported receiving letters clearing them of wrongdoing are Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, Agriculture Secretary Edward Madigan and Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp.


'Murphy Brown' Seen By 70 Million, CBS Says
The hourlong season premiere of "Murphy Brown" on Monday night in response to comments by Vice President Dan Quayle attracted the largest audience of any regularly scheduled television show since November 1990.
The show had a 29.3 national rating, with a 41 share of the audience. (Each rating point represents 931,000 homes. The share is the percent of televisions tuned in at a given hour.)


CHRONICLE
An exhibition of 150 photographs that reflect the joys and pains of black people in the United States opens today at the Museum of the City of New York.
The show, "Songs of My People," will remain through Jan. 3.
"This exhibit tells the story that hasn't been told too often, and that is of success," said MARTIN PAYSON, vice chairman of Time Warner Inc., sponsor of the project.
"It destroys the Willie Horton stereotypes and shows people living their regular lives."


A Chip Off the Old Film
Forty-six years ago, Alex Alexander was aching to leave this industrial village to join the United States merchant marine when his father, Louis, died.
Like the restless George Bailey in "It's a Wonderful Life," Alexander had to give up his dreams of exotic adventures and settle down in the same small world where he was born.
He married, raised four children and ran a successful clothing business on Main Street for 35 years.
To the villagers, he became simply, "Alex," a warm, jovial man.
But Alexander didn't become a true Capraesque figure until 1971, when he took over the community's first attempt at putting on a one-day professional golf event.


Sasser Is Certain He Won't Be Back
The clubhouse clock ticks, but not fast enough.
The games end, but always with midnight approaching and patience long gone.
Mackey Sasser watches as the 1992 baseball calendar completes its collapse for the Mets, realizing that his only personal satisfaction will be found in its final ruins.
"You can bet that as soon as the season is over, my bags will be packed and I'll be gone," Sasser said today.


Conagra Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


High School Melee Draws Heavy Fina
The Camden school district will pay a $10,000 fine assessed against its boys basketball team for a chair-throwing melee that erupted after a 1990 championship game, officials announced Tuesday.
Superintendent Arnold Webster said the district planned to pay the penalty to resolve the legal battle with the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association.


CHRONICLE
DAVID HAMPTON, the man whose escapades as an imposter and con artist became the subject of JOHN GUARE'S hit play "Six Degrees of Separation," denied in court yesterday that he had ever threatened the playwright in an attempt to get money from him.
On trial in Criminal Court in Manhattan on charges of aggravated harassment, the 38-year-old defendant said that he had only asked Mr.
Guare for what he thought was rightfully his.
"John Guare put tracing paper up against my life and stole it," Mr.
Hampton said in testimony.


CHRONICLE
He looked like Elvis and shook like Elvis but he sure didn't sound like the King.
MARK JANICELLO still captivated the judges Tuesday at the finals of the Musical Feast contest for the nation's best street performer in Grand Central Station.
Dressed in a leather jump suit and black wig, he sang an aria from "Tosca." He also did "It's Now or Never" and "O Sole Mio," hips gyrating Elvis style.
He claimed they were actually the same song.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
This week's column answers questions from readers about common -- and not-so-common -- home-improvement and repair problems.
In Place of Slate
Q.
Structurally, our Tudor home, circa 1923, is a fortress, but the slate roof seems to have reached the end of its life.
Although I can reasonably put on an asphalt roof, I think the house will lose much of its charm and resale value if we do this.
Is there a way to revitalize the slate, perhaps by applying silicone or other chemicals?
What about concrete roofing tile that looks like slate?
If there is nothing to do but replace the slate, what can I expect to pay in this region? -- Alfred Grossman, Eastchester, N.Y.


Yields of Money Funds Are Mixed in Week
Yields offered by money market funds were mixed in the latest reporting week as tax-exempt funds took a sharp upturn and taxable funds slipped a few notches.
According to IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report, the supply of new short-term tax-exempt debt from municipalities and states with budget problems and in need of cash continues to flood the market.
The result is that yields are pushed up as prices are forced down by the big supply of debt.


Samuel Greenspoon, Lawyer, Is Dead at 72
Samuel N. Greenspoon, a lawyer, died at his home in Manhattan on Sept. 19.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Greenspoon died of a heart attack, said Elaine Zweibel, a spokeswoman for the New York Law firm of Carb, Luria, Glassner, Cook &amp; Kufeld, where Mr.
Greenspoon was of counsel.


Orbit International Corp. reports earnings for Year June 20


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Michigan May Be Vital, but It's Hard to Tell by the Coverage
To Bill Clinton and George Bush, Detroit and its suburbs are like a combination lock that guards the Presidency.
Whichever one finds the right code to appeal to the region's Reagan Democrats has a good chance of winning the state, and the election.
Predictably, the battle over Michigan is being waged mostly over the airwaves.
Both candidates have commercials on television and radio here.
And Mr.
Clinton in particular has been aggressively courting local news coverage, traveling here twice in the last three days.


Newport Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corporate Issues Continue Strong
The volume of new corporate issues continued strong strong this week as many companies locked in current interest rates.
Many issuers of debt rush to bring deals to market if they sense rates are headed higher, analysts said.
Among the larger deals expected to be priced this week is a $1.33 billion offering of certificates backed by credit card receivables, according to MCM Corporate Watch, a new-issues research firm.


Angry Wilkins Says Knicks Played Games
One day after the Knicks told him to look elsewhere for work, Gerald Wilkins was still angry.
"They used me," said Wilkins of the Knicks, speaking yesterday from his home in Chattanooga, Tenn.
"The Knicks knew all along what they had planned, but they were telling everyone else around the league that they were in serious negotiations with me. But they weren't. They were just keeping me on hold as an ace in the hole, in case their other plans didn't work out."


Market Place; Seeking Bargains In Military Stocks
DESPITE a generally gloomy outlook for American military contractors, which are suffering from deep cuts in Pentagon spending, a growing number of Wall Street analysts maintain that there are still bargains to be found among aerospace and military stocks.
Adapting to a shrinking weapons market, many contractors are slashing capital spending, divesting themselves of peripheral businesses and aggressively pursuing foreign and nonmilitary sales.


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


Loss Seen For Bon-Ton; Stock Drops
Shares of Bon-Ton Stores Inc. lost more than a third of their value yesterday after the retailer painted a bleak picture of its third-quarter earnings prospects and announced the departure of its president.
The company said aggressive cost-cutting to clear excessive inventory, coupled with sluggish sales during the back-to school season, would probably result in a loss per share of 12 to 18 cents.


Sports of The Times; Riley's New Knick Doodlings
EVERYONE involved in a trade is usually filled with dreams.
It's like a transplant.
The hope, if the surgeon is to be believed, is that things will be better than ever.
So it is with the Knicks today, as Coach Pat Riley happily doodled new lineups on his note pad, inserting his new triple-threat man, Charles Daniel Smith, the key figure in their five-man deal with the Clippers and the Magic.


Violence Builds in Angola as Election Nears
With national elections less than a week away, a wave of violence apparently intended to disrupt the voting has swept through Angola.
Diplomats and political analysts here say most incidents appear to have been started by supporters of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, known as Unita, which has been fighting the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola since the latter seized power in 1975.


Mujahedeen Strive for Democracy in Iran
To the Editor:
The People's Mujahedeen Organization of Iran, the principal opposition to the mullahs' theocratic rule, is an Islamic, patriotic and profoundly democratic movement that has striven for 27 years against two dictatorial regimes to establish democracy and human rights.
A group calling itself the Forum on American-Iranian Relations, in the interests of the Khomeini regime, ran an advertisement in The Times on Aug. 28 that was a blatant bid to undercut 219 members of the United States House of Representatives who had condemned the rights abuses and terrorism of the mullahs and supported the Iranian people's struggle for democracy.


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH
In a speech yesterday at Penn State University in University Park, Pa.
"And, yes, I want a debate. I want a debate over issues and an argument over ideas, and I will stand on my record, and I won't let that Arkansas Governor run away from his record, either.
You know, I think the American people have a right to know what they're buying into because, remember, if you buy what candidate Clinton is selling, there's no refund, there's no rebate.
Actually it's more like a permanent payment plan, and I don't think we need that for the United States of America.
On one issue, and I think it's the fundamental issue in this campaign, my opponent and I have just agreed to disagree.
It's a question of how our economy grows and how our country works, and it's kind of like 'Jeopardy.' It all comes down to how you ask the question.
And my opponent asks, what makes the economy grow?
And his answer, and look at his program, is government planners and projects and programs.
And I ask, who makes this country grow?
And my answer is you, the individual working men and women, building and buying a freedom of the market."  GOV. BILL CLINTON
In a speech yesterday in Columbus, Ga.
"There are people like that all over the world who are struggling to develop the capacity to have nuclear technology; to be able to drop chemical weapons; to be able to drop biological weapons on their people, on other people.
We cannot risk that happening.
So there are significant challenges to us in the world we are living in.
What does that mean?
I conclude that it means we need not so many people in uniform as we used to have.
We need not so many people in Europe as we used to have, because the Europeans don't face the imminent threat of a large Soviet Army marching across Eastern Europe into Western Europe.
We need not so much money spent on the space-based portion of 'Star Wars,' but we do need to focus on greater training and mobility of our forces, on land, in the air and on the sea; and on maintaining the enormous technological lead we have in the development of both tactical defenses and defensive weapons.
Which means we have to maintain a strong infrastructure of technology in this country.
And we have to continue to train, equip, and work with our military forces at a smaller level to make sure they are still the strongest, the best, and now the most mobile in the world, hopefully being able always to be used in cooperation with our allies.
That is the defense plan I have put forward to the American people in this election.
It will require us to spend less money that we are now spending.
But I think it will give us a stronger national defense than Mr.
Bush's proposed budget."  VICE PRESIDENT DAN QUAYLE
In a speech at a rally yesterday in Fort Worth, Tex.
"As the case of military service makes most clear, these differing positions are, in fact, more than mere flip-flops. They reflect a fundamental element of Governor Clinton's character: the triumph of expediency over principle, of convenience over truth. Governor Clinton says he is the candidate of change, but he truly is the changing candidate.
Don't get me wrong.
If you are in public life, sooner or later some variation will creep into the record.
Sometimes, leaders genuinely change their minds or they may alter course in the best interest of the nation.
It's one thing to take a political risk in the hope of helping your country.
But it's another matter to change your position to avoid political risk in the hope of helping yourself.
One lesson we've learned over the past two centuries is the need for strong character in our Presidents.
This country has prevailed in rough times when our leaders have adhered firmly to principle and truth.
But when our Presidents have vacillated or lied or attempted to be all things to all people, then we have lost national confidence and steered toward crisis."


Shopko Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 12


Findings Add to the Mystery of Alzheimer's Disease
In a surprise twist in research on Alzheimer's disease, scientists have found that a protein widely believed to play a role in causing the disease in the brain is also found in cells throughout the body.
Microscopic balls of the protein beta amyloid accumulate in the brains of Alzheimer's patients, and previous research showed that in the laboratory the protein was toxic to brain cells.
But so far researchers have not been able to establish its exact role in the disease, and the latest findings, reported independently by four scientific laboratories, add to the mystery.


A Video Telephone From MCI
The MCI Communications Corporation opened a new front in its long rivalry with A.T.&amp; T. yesterday by announcing plans to introduce a video telephone for $750.
That is half the price of A.T.&amp; T.'s picture phone, which went on sale earlier this summer amid what the company says is intense consumer interest.
But the MCI Video Phone, available in early 1993, suffers from the same technical limitation as the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's Videophone 2500: Callers look as if they are slowly moving underwater because the carrying capacity of ordinary telephone lines is so tiny.
Technology Similar to A.T.&amp; T.'s
Both plug into a home phone jack and show full-color pictures at a maximum of 10 frames a second, compared with 30 frames on a home television set.
A video phone call costs the same as an audio call for both MCI and A.T.&amp; T.


Budgetary Roller Coaster Hurts U.S. Science; An Unhealthy Mix
To the Editor:
I was saddened to hear that the United States' research agenda at the National Institutes of Health will in the future be more affected by the country's business agenda, and that Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy, the agency's director, is supportive of this mixing of mission ("U.S. Will Tighten Health-Lab Goals," front page, Aug. 24).
Having sat on an internal review committee at the National Institute of Drug Abuse, I learned firsthand the importance of grant proposals being considered solely on their scientific merit and feasibility with as little influence as possible from political or other considerations.


Hillhaven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Opera; A Story of Intrigue In Sweden, Set Mostly In the Mind of the Met
The Metropolitan Opera has found a curious solution to the perennial problem of "Un Ballo in Maschera" -- the problem of where the work should take place.
Verdi's libretto by Antonio Somma was based on the assassination of a Swedish king at a masked ball in the Stockholm opera house in 1792.
But the censors in Naples in 1857 objected to setting it too close to home in either space or time.
So Somma thought of moving it to Pomerania ("an independent duchy in the 12th century").
Verdi finally settled on Boston, renaming the characters (although in Paris, an early production moved the setting to Italy).
So the opera ended up with villains named Samuel and Tom, along with alternative names for the king (Gustav III or Riccardo) and the king's best friend (Captain Anckarstrom or Renato).
In the current production by Piero Faggioni, which was presented for the first time this season on Tuesday night, the setting is nominally Sweden, with all the Swedish names used.
But the setting less resembles Sweden than a fictional landscape all the Met's own -- a designed universe of historical spectacle, where the attraction is less the singing and the personalities than the elaborate physical constructions surrounding them.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  PROPPING UP THE FRANC
France and Germany fought desperately to prop up the value of the French franc and preserve Europe's battered monetary system.
The two nations issued a rare joint statement vowing a strong defense of the currency, and the Bank of France raised a key interest rate.
A1  MAKE ROOM FOR US, GERMANS SAY
For the first time, Germany told the United Nations General Assembly that it would like a permanent seat on the Security Council.
It also promised to revise its Constitution so German soldiers can take part in United Nations military operations.
A1


Put Out the Police Fire
A week of protest and nasty, polarizing rhetoric has left New York City edgy and raw.
The racially tinged anger needs cooling, the city needs healing and everybody has a part to play.
That includes Mayor David Dinkins, Rudolph Giuliani, police union leaders and other elected officials who seem to have lost their voices.
Mr.
Giuliani, the once and presumably future Republican candidate for mayor, contemplates governing all of New York.
But in an obvious play for white conservative support, he gave an overwrought performance at the raucous police demonstration against an all-civilian complaint review board.
Where was his concern for his city?
He knew that the largely white police union and the black Mayor were already at loggerheads.
His decision to address the police was reckless, as were some of his harsher comments.


Advance Circuits reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Catchy Watchwords
WHETHER because of midlife crises or disenchantment with digitals, watches seem to have become a rite of passage for designers.
The latest entry in the growing list of designer watches are puns for the wrist by the Minneapolis graphics designer Charles S. Anderson.


A Police Rally And a Dispute
The dispute between Mayor David N. Dinkins and his likely Republican rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, focuses on Mr.
Giuliani's role in the police union's demonstration last week.
About 10,000 off-duty officers descended on City Hall last Wednesday to protest the Mayor's plan for an all-civilian review board to consider claims of police misconduct.
Thousands of the officers rushed barricades and swarmed the City Hall steps and plaza.


Philadelphia Mayor Forces Contract on City's Workers
Risking a strike by the city's 15,000 nonuniformed employees, Mayor Edward G. Rendell announced at a news conference tonight that he was unilaterally imposing a new contract on city workers.
"As of 5 o'clock tonight, we're implementing our last and best offer," Mr.
Rendell said.
"But that implementation should be nothing that scares city workers because this is a fair contract. It is an especially fair contract when you consider the circumstances, not only our massive and staggering deficit, but what's going on in the private sector throughout this country where worker after worker is being laid off. This contract will avoid those massive layoffs."


'Safety Net' for Anchorage Homeless Is Seen as Both a Lifesaver and a Trap
This city is a showcase to social progress of a sort, though it is measured in the slumped forms of the homeless men and women who sleep on a cavernous shelter floor.
It is progress because few homeless people in Anchorage die, despite the city's large population of street alcoholics and the long, hard winters that used to kill many of them.


Topics of The Times; Midtown's Living Room
A woman who works in midtown Manhattan recently swung by Bryant Park, the renovated space adjacent to the New York Public Library, to see if it looked as good in September as it did in April.
It looks even better, thanks to the chairs.
The chairs are French park chairs, just like the ones in Paris's Tuileries.
They hadn't arrived for the park's opening day, but now they're as much a cause for pleasure as the brilliant green lawn, the fountain, the flowers and the flock of police.
And you can move them around.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
France and Germany gave heavy support to the franc, in a temporarily successful bid to drive up its value against the mark.
The Bank of France also raised a key interest rate, making the franc more attractive.  [ Page A1. ]  The two nations' concerted effort against investors and speculators, more than any other governmental action of recent weeks, could determine the future, and perhaps the survival, of Europe's monetary system.  [ D8. ]
Britain's Prime Minister, John Major, will confront his critics in Parliament today, hoping to douse a serious rebellion over his Government's economic and European policies.  [ D8. ] Markets
Long-term interest rates are rising, threatening to slow an already sluggish recovery and proving worrisome for the re-election hopes of President Bush.  [ D1. ]


Orioles Delay Blue Jays' Playoff Bid
The Toronto Blue Jays hoped to crunch some numbers tonight, primarily those dealing with the magic number needed to secure their third American League East title in four seasons.
Instead, it was their lead that wound up crunched after a 4-1 loss to the Baltimore Orioles, combined with a 3-0 victory by second-place Milwaukee over California, reduced the gap between first and second place to three and a half games.


Administration Admits Pressuring Greenspan
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady pressured the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, to achieve a certain amount of economic growth shortly before Mr.
Greenspan's renomination and thought he had received a commitment, Administration officials said today.
But the officials denied that the Fed chairman had agreed to change monetary policy at Mr.
Brady's behest.
Administration officials said today that in meetings in July 1991, shortly before Mr.
Greenspan was renominated, Mr.
Brady told the Fed chairman that he hoped the Fed would help achieve 3 percent growth in 1992.
The meetings came just before President Bush renominated Mr.
Greenspan to a second four-year term as chairman.


Curfews on Top of Curfews
Without a single dissenting vote, both houses of New Jersey's Legislature have passed a bill authorizing towns to impose a 10 P.M. to 6 A.M. curfew on youngsters under 18.
But the law they so heartily endorse is neither necessary nor useful, except to show just how four-square New Jersey lawmakers stand against lawlessness.
The fact is that New Jersey already permits local curfews.
Over the years, 113 of the state's 567 towns have adopted them in one form or another.
They are rarely enforced, though, because they're a waste of police manpower and only marginally effective in reducing crime.
Moreover, there is a standing threat of legal challenge, since a state court ruled five years ago that a curfew in the town of Burlington was too broadly drawn.


Baker Raised Alert on Iraqi Buildup, Papers Show
As the Bush Administration was trying to preserve its friendship with President Saddam Hussein just before he invaded Kuwait, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d was urgently warning that Iraq was secretly using American technology in its vast arms buildup, according to Government documents made public today.
Mr.
Baker's warning, aimed at tightening restrictions on the sale of American technology, came at the same time that the Bush Adminstration was still privately assuring Mr.
Hussein that the United States wanted better relations with his country.
The mixed signals suggest that the Administration was torn over how to deal with the Iraqi leader as evidence that the relationship had turned sour increased.


Accounts
*
Shearson Lehman Brothers New York, narrowed the review on its estimated $16 million account, previously at Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc., New York, which was dismissed last month.
The finalists, in New York, are Ayer Inc. and Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer/Euro RSCG.


Germans Find Mass Graves at an Ex-Soviet Camp
Investigators digging at the site of a Soviet-run prison camp in the former East Germany have uncovered mass graves containing the bodies of 12,500 people, the Brandenburg state government said today.
The camp was at Sachsenhausen, north of Berlin, and was open from 1945 to 1950.
Victims were said to have included real and supposed supporters of the defeated Third Reich, as well as citizens considered unfriendly to Communist authorities.


U.S. Paging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Murder Trial Begins in Crown Heights Stabbing
The black teen-ager charged with the death of Yankel Rosenbaum killed the Hasidic scholar "in the frenzy of the moment" after getting swept up in a mob that was screaming "Kill the Jew" and seeking revenge for the death of a black Crown Heights child last summer, prosecutors said yesterday in their opening arguments.
Moments after the stabbing, they said, the police took the teen-ager, 17-year-old Lemrick Nelson Jr. into custody, and found a bloodied folding knife in his pocket.


Apogee Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


U.N. Relief Aides in Bosnia Race With Time
United Nations officials assigned to help the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina survive the winter are in a race with time that many of the officials fear may be lost.
With the first snowfalls in Sarajevo probably no more than six weeks away, this city and dozens of other towns and villages are facing a threat that has come to be regarded by many Bosnians as more menacing than the tank and mortar bombardments around them.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
AL -- Announced that Todd Stottlemyre, Toronto Blue Jays pitcher, had dropped his appeal and would immediately begin serving his five-game suspension.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed an agreement to be affiliated with the Vancouver Canadians of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed a four-year agreement to be affiliated with the Kane County Cougars of the Midwest League.
NEW YORK METS -- Announced they terminated their working agreement with Tidewater Professional Sports Inc. and have taken over control of the Tidewater Tides of the International League.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Recalled Brad Brink, pitcher, from Scranton-Wilkes Barre of the International League.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Fired Greg Riddoch, manager.
Named Jim Riggleman manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
UTAH JAZZ -- Signed David Benoit, forward, to a four-year contract.
Continental Basketball Association
FORT WAYNE FURY -- Signed Craig Upchurch, forward.
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Signed Tim Anderson, forward.
ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Signed Roderick Wade, forward.
YAKIMA SUN KINGS -- Signed William Hunter and Sean Tyson, forwards.
Football  National Football League
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Andre Jones, linebacker, to the practice squad.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Hendricks Johnson, wide receiver.
Waived Jeff Graham, quarterback, from the practice squad.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Placed Todd Lyght, cornerback, and Paul Butcher, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Signed Sammy Lilly, cornerback, and Leon White, linebacker.
Released Troy Stradford, running back, from injured reserve.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Walter Stanley, wide receiver.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Jesse Campbell, safety, to the practice squad.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Brian Blados, offensive lineman.
Waived Rhett Hall, defensive lineman.
Hockey  National Hockey League
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Sent Corey Beaulieu, Cam Brauer, Brian Chapman, Scott Humeniuk, Karl Johnson, Yuri Krivokhizha, Scott Matusovich, Jukka Suomalainen, Steve Yule, John Stevens and Martin Hamrlik, defensemen; Denis Chalifoux, Kelly Ens, Jim Powers and Leonid Toropchenko, centers; Barry Nieckar, left wing; Paul Guay, Trevor Stienburg and Paul Cyr, right wings; and Mike Lenarduzzi and Mario Gosselin, goaltenders, to Springfield of the American Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Assigned Rick Corriveau, defenseman; Justin Morrison, center; and Bill Kovacs, left wing, to Hampton Roads of the East Coast Hockey League.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Sent Mark Richards and Sean Gauthier, goaltenders; Rob Cowie, defenseman; and Craig Martin, right wing, to Moncton of the American Hockey League.
Sent Mark Visheau, defenseman, to London of the Ontario Hockey League.


Building Partially Collapses, Injuring Elderly Passer-By
A building under demolition in lower Manhattan partially collapsed yesterday, seriously injuring an elderly passer-by.
Within hours, the New York City Buildings Commissioner, Rudolph J. Rinaldi, said he would seek to license wreckers as a way of curbing unsafe work practices.
His announcement followed the second incident this month involving what the city said may have been improper demolition procedures.
In both cases, passers-by have been hurt.


Peter Cook, 77, Dies; Was a Portrait Painter
Peter G. Cook, a portrait and landscape painter, died on Tuesday at his home in Kingston, N.J.
He was 77 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Cook, a native of New York City, graduated from Princeton University in 1937, where he majored in archicture.
He finished his training at the National Academy of Design in New York and the Art Students League.


EXEL Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
'The Music of Andrew Lloyd Webber'
Radio City Music Hall
When Michael Crawford was asked by Andrew Lloyd Webber eight years ago to appear in his musical "The Phantom of the Opera," the English actor and singer assumed that the composer envisaged him playing Raoul, the show's second male lead.
For the next year he studied the character as portrayed by Nelson Eddy in a 1943 Hollywood adaptation of the story.
It was only when Mr.
Crawford auditioned for the show that he discovered Mr.
Webber had the title role in mind for him.


In Shadow of Tammany, Contest Loses Suspense
It seemed only fitting that it was James McManus, fourth-generation scion of the one-time ward-heelers of Tammany Hall, who was the first to let Manhattan Democrats know last night that it was in the bag for Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler.
Let the West Side reformers stomp in disgust in and out of the High School of Fashion Industries, sighing at each other with phrases like "debacle" as the party gathered to nominate a new Congressman.
Leave it to the Park River Independent Democrats to feud openly, with Suzanne Jacobson fuming to reporters, "This is chaos, this is disgusting, this is obscene," as another club member angrily interrupted her to disagree.


Cone Thrives in Jays' Spotlight
David Cone was never one to blink or shy away, even when dozens of klieg lights burned brightly, camera after camera whined and pens and pencils flashed furiously about him.
The pitcher's cool, dispassionate behavior, whether after the most impressive victory or inglorious defeat, not only lent itself to the belief that the suave young man could withstand anything, but that he constantly thrived under such pressures.


Raposo Breaks Road Record
NANCY RAPOSO, a 35-year-old long-distance cycling champion from Newport, R.I., set a women's 24-hour world road record on Tuesday at Egg Harbor, N.J.
Raposo rode her bicycle 439.65 miles through wind and rain, beating a 436.3-mile record set in May by ANNA SCHWARTZ, 28, of Gainesville, Fla.


Espey Manufacturing &amp; Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


30 Iraqi Opposition Groups Meet in Kurdish-Held Region
Representatives of more than 30 diverse Iraqi groups who oppose the Baghdad Government met for the first time in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq today in an attempt to unify ranks.
"We are now trying to gather all the opposition into one single organization," said Jalal Talabani, the leader of one of the Kurds two main parties.


ECC International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


International Thoroughbred Breeders reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Connors, Navratilova Play Just For Fun
Nineteen years ago, 55-year-old Bobby Riggs said he could beat the best female tennis player in the world: 29-year-old Billie Jean King.
Riggs, who earlier that year had beaten Margaret Court, 6-2, 6-1, was wrong.
On Sept. 20, 1973, King beat Riggs, 6-4, 6-3, 6-3, in a match billed as the battle of the sexes but more reflected the social climate of the times than a sporting event.


GERMANY BACKING EFFORT BY FRANCE TO SUPPORT FRANC
France and Germany fought desperately today to prop up the value of the French franc and so preserve the battered European monetary system on which plans for the Continent's integration are based.
The two nations at the core of Europe's postwar quest for unity acted on both the political and financial fronts today.
They issued a rare joint statement vowing a cast-iron defense of the French currency and they also bought francs heavily in a temporarily successful bid to drive up the franc's value against the German mark.
The Bank of France also raised a key interest rate, making the franc more attractive to investors.


Meulens Says Future Isn't in Pinstripes
The date is circled in red on Hensley Meulens's calendar: Nov. 17.
That's when he might get a second chance, might be able to leave the Yankee organization, leave the past behind and start fresh with an expansion club.
It is all he has left to hope for, and he doesn't hope for much anymore.
Too many times he has been disappointed.
Too many times his expectations have slapped him in the face.
"I think it's past the point of frustration," Meulens said yesterday afternoon in the Yankee clubhouse, a place he long expected -- but never was able -- to call home.
"I don't know if that's the right word anymore. I don't even know if there is a word to describe how I feel."


Genetic Defects Detected In Embryos Just Days Old
In a feat that some say provides a glimpse of fetal medicine in the 21st century, doctors have identified embryos with genetic defects only a few days after the embryos were created when sperm met egg.
Working under a microscope on embryos in a petri dish, doctors removed single cells from four- or eight-cell embryos.
Then, using those cells, they looked for genes for cystic fibrosis and discarded embryos with the disorder.
Removal of a single cell at this stage has no effect on an embryo's development.


Override the Family Leave Veto
In a late-night veto designed to escape attention, President Bush has rejected a family leave bill that guarantees time off, without pay, to workers dealing with family or medical emergencies or a new child.
But Congressional Democrats and Republicans can still give a boost to family values by overriding the veto.
The bill provides up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave to an employee with a newborn or newly adopted child or with a serious family or medical emergency.
It applies to businesses with 50 or more employees, but exempts the highest-paid workers.
These are reasonable provisions well within the benefits provided in other industrial nations.


New Sexual Misconduct Charge Against Ex-Priest
Charges of criminal sexual conduct with a 15-year-old baby sitter in 1987 were lodged in Minnesota today against James R. Porter, the former Roman Catholic priest who was indicted Monday on charges of sexually assaulting 32 girls and boys in Massachusetts three decades ago.
The new charges against Mr.
Porter were disclosed today while he was being arraigned at Bristol Superior Court in New Bedford on the accusations dating to when he was a priest in the area.
Mr.
Porter, 57 years old, has admitted to some sexual misconduct in Massachusetts in the 1960's, but he has denied any sexual impropriety since he left the priesthood in 1974 and settled in the St.
Paul suburb of Oakdale.


Congress Pressures U.S. on Waste Disposal
Congress passed and sent to President Bush today legislation requiring Federal installations, like nuclear plants, to comply with state and Federal laws on the disposal of hazardous waste.
The compromise version of the legislation, which the Administration has blocked by raising objections for several years, was passed, 403 to 3, in the House and by voice vote in the Senate.


Social Security's Ungrateful Children
To the Editor:
"How sharper than a serpent's tooth is an ungrateful child" could well apply to many of the baby-boomer experts who do not remember how it was in the "good old days" before Social Security benefits.
It is saddening to witness the rising savagery of the campaign against the elderly and their entitlements.
It is even more saddening to see workers and the middle class being hoodwinked into joining this shortsighted behavior when they are the ones who may need the support of Social Security and other social programs.


Home Video
Big movies get most of the attention in video stores, but occasionally smaller films, usually from smaller distributors, illustrate the wide variety in the titles being released and in the companies doing the releasing.
This week, for instance, there are "Daughters of the Dust," Julie Dash's film about the Gullah people of the Sea Islands off the South Carolina-Georgia coast, and "Paris Is Burning," Jennie Livingston's feature-length documentary about the world of drag balls.
The two films, each critically acclaimed, come from two small film companies that may be dissimilar in the titles they offer but that are good examples of small distributors who pick their niches.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW LIFE FOR OLD ALEXANDER'S STORES
In a bid to resuscitate some of the devastated retail industry in the New York region, Bradlees Inc., a large discount department store based in Massachusetts, said it had agreed to acquire six of the 11 Alexander's Department Stores closed this year in bankruptcy: two in the Bronx, two in Queens, one in Yonkers and one in Valley Stream, L.I.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SUCCESSOR TO WEISS SELECTED FOR BALLOT
State Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler, a veteran legislator from the Upper West Side, was chosen last night by Manhattan Democratic Party leaders as their nominee to succeed Representative Ted Weiss on the November ballot, virtually assuring his election in the overwhelmingly Democratic district that has long been among the most liberal in the nation.
A1.
A scion of Tammany Hall puts West Side liberals to rout.
B4.
BUILDING COLLAPSE SPURS CITY ACTION
A building under demolition in lower Manhattan partially collapsed, seriously injuring an elderly passer-by.
Within hours, the city's Buildings Commissioner, Rudolph J. Rinaldi, said he would seek to license wreckers.
B3.
MAYOR'S PLAN GAINS AN ALLY
City Council President Andrew J. Stein yesterday said he would support Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to establish an all-civilian agency to investigate police misconduct, with some minor alterations.
B3.
NEW SUPPORT FOR ZUCKERMAN
The creditors committee of The Daily News endorsed Mortimer B. Zuckerman's plan to buy the bankrupt paper, and he could close the deal as early as Thanksgiving.
B3.
Firefighters exposed to asbestos.
B3.
Conductor recounts fatal subway ride.
B3.
Trial begins in Crown Heights stabbing.
B2.
REGION  FAMILY MUST PAY FOR LIFE SUPPORT
A New York State appellate court has ruled that the family of a comatose patient must pay for life-prolonging treatment, even if the family believes the patient would not have wanted the treatment and tries to have it stopped.
B7.
HOLDING ON TO THEIR JOBS
For two years, the Remington Products factory in Bridgeport, Conn., has been in trouble.
But last week, the company and Connecticut officials held a festive rally at which they announced that the company's 1,100 workers would be staying put.
B7.
MARCHING TO THE SOUNDS OF SOUSA
On Sept. 26, 1892, John Philip Sousa arrived in Plainfield, N.J., by rail, having resigned as director of the Marine Band and taken up the baton in front of the 60-member concert band bearing his name.
But why Plainfield?
Journal, B7.
INVESTING IN A FIELD OF DREAMS
The Suffolk County Legislature voted to spend as much as $500,000 for design of a $7.5 million minor-league baseball stadium at the county's community college in Brentwood.
B7.
New money plan for New Jersey schools.
B7.
Settlement in an East Hampton land case.
B7.
Chronicle B8


Now Ask Contractors About Wicks Law
To the Editor:
As someone deeply involved in public construction for more than 30 years, I can attest that the problem with public construction is not the way contracts are bid (the sole province of New York's Wicks Law) but the way construction projects are managed ("Stop Swindling New York," Op-Ed, Sept. 14).
The accusation that the Wicks Law leads to criminal infiltration is ludicrous.
Unfortunately, mob activity in construction is endemic.
The only proven antidote to such activities is competition and plenty of it.


Lack of Funds Leaves Abrams Silenced
For more than a week, since the day after the Democratic primary, United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has been mounting a relentless television and radio attack upon his Democratic challenger, State Attorney General Robert Abrams.
But Mr.
Abrams has largely not returned the fire -- defying conventional wisdom by leaving many of the attacks unrebutted and allowing Mr.
D'Amato, the Republican incumbent, to define the campaign and his opponent.
Mr.
Abrams's strategy is dictated by money, or the lack of it, his campaign staff said.
But some of his supporters said that even before he fired the first shot on primary night, Mr.
Abrams should have anticipated Mr.
D'Amato's scathing counter-strikes and responded to them.


First It Was Bird, Now Gretzky
A few years ago, after creating one of his many game-winning goals in the Stanley Cup playoffs, Wayne Gretzky spoke of his inspiration that day.
He had spent the afternoon watching Larry Bird do a similar thing on television for basketball's Boston Celtics, Gretzky said, and he wanted to be like him.
The two superstars have maintained a friendship, and there are many parallels to their careers.
The saddest comparison was emphasized on Tuesday with the announcement by Gretzky that painful back problems would keep him out of the Los Angeles Kings lineup indefinitely.
He is suffering from a herniated disk in his upper back.


Shaver Maker Announces Refinancing
For two years, the Remington Products factory that fronts Long Island Sound here has been in trouble.
Workers were laid off, raises were foregone, and the possibility of a foreign buyout, one that would move every last Remington job out of Bridgeport, hovered persistently.
But last week, the company and Connecticut officials held a festive rally at which they announced happy news: thanks to a $15 million loan guarantee from the state, various banks had been persuaded to refinance Remington's $100 million debt, and the company's 1,100 employees would be staying put.
About 100 white-collar employees had been let go during the last two years.
Jobs to Be Added
In fact, jubilant company spokesmen said, the refinancing would enable Remington, which makes shavers and travel products, to move between 50 and 100 jobs to Bridgeport from factories in Japan and Hong Kong, where some women's shavers were assembled.


Giants Learn a Lesson On How World Turns
Call them the sweetness-and-light Giants.
Until Monday night, it had been a season without a victory, an 0-2 season of finger pointing by players and coaches.
But winning makes happy bedfellows.


Rite Aid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Free Flu Shots Halted, Leaving Many at Risk
Many older Americans who have received free influenza shots for the last four years under an experimental Medicare project could go unprotected during the coming flu season, health experts say.
With the project completed, the free shots have been discontinued pending an evaluation of whether they saved money for Medicare.


Alison R. Bryan, 101, Presbyterian Minister
The Rev.
Dr.
Alison Reid Bryan, a retired Presbyterian minister who served churches in New Jersey and New York from 1931 until 1977, died on Tuesday at his home in Frenchtown, N.J.
He died in his sleep, nine days after his 101st birthday, his family said.


Paul S. Woerner, 40, Entertainment Lawyer
Paul S. Woerner, an entertainment lawyer in New York, died on Tuesday at his home in Newtown, Conn.
He was 40 years old and also lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Woerner died of AIDS-related meningitis, said a friend, Bill Riley.


Oracle Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Policeman Shoots Himself
A New York City police officer, on duty and in uniform, shot himself in the head last night inside the St.
George ferry terminal on Staten Island, but it was unclear whether he fired the gun accidentally, the police said.
The 22-year-old officer, who was not identified pending notification of his family, shot himself at 8:15 P.M. inside a police office adjacent to the main waiting room, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
The injured officer, who was assigned to the 120th Precinct, was listed in critical condition last night in the intensive care unit at St.
Vincent's Medical Center on Staten Island.


Calendar: Tours, Talks And a Harvest Fair
Waterfront and Beyond
Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.04
5.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.91
5.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.94
5.21
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
6.05
7.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.48
7.46
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.45
8.91
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.42
6.42
6.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
Objects and memorabilia belonging to James Cagney will be put on auction Sept. 30 at William Doyle Galleries on the Upper East Side.
Fans of the actor, who died in 1986, will find mementos of some of his most famous movies, including the spats and boots he wore as George M. Cohan in the 1942 musical "Yankee Doodle Dandy," the role for which he won an Oscar.


James A. Van Fleet, Leader In Korean War, Dies at 100
Gen.
James A. Van Fleet, a foot soldier through nearly four decades in the Army and a commander who led major campaigns in World War II and the Korean War, died yesterday at his ranch in Polk City, Fla.
He was 100 years old.
He died in his sleep, funeral home officials said.


Torborg Nixes WFAN Show
Jeff Torborg said today that he would not conduct his daily pre-game reports on WFAN radio next season.
The Mets' manager cited logistics as well as concern about his players finding out information before he can tell them.


Economic Scene; Long Creek, Short Paddle
"U.S. interest rates are too low," Carlos Solchaga told the multitudes assembled in Washington to watch unnerved government bankers play Point the Finger.
What Spain's minister of finance meant was that American interest rates are too low to suit Europeans, whose internal system of fixed exchange rates deconstructed last week under the strain of trans-Atlantic warfare over monetary policy.
With the White House begging for still lower rates, the Federal Reserve is not about to take Mr.
Solchaga's hint.
But by most accounts, fears of stirring the currency pot have dampened the Fed's enthusiasm for a further easing of monetary policy.
And with the Federal deficit pushing $400 billion, Washington also has deep misgivings about stimulating the economy with budget-busting tax cuts or increased spending.


RSI Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Larson-Davis Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Bondholders Seek to Alter USG Debt Plan
An adviser to a group of dissident bondholders of the USG Corporation said yesterday that the group's differences with the company over its proposed $2.7 billion debt restructuring plan were not large and could be negotiated.
On Tuesday, the group, which holds $477 million of 16 percent junior subordinated payment in kind debentures issued by USG as part of its recapitalization plan of June 1988, announced it had rejected the restructuring proposal.
USG, a maker of building products based in Chicago, presented the plan to all bondholders on Aug. 20.


SPORTS PEOPLE: HOCKEY
MANON RHEAUME, a 20-year-old goaltender, became the first woman to play in one of the four major pro sports leagues last night when she played the first period for the Tampa Bay Lightning against the St.
Louis Blues in an exhibition game in Tampa, Fla.
She faced nine shots and allowed two goals.
Rheaume left after the first period with the score 2-2 and was replaced by WENDELL YOUNG.
Lightning General Manager PHIL ESPOSITO admits that publicity was one of the major factors in the decision to invite the 5-foot-6-inch, 130-pound goalie to training camp.
Still, he thinks she's deserving of a shot at pitting her skills against those of N.H.L. players.


DWG Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Vane Glory In the Wind
THE winds of recession may be buffeting the architecture world.
But that hasn't stopped a group of luminaries from designing striking weather vanes to be auctioned off Saturday to benefit the Caramoor Garden Guild at the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah, N.Y.
They include Robert Siegel, Kent Bloomer, Theodore H. M. Prudon, George Ranalli, Bart Voorsanger and R. M. Kliment and Frances Halsband.
Some vanes were designed to capture the changing direction of the wind; others, simply to capture the changing directions of architecture.


N.F.L. Decision Delayed Again
A decision on whether four National Football League players would be granted immediate free agency was delayed at least until Thursday.
United States District Court Judge David Doty had planned to decide the case today, but the Minneapolis Federal Court system is backlogged with criminal cases and Doty is presiding over one of them.


Manhattan Democrats Select Assemblyman for Weiss Seat
State Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler, a veteran legislator from the Upper West Side, was chosen last night by Manhattan Democratic Party leaders as their nominee to succeed Representative Ted Weiss on the November ballot, virtually assuring his election in the overwhelmingly Democratic district that has long been among the most liberal in the nation.
In a raucous meeting of nearly 1,000 Democratic county committee members that capped a week of old-fashioned ward politics and intense lobbying, Mr.
Nadler handily defeated a crowded field of five other candidates, including the widow of Mr.
Weiss, the longtime liberal lion who died last week.


Navy Is Said to Punish 3 Admirals For Lax Inquiry on Fliers' Conduct
The Navy has decided to oust one admiral and discipline two others after a long-awaited Pentagon investigation concluded that they had failed to aggressively carry out an investigation into a naval aviators' convention in Las Vegas, Nev., where at least 26 women were sexually assaulted, Pentagon officials said tonight.
A report on the inquiry is said to recommend that the three admirals, all of whom supervised earlier investigations of the incident, be replaced or relieved of their commands.
One of the admirals is said to be retiring under pressure; the Pentagon was understood to be weighing the fate of the others tonight.


On Fire Island, Hungry Deer Give The Gardens 4 Stars
WHEN people here on Fire Island talk about gardening, they sound like characters out of "O Pioneers!" by Willa Cather: We carry our kitchen waste in old milk containers all the way from Manhattan.
We take our little red wagons down to the bay for seaweed.
We grow tomatoes and roses in sand and salty winds and scorching sun.
And the deer are always right behind -- clematis dangling from their lips.
Though the deer haven't swallowed any people yet, their taste for plants is growing by leaps and bounds.
They used to like just Big Boy tomatoes, Gertrude Jekyll roses and tasty pots of geraniums.
Now, they eat yew and rhododendrons, dogwood and birch, even thorny holly trees.


Review/Theater; 4 Playwrights, Young but Cleareyed
Each of the four new playwrights in the 1992 Young Playwrights Festival is clearsighted about troublesome social concerns and unafraid to challenge accepted standards and practices.
Even when plays waver, the playwrights express a mature point of view that belies their youth.
As is customary in this annual festival, the one-acts were written when the authors were under the age of 19, and they are treated to highly polished productions at Playwrights Horizons.
The evening begins on an iconoclastic note with "The P.C. Laundromat," a brief, spin-dry comedy by Aurorae Khoo.
Peter Jay Fernandez and Christina Moore play two hospitable attendants in the Laundry of Brotherly Love.
Together, they deliver a nonstop vaudeville spiel about ethnicity and assimilation, which pays stylistic homage to Vachel Lindsay's drumbeating poem "The Congo" while rapping in a manner that would also be recognized by a contemporary playwright like Suzan-Lori Parks.


OVERRIDE VOTE SET ON FAMILY LEAVE
Reacting to President Bush's late-night veto of family-leave legislation, Democratic leaders in the Senate today scheduled an override vote on the politically contentious bill for Thursday.
The legislation would require larger companies to grant at least 12 weeks of unpaid leave to any employee to deal with a birth or adoption or family emergencies like a parent's or spouse's sickness.


Bassett Furniture Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Celebrating 30 Years of Valentino's Couture
PLACIDO DOMINGO's tenor dominated as he, Bette Midler and Aretha Franklin sang "Happy Anniversary to You." Lypsinka popped out of an anniversary cake, and Kid Creole and the Coconuts drew the elegantly dressed guests in black and white gowns to rhythmic wriggling on the dance floor.
Sophia Loren brought the house down when she swept onstage to receive an award for her work for abused children.
The black-tie dinner for 400 guests on Tuesday night marked the opening of the exhibition "Valentino: 30 years of Magic" at the Seventh Regiment Armory, which has been transformed into an Italian piazza for the show.
The exhibition chronicles the Rome-based designer's couture collections since 1960 and can be seen through Oct. 9.
It was shown in Rome last year and will go on to Los Angeles, Tokyo and London, Valentino said.


What's a Poor Man's Pennant Race? This Is
Welcome to the only race in town.
No, make that the only race in baseball.
As Sparky Anderson said upon arriving at Yankee Stadium the other day, "It's the one to watch."
It's the fight for fourth place in the American League East, and three teams are the contenders (it was four before the Boston Red Sox nestled into last place and claimed it for themselves).
What makes the race even more scintillating is that the three teams play one another these last two weeks of the season.


Long-Term Rates Back Near 7.5%
Long-term interest rates, which fell sharply after the Federal Reserve cut short-term rates last summer, are rising again because of economic and political uncertainties at home and abroad.
Some see the higher rates as a threat to the already sluggish economic recovery.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond inched back up toward 7.5 percent yesterday in very volatile trading.
The yield has leaped more than a quarter of a percentage point in just two weeks, to 7.48 percent yesterday, as a host of negative factors have beset the market, including the dollar's fall yesterday to a new low against the Japanese yen.  [ D21. ]


If Nets Do Keep Mills, He Won't Come Cheap
More than a week after the Detroit Pistons offered Terry Mills a five-year contract worth almost $10 million, the Nets haven't decided whether to match the offer to their backup power forward, and no wonder.
According to Mills's agent, Harold MacDonald, if the Nets do match the offer, within 24 hours after the contract is registered with the commissioner's office the club would have to shell out as much as $8.4 million -- a $2 million signing bonus, a first-year salary of $937,400 and a loan of as much as $5.5 million.


Plan to Destroy Toxic Weapons Polarizes a City
Each day for more than 32 years, Curtis Penny's job took him into the concrete, earth-covered igloos that dot acre after acre of the Anniston Army Depot, like so many grassy hummocks.
The tools of his trade included protective clothing, a gas mask and a syringe full of atropine, the heart and muscle stimulant he would have injected at a moment's notice if any of the thousands of containers he was charged with maintaining had leaked their deadly contents: nerve gas that had been stored for up to 30 years.


Oil-Dri Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Aztec Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


COMPANY NEWS
BORLAND INTERNATIONAL CORP.  saw its appeal denied in a suit filed by Lotus Development Corp.
The ruling keeps Lotus's case to protect its spreadsheet program on track for a Nov. 2 jury trial.
L.
M.
ERICSSON signed a contract of more than $430 million under which it will continue to modernize British Telecom's network.


Jerusalem Journal; Write 100 Times: The Schools Need Shaking Up
To hear her enemies talk, you would think that Education Minister Shulamit Aloni was the Wicked Witch of the West.
When she assumed her highly sensitive position in mid-July after two decades of wandering in the wilderness of political opposition, one Orthodox Jewish newspaper immediately denounced her as a "wicked person."


In Right-to-Die Fight, Court Finds Family Liable for Care
A New York State appeals court has ruled that the family of a comatose patient must pay for life-prolonging treatment even if the family believes the patient would not have wanted that treatment and had tried to have it stopped.
The decision could make it even more difficult for families in New York State to remove life support for dying patients who have not left explicit written instructions.
The state already has one of the strictest right-to-die laws in the country, requiring elaborate proof of a patient's wishes before life-support equipment can be withdrawn.


AG Services of America reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Topics of The Times; The Smoking Disease Bill
It's not surprising that the Department of Veterans Affairs has been moving for months to bring its 172 hospitals up to the level of most private institutions by banning the sale of cigarettes in hospital shops and by moving smoking lounges outside.
After all, diseases associated with smoking are responsible for the deaths of 434,000 Americans every year, and there's considerable reason to suspect it's hazardous just being exposed to cigarette smoke.
What is surprising is that at this moment in the health history of America, Representative Harley Staggers, a Democrat from West Virginia, still wants to make it easier, not harder, to smoke.
He proposes an amendment to the Veterans Health Bill, coming up for action in the House soon, to insure smokers easy access to cigarettes and smoking lounges.


Russian Tells of Americans' Fate
The Russian official responsible for the search for missing American prisoners of war in the former Soviet Union said today that two Americans had died in the 1940's after long prison terms and that one of them had probably been executed.
The official, Gen.
Dmitri Volkogonov, a military adviser to President Boris N. Yeltsin, said that tracking the cases of Americans through Soviet files was difficult and time consuming and that in some cases files had been falsified.
But he said that to the best of his knowledge there was no American prisoner of war currently alive in the former Soviet Union.


The Ad Campaign


An Israeli Opening to Palestinians Delayed
To discourage moves to involve the Palestine Liberation Organization in Mideast peace diplomacy, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has delayed proposed changes in a law banning contacts with the group, officials said today.
Under the planned changes, private individuals would be allowed to meet P.L.O. members as long as the meetings did not harm state security.
A 1986 law prohibits any contacts.


Topics of The Times; Vitamin Voodoo
A mischievous amendment quietly inserted in the giant Labor, Health and Education appropriations bill would prevent the Food and Drug Administration from taking action against false and misleading health claims for vitamins and dietary supplements.
The amendment would exempt vitamin pills and herbs sold as dietary supplements from new F.D.A. regulations limiting health claims to those supported by "significant agreement" within the scientific community.


Stein Supports Proposal For Police Review Board
City Council President Andrew J. Stein took a side yesterday in the battle over investigating police misconduct, saying he would support Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal to establish an all-civilian agency, with some minor alterations.
Mr.
Stein, who is unofficially running for mayor, has been silent on the question in the last week while Mayor Dinkins and his Republican rival, Rudoph W. Giuliani, have hammered at each other in a bitter and racially charged dispute.
The battle took a nasty turn after thousands of police officers held a rowdy demonstration around City Hall last Wednesday.


Met Museum Reports on Spending
A new survey indicates that two-thirds of the 642,000 people who visited the four-month-long Seurat show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art last year came from outside New York City and spent about $313 million on travel, hotels, restaurants and shopping while visiting, said Philippe de Montebello, director of the museum.
Of those out-of-town visitors, nearly 40 percent said the Seurat show was a major reason for their coming to New York, the survey showed.


Fuller (H.B.) Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


AutoZone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Corrections
A picture caption on the Education page yesterday about private management of public schools misidentified the Baltimore school shown.
It was the Harlem Park Middle School, not an elementary school.


Weinberger Friends to Help Pay Legal Fees
In the latest variation on a modern Washington ritual, friends of Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary, have banded together to help him pay his legal costs.
Mr.
Weinberger, who served in President Ronald Reagan's Administration, faces five felony charges of lying to Congressional committees in 1987 about the Administration's efforts to make an arms-for-hostages deal and its funneling of the proceeds to Nicaraguan rebels.
He is also accused of concealing a private diary that prosecutors said contained incriminating evidence.
Mr.
Weinberger's supporters have complained that not only has he been charged unfairly but that he also opposed the deal with Iran in internal Administration deliberations.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Tarkanian Subpoenaed by Committee
Former Nevada-Las Vegas Coach JERRY TARKANIAN and the university president, ROBERT MAXSON, have been subpoenaed to testify next month before a Nevada legislative committee investigating problems at the school.
The Las Vegas Sun reported yesterday that Maxson's subpoena ordered him to bring all documents related to Tarkanian's employment and resignation.
He was also ordered to bring records relating to his use of discretionary funds at the school, and the U.N.L.V.
Foundation, a separate fund-raising organization. (AP)


Environmental Safety reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Designs for a Decade
GALLERY 91 in SoHo has long been a bellwether of emerging design trends.
The gallery is celebrating its 10th anniversary with a retrospective, "A Decade of Design."


Education Alternatives Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Jay Jacobs reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


INSIDE
Russian Submarines for Iran
Pentagon officials said Russia is selling two or three submarines to Teheran despite protests from Washington, and they are worried.
Page A9.
In Over Their Heads
A Russian official said his country was unable to tap Western loans because it could not meet overdue payments on previous debts.
Page A10.
Safety Net for Homeless


Japanese Troops in Cambodia Get Their Marching Orders


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Celeste Cielo Victorious
Celeste Cielo slipped through along the rail under John Velezquez and took command moving down the backstretch for a half-length victory in the $28,000 Never Behaving purse for fillies and mares yesterday at Belmont.
Celeste Cielo, whose 113 impost was four pounds lighter than runner-up Miss Jazz, achieved her third victory in nine career starts.
All her victories, including her first in which she established a track record for five furlongs on May 31, 1991, have come at Belmont.
Miss Jazz, 117, with Julie Krone riding, finished fast to be runner-up in the 10-horse field, 2 1/4 lengths ahead of Final Crossing.
Celeste Cielo covered seven furlongs on the fast track in 1:23 1/5 to earn $16,800 for Jack Shelley and returned $25.40, $10.40 and $6.80 for $2 across the board. (AP) GOLF  Baum Leads by 1 Stroke
Mel Baum, a 35-year-old assistant pro at Bonnie Briar Country Club in Larchmont, N.Y., who won this event in 1989 and 1990, shot his second par-71 yesterday to take a one-shot lead into the third and final round of the $55,000 Izod-Cadillac Met PGA Championship.
Jerry Impellitiere, a driving-range pro at Duffers Hideaway in New Windsor, shot 72 on the 6,950-yard Black course at Bethpage (L.I.) State Park and was alone in second at 143.
Larry Rentz of Winged Foot and Bob Longo of Seawane were tied for third at 144.
Mark Mielke of Lawrence, the current New York State and Met Open champion, was tied with three others at 145.
Baum is bidding to join Gene Sarazen, Paul Runyan, Doug Ford and four others as champions three or more times in the 66-year history of the event.
Sixty-five players in the field of 144 pros, chasing a $7,500 first prize, survived the cut of 154.
McGinnis Stays on Top: A former PGA Tour pro, Tom McGinnis, who is the teaching pro at Crescent Range in Union, shot a par 71 yesterday and maintained a four-stroke lead after two rounds of the New Jersey PGA Championships at the Forsgate Country Club in Jamesburg.
McGinnis had four birdies and four bogeys on the 6,577-yard course and finished with a 36-hole total of five-under-par 137 in the 54-hole event.
John Klocksin of Twin Brooks, Gary Ostrega of Colonia, a former winner; Baker Maddera of Rock Spring and Mike Burke Jr. of Mountain Ridge were tied for second at 141. (AP)


Senate Sweetens Tax Bill With Cut in Health Costs
Burdened by growing election-year partisanship over taxes, the Senate moved today to make it more difficult for President Bush to kill a $31 billion tax bill by passing an attractive measure cutting health care costs.
April's rioting in Los Angeles gave impetus to the legislation, which would include a series of incentives for businesses to invest in impoverished urban neighborhoods, creating what are known as enterprise zones.
But supporters of the measure said its prospects have been damaged since it was last considered on the Senate floor nearly two months ago.
President Bush, trying hard to reinvigorate his sagging re-election campaign, has hardened his anti-tax position.


Germany Tells the U.N. It Wants A Permanent Seat on the Council
Germany told the United Nations General Assembly for the first time today that it would like a permanent seat on the Security Council and promised to revise its Constitution so that German soldiers could take part in United Nations military operations.
The German statement, made by Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel in an address to the Assembly, was widely viewed as a sign that two years after reunification Germany is ready to take a role in world political affairs commensurate with its economic strength.
Japan Also Wants a Seat


Sousa's Band Is 100. So Is the Plan of Celebration.
THE Stillman Music Hall, built in 1884, is long gone, extracted like a decayed tooth from the 200 block of West Front Street almost 40 years ago to make room for the city's first municipal parking lot.
What was once its narrow facade is now a grassy gap between Albert's Record Shop and the abandoned Nelson's Active Wear Center, a reminder of the popular but clumsy urban renewal policies of a generation or more ago that failed to rejuvenate the business district.


William P. Mott Jr. Is Dead at 82; Directed the National Park Service
William P. Mott Jr., director of the National Park Service from 1985 to 1989, died on Monday in Orinda, Calif., where he lived.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Mott, who had been suffering from pneumonia for the last month, died of heart failure, said Jo Hemphill, a spokeswoman for the family.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CLOTHING and fashion form an increasingly important aspect of children's lives as they progress from the toddler years through adolescence.
Their selection of a particular style of dress, and even their battles with their parents over clothing, can provide insights into the developmental issues with which they are struggling.
From the children's perspective, having the right outfit, shoes or even shoelaces is far from trivial.
And they can have profound implications on how adolescents are treated by their peers, and even how they view themselves.
For toddlers and preschoolers, selecting their own clothing has much less to do with peer approval or fashion than with having a chance to demonstrate their independence.
This inclination can be frustrating for parents, especially when their daughter wants to wear her frilly dress and patent leather party shoes to the playground, or their son insists on sleeping in his galoshes.
At this age, explaining to children why their clothing choices are inappropriate usually doesn't help.
From their point of view, the clothing selected is seldom as important as the freedom to make a choice at all.


American Greetings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Easter Seal Award to McCann
McCann-Erickson and A.T.&amp; T. took top honors at the 1992 National Easter Seal EDI Awards ceremony in New York Tuesday night.


Opponent of Military Dominance Named Thailand's Prime Minister
A politician who has opposed military interference in politics was named Thailand's 20th Prime Minister today after cobbling together a coalition Government that includes one of the nation's pro-military parties.
The new Prime Minister, Chuan Leekpai, is considered honest and self-sacrificing and, as the first Thai leader in modern times without links to the military or to the aristocracy, has a career that is admired for its up-by-the-bootstraps quality.


Firehouse Furnishings
AFTER Janet Rutkowski, a sculptor, and Walter Kenul, a musician, finished renovating their historic firehouse in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, they did the only thing that self-respecting design-minded people could do: design a firehouse-full of furniture, including a lizard shelf (right, $600).
The result was B.F.D.
Firehouse Studios, a business specializing in steel furniture.
"We needed a coffee table," Ms.
Rutkowski said of the origin of their African shield table.
"We learned how to build things in order to survive."


SUPPLIER GROUP CHARGES WAL-MART BROKE ANTITRUST LAW
A group of 29 international sales representatives and suppliers filed a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission, charging Wal-Mart Stores Inc. violated Federal antitrust law when it asked its large manufacturers to sell products to it directly, cutting out middleman suppliers.
"Power buyers are engaging in a predatory buying scheme to force their competitors out of business so they can control the marketplace," said Robert C. Schwarze, executive director of the Coalition of Americans to Save the Economy.
A Wal-Mart spokesman was unavailable for comment.


Gypsy Cabs: A Hard, Chancy Life on the Side Streets of New York
The death notice at Olu Olux Amara's funeral described his arrival from Sierra Leone: "The urge for furthering his education and experience came to reality when he decided to brave the air and set foot on the firm dust of the United States of America with its untapped bosoms of unlimited opportunities."
He was not one to back away from a challenge.
He chased off drug users nodding in the hallways of his apartment building in the East Tremont section of the Bronx.
And he earned a living driving a gypsy cab in the toughest streets of the city.


A New School Opens in Brooklyn


Is It Art or Scrap Wood? The Answer Is: It's Both
The southern tip of Roosevelt Island is haunted ground, a wasteland of crumbling Gothic ruins where the city once deposited its sick and insane.
It has a new, peculiar feature.
Yesterday, the final nail was driven into a temporary sculpture called "Kawamata: Project on Roosevelt Island," bringing to an end five years of negotiation, bureaucratic wire-pulling and furious hammering.
The work, which surrounds the ruins of the Smallpox Hospital, looks at first glance like a load of lumber dropped by a whirlwind.
Made almost entirely of scrap wood gathered around Manhattan and Queens, it creeps around the ruins of the Smallpox Hospital, extending long wooden fingers into its gaping windows.
In certain sections, the sculpture's wooden walls form mazelike passages.
In others, the structure opens up and looks more like complex scaffolding.
On the south side of the building, where the ground rises suddenly, the sculpture proliferates madly, completely enshrouding the brick wall, and small shacks are scattered here and there.


Sales of U.S.-Built Cars and Light Trucks Off 3.1%
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks, burdened by weak results at the General Motors Corporation, fell 3.1 percent in mid-September, according to company reports released today.
Car sales alone by the Big Three and Japanese companies with American operations dropped 7.3 percent, to 134,283, while light-truck sales, which include sales of mini-vans, sports-utility vehicles and pickups, rose 3.4 percent, to 98,005.
Overall sales of domestically built cars and light trucks totaled 232,288.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a student's fatal stabbing at South Shore High School in Brooklyn referred incorrectly to the school system's metal detector procedure.
Security guards with hand-held metal detectors arrive at 40 schools five days a week to check for weapons, deciding each day which students will be checked.


Pentagon Says Russia Is Selling Subs to Iran
Russia is selling diesel submarines to Iran despite protests from Washington, and the first of the vessels is expected to be sent to Iran shortly, senior Pentagon officials said today.
The sale worries the United States Navy, which says the Iranian submarines will introduce a new threat to naval operations in the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea, sea lanes for much of the world's oil.


Ford Motor Credit Prices Certificates
Ford Motor Credit, a unit of the Ford Motor Company, was in the debt market yesterday to price for sale to the public $220 million of certificates due 2000 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The issue, which has an average life of 4.1 years, is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Among Many Lists, Tales of Missing Americans
On May 18, 1965, when the American war in Indochina was still in its early stages, Capt.
David L. Hrdlicka, an Air Force pilot, was shot down in an F-105D over Laos.
He walked away from the crash, and into oblivion.
There is evidence he survived: The Communist Pathet Lao who apparently captured him took pictures.
One of them appeared in the Soviet newspaper Pravda in Moscow and a Vietnamese daily in Hanoi; another was later displayed in a Lao museum.
His arrest was announced on the radio.
The Pathet Lao also broadcast a tape recording purportedly of the American pilot asking for pardon and release.
List Presented to Hanoi


Her First Issue at the Ready, Tina Brown Talks About The New Yorker
For three months now, the talk of the town has been about Tina's tightrope.
How will Tina Brown, the flamboyant former editor in chief of Vanity Fair, take her panache to the statuesque New Yorker without losing all those hard-core readers who have spent the summer in distressed anticipation of her arrival?


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 5 about Deborah (Arnie) Arnesen, a Democratic candidate for Governor of New Hampshire, referred incorrectly to the law school from which she received her law degree.
It was the Vermont Law School in South Royalton.
It is not affiliated with the University of Vermont.


And Goodwill To Someone
The site of the 1988 Goodwill Games will be announced Oct. 16 in the city, or regional area, selected.
Final presentations will be made to the selection committee in Atlanta the day before by the four finalists: New Yorki, Dallas-Fort Worth, South Florida and St.
Louis.


Why Worry About the Brain Machine?
To the Editor:
Re "Japan Plans Computer to Mimic Human Brain. Washington declines to sign on, seeing project as scheme to help Japan" (Science Times, Aug. 25): Washington need not worry.
If the machine will truly mimic the human brain, the first question is, Whose?
It's almost a parallel to the problem raised by the ads that say, "Speak French like a diplomat." Whose?
Theirs or ours?
Once the Japanese have chosen a brain, think -- if I may use the word -- of the other problems.
A machine that mimics the human brain will be accurate in the morning but sag in the late afternoon.
Your article says it will recognize human faces.
Yes, but it will forget a lot of them.


Technology Solutions Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Harold's Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Stuart W. Thayer, 66, A New York Lawyer
Stuart W. Thayer, a New York lawyer who specialized in international finance, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Insituform East Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Backlash for Hillary Clinton Puts Negative Image to Rout
Barbara Bush is still vastly more popular and better known in the polls, but Hillary Clinton seems to be riding a heady backlash from the Republican convention these days.
Her crowds are big, her portrait on the cover of Time magazine this month was downright beatific, and months of careful maneuvering to recast her image may be finally paying off.
Mrs.
Clinton, who dislikes and dismisses the notion that there was ever a strategy to warm her up, says she simply realized last spring that voters were getting a one-dimensional portrait of her.


Essay; Into the Shredder
Some realistic Senate Republicans, aghast at the prospect of Mario Cuomo or Robert Morgenthau as Attorney General, have decided that it would be better to have a nonpartisan special prosecutor look into the Iraqgate scandal.
That was why they are joining Carl Levin, a Democrat, and Bill Cohen, a Republican, in backing that law's extension.
I believe a grand jury will be empaneled next year to probe James Baker's backdoor financing of Saddam Hussein's war machine.
It will take sworn testimony about how Agriculture, Commerce and State and White House officials lied to Congress, altered and shredded evidence, and conspired to conceal these acts.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: California; For Bush, California Seems a Lost Cause
Republicans have all but given up on winning California for President Bush, essentially writing off the largest electoral prize of all to Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Although Mr.
Bush carried California in 1988, he has never played particularly well on the West Coast, and his standing has sunk to historic lows in this state, where, on his watch, the economy has turned from the nation's most vibrant to a basket case.
In addition, Republican messages on abortion and "family values" have alienated many voters.


R2 Medical Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Television; The Misadventures of the Simpsons
Some politicians might take exception to CBS's "Murphy Brown." A few might even dare to tackle ABC's "Roseanne," which has been mounting a persuasive challenge to the White House stand that the recession is not as bad as the press might have you believe.
But only the foolhardy would go up against "The Simpsons," returning at 8 tonight on Fox for a fourth season and still the most radical show on prime time.
With its breezily dysfunctional family, "The Simpsons" can deftly skewer everything from nuclear energy and modern education to corporate greed and baseball nostalgia.
Matt Groening, the show's creator, is a cartoonist with a pen dipped in seemingly fey, truly diabolical whimsy.
Further proof is available in "Life in Hell," his syndicated newspaper comic strip starring Ali and Akbar, America's most endearingly odd couple.


Bush and Bounty
Today, President Bush offered a $20 billion tax break to small businesses.
Last week, it was $500 million a year to companies that give workers time off in family emergencies.
Before that, it was a 1 percentage point across-the-board reduction in tax rates for individuals.
And these are just the tax cuts Mr.
Bush has proposed since the White House published its mid-year budget review in July.
All told, the tax breaks he has put forth in his election campaign would cost the Government about $165 billion in lost revenue over the next five years.


Southwest Cafes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 24


Bridge
When a gremlin flies in with an outrageous hand, conventional guidelines often fly out.
There are times when the gods of the game seem to be playing a joke on the players.
A case in point is the diagramed deal which they, or perhaps a mischievous gremlin, inserted into a duplicate game at the Executive Bridge Club in Hallandale, Fla., in March.


Perfumania Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Daily News Creditors Endorse Zuckerman's Plan
The creditors committee of The Daily News yesterday endorsed Mortimer B. Zuckerman's plan to buy the bankrupt paper, and he could close the deal as early as Thanksgiving.
The paper's creditors had opposed the offer by Mr.
Zuckerman, a New York real-estate developer and owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, but a majority of the 13-member committee voted to approve his plan after he improved his offer to creditors.


Reitmans (Canada) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Paul E. Garber, 93, First Curator Of National Air and Space Exhibit
Paul E. Garber, whose childhood fascination with a kite inspired a lifelong love of aviation that led to the founding of the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, died yesterday at the Arlington Hospital in Arlington, Va.
He was 93 years old and lived in Arlington.
His family did not disclose the cause of death.


Memphis State Players End Boycott
Memphis State's team returned to practice yesterday after a one-day player boycott set off by frustration over an 0-3 start.
Some players said they wanted a new coach.
Coach CHUCK STOBART said he was the primary target of the team's unhappiness.
He is in his fourth year, with a record of 11-24-1.
"I've probably not done a real good job of communicating with our football team, and I need to do a much better job of doing that," Stobart said after a meeting with his players.


Cangene Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Books of The Times; Creation: Who, How and Why
The Creators By Daniel J. Boorstin  811 pages. Random House. $30.


Gas-Price Rally Continues To End of October Contract
Natural gas prices extended their remarkable post-hurricane ascent yesterday, with the contract for October delivery rising 9.7 cents, to $2.743 per 1,000 cubic feet, in the contract's final day of trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Traders said the buying strength that developed after Hurricane Andrew temporarily disrupted 5 percent of the nation's gas output in late August had evolved beyond bullish sentiment this week, possibly setting the stage for a sharp retreat.


Giants Situation Angers Florida Senator
Senator CONNIE MACK, a Republican of Florida, accused baseball officials with trying to block the move of the San Francisco Giants to Tampa Bay, Fla., and said he would do everything he could to revoke the sport's antitrust exemption.
Mack is a member of a Senate subcommittee that will hold hearings next week on baseball's exemption from antitrust laws.
Mack said he thought baseball officials made "a 180-degree turn" by letting San Francisco make a counteroffer after the Giants' owner, BOB LURIE, was told he was free to explore other offers. (AP)


D'Amato Raises Issues of Ethics


British Premier Will Seek Support for New Strategy
A week after being forced into a humiliating reversal on monetary policy, Prime Minister John Major will confront his critics in Parliament on Thursday, hoping to douse a serious rebellion over his Government's economic and European policies.
The Government said today that it would ask Parliament to endorse the bones of a new economic strategy, which Mr.
Major has not yet disclosed but which will rely primarily on lower interest rates in an effort to spur job growth.


Designing a Better New York
NEW YORK CITY has been imagined as a place where the newsstands are beacons of light and Broadway a bicycle path edged in grass.
These are two of the winning proposals in the Design New York competition, sponsored by the Municipal Art Society, a nonprofit group devoted to improving the physical environment of New York City.
The seven winning ideas, and 50 other noteworthy submissions, are mounted in an exhibit that opens Friday at the society's galleries at the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.
Two hundred other ideas are shown in portfolios.
The show, celebrating the society's 100th anniversary, runs through Nov. 10.


Baseball Goes Cool to Lure Young Audience With Rap
IN the 1950's musical "Damn Yankees," the Devil turns a middle-aged baseball fan into a young player.
Now, Major League Baseball is trying to turn young people into baseball fans.
Back then, the Devil used a sultry temptress named Lola to seduce the fan into selling his soul.
Now the executives at Major League Baseball in New York are using the Lola of the 1990's, advertising.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day yesterday misidentified the parent company of the Hartmarx Specialty Stores Group.
It is the HSSA Group Ltd.


Firefighters Are Exposed To Asbestos
A smoky fire broke out last night in the basement of a high-rise apartment building on Central Park West undergoing asbestos removal.
Although no one was injured in the blaze, 30 firefighters were exposed to the asbestos, which had been collected in more than 40 bags in the basement, the authorities said.
Capt.
Fred Villani of the Emergency Medical Service said that none of the approximately 230 residents of the building had been treated for exposure to asbestos.
The 30 firefighters were not hospitalized, but their clothes were taken from them and they were given showers at the scene, the Fire Department said.


140 Fingers, 35 Feet
SOME designers' egos can get overblown.
So, perhaps it is poetic justice that a 35-foot-long inflated creature will adorn the outside of the Architects and Designers Building for the 25th annual Designers Saturday festivities from Oct. 15 to 17 in New York.
The make-believe sea slug, with 140 wiggling fingers, is the latest inflatable item developed by Goldman Arts of Boston, an environmental-design company.
"It's something that every building needs," said Jon Goldman, the creative director, who was inspired by Japanese science-fiction films and named the slug "Nudibranch."


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about the author William A. Swanberg misidentified the subjects of his last book, "Whitney Father, Whitney Heiress." They were William Collins Whitney, Secretary of the Navy in the first Cleveland Administration, and his daughter, Dorothy, not the publisher John Hay Whitney and his daughter, Dorothy.


Future Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot, Pondering Re-entry Into Race, Spends Millions to Press Ballot Drive
In the month after he renounced his intention to seek the Presidency, Ross Perot spent nearly $4 million -- nearly all of it his own money -- to continue the effort to place his name on the ballot.
In addition, a newly obtained campaign document provides hints that Mr.
Perot's new grass roots organization is more tightly controlled from Dallas than the Texas billionaire admits in public.


Corrections
A report by Bloomberg Business News in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about an investor group's stake in Taj Mahal Holding referred incorrectly in some editions to the securities sold by the group.
They were bonds with a face value of $30 million, and 30,000 class B shares.


Top Russian Official Says Debts Are Preventing New Borrowings
A top Russian official asserted today that his country was unable to tap Western loans because it could not meet overdue payments on previous debts.
Other Western loans are not being used because the weak ruble make imports too expensive, even with the loans, he said.
The International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and industrialized democracies have been trying to help Russia mainly by insuring that private and state-owned enterprises do not shut down for lack of critical imports.
All of the money from the international financial institutions and most of the money from the Group of Seven has consisted of loans that must be repaid eventually, rather than grants.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Bats Beyond the Belfry
Q.
I've seen bats flying around my garden at night and they are a bit scary.
Are these good guys or bad? -- Germaine Ruggles, Cleveland.


GTE CLOSES SALE OF 33 MILLION SHARES AT $32.875 EACH
The GTE Corporation, the nation's largest local-telephone company and one of the most widely held equities in the country, said yesterday that it had closed the sale of more than $1 billion of new shares.
GTE said it had sold its planned 30 million common shares plus an extra 3 million it had set aside if the first group was oversubscribed.
The price was $32.875 a share.
GTE sold its stock despite an unsettled stock market, in which several large companies have had to withdraw stock offerings after investors, especially mutual funds, balked at rich prices.


Billy Joel Takes His Lawyers to Court
In a case that reveals the stress and complicated financial ties that can develop between performing artists and those who represent them, the singer Billy Joel filed a lawsuit yesterday against his lawyers, Allen Grubman and Arthur Indursky, and their New York City firm.
The suit, filed in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan, includes a wide range of charges including fraud, breach of fiduciary responsibility, malpractice and breach of contract, among others.


Philadelphia Mayor Forces Contract on City's Workers
Risking a strike by the city's 15,000 nonuniformed employees, Mayor Edward G. Rendell announced at a news conference tonight that he was unilaterally imposing a new contract on city workers.
"As of 5 o'clock tonight, we're implementing our last and best offer," Mr.
Rendell said.
"But that implementation should be nothing that scares city workers because this is a fair contract. It is an especially fair contract when you consider the circumstances, not only our massive and staggering deficit, but what's going on in the private sector throughout this country where worker after worker is being laid off. This contract will avoid those massive layoffs."


Hearing the Fears, With No Answers
If the General Motors Willow Run Assembly Plant, with 4,000 hourly workers, is a small town, then Bob Harlow is the mayor.
He is the president of the auto workers' Local 1776.
Only now, his town is going out of business.
The cars it has been building will be produced instead in Arlington, Tex.
Bob Harlow's people are scared about their futures.
They want answers.
When is the plant going to close?
Should we move to Arlington?
How do they treat blacks in Texas?
If we don't go, will we get picked up at other plants in Michigan?
How long will Arlington stay open?
What about early retirement?
What's going to happen after the contract expires?
Why are they closing our plant?


Ogilvy Forms Client Service
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide said yesterday that it would form a unit, called the Worldwide Client Services Organization, to improve service to multinational clients by restructuring the agency's system of worldwide management supervisors.
G.
Kelly O'Dea, 43 years old, who had been executive client services director, was named to the new position of president of the organization.
He will continue to be based in London.


Amy Fisher Pleads Guilty To Assault
Speaking in a quiet and sure voice, Amy Fisher, the 18-year-old who claimed tabloid headlines and the leering side of New York's imagination, pleaded guilty today to shooting Mary Jo Buttafuoco, delivering her final lines as defendant in one of the region's longer-running morality tales.
With her plea bargain, the spotlight shifts to Joseph Buttafuoco, Mary Jo's husband, who may face charges of statutory rape and involvement in his wife's shooting, according to the Nassau County District Attorney, Dennis Dillon.
Miss Fisher is expected to testify before a grand jury investigating the case against Mr.
Buttafuoco, who has denied having an affair with her.


Prudential Lifts Florida Loss to $1.2 Billion
The Prudential Insurance Company announced yesterday that it was raising its estimate of what it would pay in claims for damage in Florida from Hurricane Andrew to $1.2 billion, four times what executives previously thought.
As a result of the Prudential's new loss estimates, Standard &amp; Poor's, the rating agency, said it was placing Prudential on credit watch, with the possibility of downgrading the nation's largest insurance company from its present AAA, or highest rating.
The agency said the losses from Andrew alone could be expected to use up nearly 10 percent of Prudential's capital.


U.N. Expulsion of Yugoslavia Breeds Defiance and Finger-Pointing
Serbs reacted with defiance and despair today to Yugoslavia's ouster from the United Nations, and the nationalists who hold power tried to pin the blame on the Serbian-American millionaire they drafted to become Prime Minister 10 weeks ago.
But Serbs waiting in a four-mile-long gasoline line were more concerned by the international economic embargo, now in its fourth month, and some blamed the nationalist leadership.


Changes Leave Riley Content, but Cautious
Pat Riley spent most of yesterday in his office, formulating new ideas for the new-look Knicks.
In the aftermath of Tuesday's major trade, it has become clear that last season's success did not pacify the Knicks' front office.
They have changed three-fifths of their starting lineup after winning 52 games last year and extending the defending champion Chicago Bulls to a seven-game playoff series.
It's a gamble, but a calculated one.
Riley knows what a championship team looks like, and when the coach evaluated the Knicks after last season, he did not see one.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Georgia Power Co., Atlanta, a unit of the Southern Company, is offering $100 million of 7 percent first mortgage bonds due in 2000 at 99.585 to yield 7.069 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The bonds, callable after five years, are rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.
*
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Co., Boca Raton, Fla., is offering $150 million of 7 3/4 percent notes due in 2002 at 100 through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P.


Nu-West Industries reports earnings for Year June 30


Subway Conductor Tells Jury What Led to Fatal Derailment
The motorman of the subway train that crashed last year, killing five passengers, overshot the first two stops in the Bronx and never applied the brakes before the speeding train derailed near Union Square, the train's conductor told a Manhattan jury yesterday.
Testifying in the murder trial of the motorman, Robert E. Ray, the conductor, David Berram, gave a harrowing account of how Mr.
Ray arrived for work late and then took the Lexington Avenue express on a dangerous ride south through the Bronx and Manhattan until it crashed shortly before midnight on Aug. 28, 1991.


Big Chain to Reopen 6 Department Stores Shut by Alexander's
Bradlees Inc., a large discount department store based in Massachusetts, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire and reopen six of the 11 Alexander's Department Stores closed in bankruptcy this year in the New York region.
The new stores, in the Bronx, Queens, Yonkers and Long Island, could give a boost to the area's devastated retail industry.
New York City has agreed to give Bradlees tax incentives as part of the deal, but the details are not settled.


Resourcecan Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Big Stakes in Europe
More than any other action by European governments and central banks during the extraordinary tumult of the last several weeks, the concerted effort today by France and Germany to halt the run on the franc could determine the future, and perhaps the survival, of Europe's monetary system.
The alliance of France and Germany against the investors and speculators who have been betting on a fall in the franc's value is extremely powerful.
Together, they signaled clearly today that they would go to great lengths to maintain a stable exchange rate between the franc and the mark and to keep up the momentum toward a more coordinated monetary policy among the European Community nations.


Supervalu Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 12


Malakhov Condition Concerns Islanders
Vladimir Malakhov, the ailing defenseman the Islanders hired this year from Russia, missed practice again yesterday and may be out another week.
Don Maloney, general manager of the Islanders, said team doctors and trainers are trying to find out when Malakhov initially suffered the injury, a groin pull, and how it was treated.


Pacific Physician Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mount Sinai Opens A Medical Pavilion
More than 900 people were on hand yesterday for the dedication of a $200 million addition to Mount Sinai Medical Center, a building that hospital officials say offers state-of-the-art patient care.
"This is New York's first 21st century hospital," John W. Rowe, president of the hospital and school of medicine, said before the gathering.
"It has a remarkable mix of new technology plus concern for the entire patient, meaning that we have special waiting rooms for families."


Review/Dance; Shapes of Unrest and a Premiere of Dreams
Garth Fagan's choreography pleases.
But even as it does so, it startles.
His works can easily cause dancegoers to clap their hands and furrow their brows at the same time.
Mr.
Fagan delights in artistic contradictions, perhaps because he finds life itself contradictory.
His company, Garth Fagan Dance, opened a two-week engagement Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater in Chelsea.
His works are well worth seeing, applauding and pondering.


Morgan's Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 18


Jazz's Benoit Gets New Contract
Utah forward DAVID BENOIT, who joined the Jazz as a free agent last year for the league minimum of $140,000, has signed a four-year, multimillion dollar contract.
Details of the contract were not disclosed.
The Salt Lake Tribune reported it at $3.5 million over the four years. (AP)


Review/Opera; Love's Labors Exercised in a Series in Omaha
Love took its lumps over the weekend at Opera Omaha.
The three wildly divergent works in the company's fall festival at the Joslyn Art Museum, which ended today, shared one thing: an obsession with fruitless romance.
At every turn, love met with frustration or even outright mayhem and disaster.
The whole experience might have led even an incurable romantic to consider becoming a hermit.
In Hugo Weisgall's "Gardens of Adonis," Venus, the goddess of love, comes up short when Death claims her resistant prey, Adonis, just as he seems to be within reach.
"Since he is dead," Venus resolves, in words adapted from Shakespeare, "lo, here I prophesy: Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend."


AT HOME WITH Jeanne White-Ginder; A Son's AIDS, and a Legacy
IF you blink you might miss this town of cornfields, cows and Dairy Queens, but once on the street where Jeanne White lives, you know exactly where you are.
Beneath the American flag on the front lawn a sign proclaims: "The White House, Established 1987. Home of Ryan White." And in the windows over the garage, large red letters spell out "R-Y-A-N" so people who drive by will know which room was his.
Now that the celebrity pallbearers have all gone home, the room remains the proof that they had been there.
It is unchanged since Ryan's death from complications with AIDS at the age of 18 in 1990.
His dog still sleeps in his bed.
His sneakers still sit beneath it.


Architecture as an Antidote
At the Guggenheim Pavilion, Mount Sinai Medical Center's new $200 million hospital building on upper Fifth Avenue, I. M. Pei continues his quest for a clean, well-lighted place.
This time, the search has turned up a couple of beauties: a pair of lofty atriums, luminous with natural light.
Rising 6 and 11 stories, respectively, these radiant, three-sided rooms offer Mount Sinai's patients one of the world's oldest holistic therapies: architecture.
They also take Mr.
Pei back to the historic roots of his style.
The Guggenheim Pavilion, the first hospital designed by one of our leading modernists, recalls to mind that modern architecture was initially something of a public health crusade.
Bright, open buildings, it was believed, would nurture healthy, active bodies.
Glass curtain walls would rid buildings of germs and banish depressing gloom.
Rationally planned cities would combat contagious diseases.
When critics complained that modern buildings looked like hospitals, in other words, they weren't far off the mark.


Agassi Will Play in Australian Open
ANDRE AGASSI, who won Wimbledon this year, has decided to make his first appearance in the Australian Open in January, tournament officials said.
The 22-year-old American customarily has taken the first month of the season off, including the two-week tournament at the National Tennis Center in Melbourne. (AP)


Crowning Touches That Open Doors
THEY'RE meant to be functional, but doorknobs and levers can also be a handsome finishing touch for any type of room.
They're the jewelry of a house, and like necklaces or bracelets, they come in an enormous range of styles, shapes and even materials.
"We have over 50,000 styles of hardware," said Andrew Ward, chief executive of P. E. Guerin, makers of decorative hardware for 135 years.
"We make them all ourselves, in the foundry upstairs."


No Headline
"I will fight, we will fight, France and Germany will fight this speculation, which is based on no economic fundamentals. During the French Revolution such speculators were known as 'agioteurs' and they were beheaded." -- MICHEL SAPIN, the French Finance Minister.  [ A1:6. ]


Hal Hester, 63; Helped to Write A Rock Musical
Hal Hester, a co-creator of "Your Own Thing," the 1968 hit Off Broadway show that was the first rock musical and whose title became a youth-culture motto, died on Sept. 13 at the Rio Piedras Medical Center in Puerto Rico.
He was 63 years and lived in Cayey, Puerto Rico.
He died of diverticulitis, an intestinal ailment, said John Britton, a friend.


It's Time to Snap Into Action: Nagle Declared Ready to Play
Quarterback Browning Nagle returned to practice today and despite being listed as questionable, he is expected to start against the Rams on Sunday in Anaheim, Calif., when the Jets try for their first victory.
Nagle, who started the first two games of the season, missed last week's game against the San Francisco 49ers with a bruised right index finger on his throwing hand.
The finger made it difficult, if not impossible, for Nagle to take the direct snap from center last week.


Cognos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Coors Counters Busch Attack
Continuing a bitter advertising brouhaha, the Coors Brewing Company introduced a 60-second radio commercial yesterday countering television commercials by its archrival, Anheuser-Busch Inc., that attempt to cast doubt on the brewing process used to make Coors Light.
The spot, created by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, features the brewery's president, Peter Coors, explaining the beer's "Rocky Mountain spring water" brewing process.
He elegantly describes Coors's Elkton, Va., plant, which was disparaged in the Anheuser spots, as a "brewery in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia."


Tim Taylor; Editor, 39
Tim Taylor, a magazine editor and former legislative spokesman and civic leader, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan and Southampton, L.I.
He died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


Albany to Settle Suit for $40 Million
An East Hampton art dealer and land developer has reached a settlement with New York State in which the state will pay him $40 million for 341 acres in the Town of East Hampton.
The art dealer, Ben Heller, had charged that East Hampton officials had blocked him from developing the land while conspiring with state officials to condemn the property and acquire it for preservation at an artificially low price.


Suffolk Authorizes Outlay Of $500,000 for a Ball Park
Brushing aside financial constraints that have forced cuts in jobs and services, the Suffolk County Legislature voted early today to spend as much as $500,000 for design of a $7.5 million minor-league baseball stadium on the campus of the county's community college in Brentwood.
The 6,000-seat stadium, which would be completed in time for the 1994 season, would become the new home of the Albany-Colonie Yankees, an Eastern League affiliate of the New York Yankees.


Thor Energy Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Restoration on Roosevelt Island? No, It's Sculpture


Auto Emissions Aren't Lead Pollution Source
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 4 Metro Section news article reporting that New York City will add the chemical calcium orthophosphate, a relative of baking soda, to the city's water supply to lower lead contamination in older buildings states that this is advantageous because water tainted with lead can pose an added risk for city dwellers, who are already exposed to high levels of lead from other sources, "like auto emissions."
Reducing the levels of lead ingestion from any source is obviously advantageous, but auto emissions are no longer a significant source of lead pollution.


Wathan Interviews for Marlins Job
The California Angels' dugout coach, JOHN WATHAN, interviewed for the job as manager of the Florida Marlins.
COOKIE ROJAS, a former major league second baseman and a major league scout for the Marlins, interviewed for the managerial job on Monday. (AP)


Rescuing Street Drunks And Trading War Stories
Saving the lives of street alcoholics is an unassailable goal, but it is also ugly work.
And no one knows it better than Kirk Roberts, a medical technician who spends his days dragging them from bushes, sidewalks and alleys.
"C'mon, Manny, be cool," he pleaded one August night to a resisting man, who five minutes earlier was lying unconscious in a park.


A Passion for Folk Art That Follows You Home
IMAGINE a world without Madison Avenue.
A world in which toys, cookware, clothes and other stuff of life do not bear brand names but the eloquent, imperfect stamp of the human hand.
Throughout Latin America -- in kitchens, roadside shrines, churches and living rooms -- folk art, or arte popular, is everywhere, as natural as air.
It is found in the red embroidered signs hanging outside butcher shops in Guatamala that herald fresh meat, or whenever a Mexican shoeshine boy decorates his shoeshine box with the word "amor" to attract customers.


And Goodwill To Someone
The site of the 1988 Goodwill Games will be announced Oct. 16 in the city, or regional area, selected.
Final presentations will be made to the selection committee in Atlanta the day before by the four finalists: New Yorki, Dallas-Fort Worth, South Florida and St.
Louis.


Budgetary Roller Coaster Hurts U.S. Science
To the Editor:
In February President Bush proposed significant increases for scientific research.
By mid-summer these had been slashed by House subcommittees to the point that the research budget of the National Science Foundation will remain flat in nominal terms and the National Institutes of Health budgets will increase by at most 4 percent, a full percentage point lower than the increase in the price index of biomedical research.
Not only astronomy is plagued with financing problems ("Astronomy's New Era of Discovery Is Being Born in Poverty," Science Times, Aug. 18), but the rest of science as well.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview; BUSH SAYS CLINTON IMPERILS BUSINESS
President Bush continued his political assault on Gov.
Bill Clinton today, using his first television attack ad and two pointed speeches to broaden his profile of Mr.
Clinton as a tax-and-spend liberal.
Mr.
Bush said at a morning rally in Greensboro, N.C., that Mr.
Clinton's plans for higher business taxes would wipe out tens of thousands of jobs in that state alone and millions of businesses nationwide.
Later, at Pennsylvania State University, he told a roaring crowd of students that his rival was "taxing everything he can get his hands on" as Arkansas Governor.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Check That Clinton Quote
Never mind.
Speaking here today, George Bush waxed indignant over some words his research staff said Bill Clinton had spoken.
Mr.
Bush began by saying he wanted to ask his opponent "what the heck he's talking about when he describes a President's -- quote -- here's what he called it: a President's 'powerless moments when countries are invaded, friends are threatened, Americans are held hostage, and our nation's interests are on the line.' "


Foreign Affairs; Mr. Bush, Statesman . . .
George Bush was not at a political rally in Pittsburgh or San Diego Monday when he recalled his military career, backhandedly rebuking Bill Clinton for failing to serve, and then proposed revamping U.S. foreign aid to create 40,000 new U.S. jobs.
No, he was plugging his own campaign in New York -- in a solemn speech before the U.N.
General Assembly, of all places.
Mr.
Bush's odd sense of place should surprise no one.
For a year and a half now, almost everything he has done or not done abroad has been in direct service of his own political ambitions at home.


CHRONICLE
Twenty-five years after Sir Kenneth Clark first guided television viewers through Western culture, from the fall of the Roman Empire into the 20th century, the "Civilization" series will be seen again.
To celebrate the anniversary, the restoration of the 13 programs and their broadcast starting Oct. 4 on the Learning Channel, ALISTAIR COOKE is giving a party on Wednesday at the Westbury Hotel in Manhattan.
The first episode will be shown.


Opportunities Are Not Equal in Athletic Departments
A survey of the nation's Division I athletic programs by the General Accounting Office, due to be released today, offers the first firm evidence that women and members of minority groups have been excluded, minimized and underpaid by college athletic departments.
Among other things, the G.A.O. found sizable disparities between the salaries paid to those who coach men's basketball and those who coach women's basketball at the Division I level.
It also found that few blacks hold key athletic positions at predominantly white Division I schools.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Mother Denies Abuse of Son Suing to End Parental Tie
A 12-year-old boy who wants to choose who will be his parents began a widely publicized trial here today that could substantially alter the legal rights of children and broaden the debate over the structure of contemporary American families.
The boy, Gregory K., has asked the court to end the parental rights of his biological mother, asserting that she has abused and neglected him for most of his life.
He is asking the Florida juvenile court to allow him to be adopted by the foster family with whom he has lived since last October.


Briton Repeats His Commitment to Europe, but Warily
Prime Minister John Major told a clamorous session of the House of Commons today that Britain was committed to closer European union, but he said the details of future monetary and political cooperation still needed further deliberation.
After eight hours of often acerbic debate, Mr.
Major and his Cabinet won a narrow vote of confidence, 330 to 288.
It came a week after his Government had to make an embarrassing policy reversal and back out of the European monetary system, causing the value of the pound to fall steeply.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; A Clinton Team Maps Plans To Get Out the Indian Vote
President Bush entered the 1992 campaign figuring that most of the states of the Great Plains, Rocky Mountains and Southwest were already in his political pocket.
But his edge in those regions is eroding, and now Bill Clinton's strategists think they see a way for the Governor to snitch a few extra electoral votes out West.
In some states, they say, the crucial vote could come from American Indians.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


The Cemetery Called East Timor
Indonesia for the first time seems genuinely flustered by the world's protests over its invasion and long-term oppression of East Timor, a former Portuguese colony.
But not enough to do anything about it.
Jakarta's 1975 conquest of 750,000 Timorese was just as heinous as the more recent and more highly publicized territorial grabs by Iraq and Serbia.
And the evil continues.
Last November foreign witnesses were present as Indonesian troops massacred from 50 to 100 nonviolent demonstrators who had gathered at a cemetery in Dili, East Timor's capital.


The Art Market
There and Back Again
Two paintings hanging in the Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art will disappear for a week in November.
The works -- "Asia" (1946) and "The Red Beach" (1905) -- will make a brief appearance at Sotheby's in New York, where they will be offered for sale at the Nov. 10 auction of Impressionist and modern paintings.
After the sale, the buyers will have to wait to take the works home.
Both paintings will go back to the Modern for the remainder of the exhibition, through Jan. 12.
Sotheby's timing couldn't be better.
Prices for the work of a major artist often rise after it is the subject of an important exhibition.
And what finer showcase than the splendid Matisse blockbuster?
Another reason these works are expected to bring high prices is that great Matisses rarely come up at auction.
Most of them are either in museums or tend to stay in private collections.


G.M. Faces the Prospect of Another Strike Today
The General Motors Corporation, which two weeks ago was recovering from a disruptive 10-day strike at its Lordstown, Ohio, manufacturing complex, faces another strike as early as Friday morning in Lansing, Mich.
Negotiators representing G.M. and Local 602 of the United Automobile Workers union have been trying since August to resolve a disagreement over how the plant will schedule rest periods during work shifts.


Boston Receives a Federal Grant for Transit Projects


Innovo Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


George Bush's Stall on Debates
President Bush continues to duck the Presidential debates, and voters have a right to be angry.
This week in Greenville, Miss., demonstrators dressed in chicken suits chided Mr.
Bush with placards that said "Chicken George" and "Read My Beak." The demonstrators may well have been Clinton operatives; even so, plenty of ordinary voters want to see the candidates face to face, displaying views and personalities that can help form judgments for Nov. 3.
Gov.
Bill Clinton agreed months ago to three encounters with Mr.
Bush, sponsored by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates.
The Bush campaign artfully dawdled, then took issue with the debate format.
The commission, reacting to past experience, sensibly proposed a single moderator.
But Mr.
Bush is holding out for the cumbersome format of a panel of journalist questioners that has clotted past debates.


For Burned-Out Businesses, More Hope Than Help; Bronx Merchants Say They Have Seen City Agencies' Promises, Too, Turn to Ashes
On a sunny day last July, Stanley Bell stood helplessly outside his electronics shop and watched a business he had built up over 40 years vanish amid a swirl of flames and smoke.
A scrappy businessman, he vowed to rebuild, determined to stay put in the central Bronx neighborhood that nurtured his company, Belco Distributors.
He was reassured by a procession of city officials who convened meetings and pledged help with loans, building improvements and cutting through red tape in his dealings with city agencies.
He was heartened that his store was salvageable and its inventory largely intact.


Economic Consensus Is Elusive
After a week in which currency speculation bore more fruit than international economic cooperation, finance ministers and central bankers from 172 countries left here saying that more cooperation would get the global economy moving again.
Even before high-level meetings began in Washington a week ago, the economic officials were unhappy about forecasts that the global economy would grow by a feeble 1 percent this year.
Now they fear that Europe's currency crisis will make things even worse.


Their Own Place in the Sun


A House of Faith Weathers 100 Years of Change
THE REV.
Michael J. Desmond is feeling fine on this day.
First, he got a good-news phone call from Delaware: a young couple wants him to marry them.
Second, his church had a visitor, and Father Desmond, who likes things organized, was ready with his notes.
Third, and most important, Sunday was approaching.
This Sunday, St.
John the Baptist Church marks its 100th anniversary; Newark's Roman Catholic Archbishop, the Most Rev.
Theodore E. McCarrick, will celebrate noon Mass.
One hundred years!
A mere moment in time in some lands.
But a big deal here just a mile from the old docks where Irish and German immigrants stumbled ashore, having forsaken the old country forever.


NEGATIVE RESEARCH REPORT PUSHES MERCK'S STOCK DOWN
Merck &amp; Company's stock fell $1.125 cents yesterday after IMS America, a marketing research group that tracks prescription trends, reported that new prescriptions for its drugs were disappointing in August.
Merck closed at $45.625 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the second-most-active stock, with about 4.4 million shares traded.


EX-OFFICIAL CITES DOUBT ON P.O.W.'S
Elliot L. Richardson, Secretary of Defense when American troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in 1973, said today that the Pentagon believed that some prisoners of war might have remained in neighboring Laos, contrary to a statement by President Nixon that all the prisoners were on their way home.
Mr.
Richardson, who was Defense Secretary for four months between the signing of the Paris peace agreement on Jan. 27, 1973, and his appointment as Attorney General in May, told the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs that he could only speculate why Mr.
Nixon told Americans on March 29, 1973, that "all our American P.O.W.'s are on their way home."


Wang Expects Year's Loss To Be Worse Than Forecast
Wang Laboratories Inc., which filed for bankruptcy protection in August, informed customers and investors yesterday that its results for the fiscal year that ended on June 30 would be far worse than previously announced.
The computer company, based in Lowell, Mass., had announced preliminary year-end results on Aug. 18 showing a net loss for the year of $139 million.
But the company now says that additional restructuring charges resulting from its Chapter 11 filing would change those numbers.


Pat on Back Before Back of Hand
In four years with the Giants, Bob Kratch has started 15 games, including all three this season.
On Monday night, in the Giants' 27-14 victory over the Chicago Bears, he played the best game of his career, "an excellent performance," Coach Ray Handley said.
Today, along with the pat on the back, Kratch received a demotion.
Coach Ray Handley said William Roberts and Eric Moore would start at guard in the Giants' next game, a week from Sunday against the Raiders in Los Angeles.
But Handley also said he was more comfortable with Kratch now and expected him to play more.


No Headline
"I need to emphasize a very important message: We get it. " SEAN O'KEEFE, Acting Secretary of the Navy.  [ A1:1. ]


Heroic Bus Driver Is Dismissed and Rehired
Last June, Donna Smith was praised for her heroism after she piloted a school bus full of terrified kindergarten children, one of them badly wounded, out of a street-side gun battle in New Haven.
On Tuesday, she was dismissed by the bus company for refusing to drive a new route that she considered dangerous.


Review/Film Festival; 'Olivier, Olivier,' a French Provincial Family Mystery
Agnieszka Holland, who wrote and directed last year's popular "Europa, Europa," is in a far less somber mood with her new "Olivier, Olivier," the entertaining, initially sunny, very spooky opening attraction of the 30th New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center.
The film will be shown tonight at 7:30 at Alice Tully Hall and at 9 at Avery Fisher Hall.
"Olivier, Olivier" is a perverse kind of idyll, set not far from Paris in a countryside where quaint old farmhouses are still affordable, wheatfields are golden and children can be raised with a freedom no longer possible amid the congestion and crime of polluted cities.


On My Mind; Hello Again, Suckers
H.
Ross Perot, having betrayed and suckered millions of Americans, is giving them one more chance to be betrayed and suckered again.
Before he cut and ran, the most attractive part of the first Ross Perot campaign was the people who believed in him, the volunteers.


Perot TV Plans Stir Speculation
Like a salmon returning to the stream where he was born, Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire, will appear on CNN's "Larry King Live" Monday night, raising the possibility that he will use the show to announce a resumption of his candidacy for the White House.
Mr.
Perot, who said on Tuesday that his decision to drop out of the Presidential contest in July was a "mistake," is scheduled to meet early next week with state coordinators of his grass-roots organization, United We Stand, America, but it could not be determined if the meeting will come before the appearance on the television program.
He has said that if the state coordinators ask him to, he would once again actively seek the Presidency.


Match Made in Make-Believe Land
Yet another silly pay-per-view event encroaches upon us tonight, a dubious two-out-of-three, $500,000 winner-take-all tennis match between Jimmy Connors and Martina Navratilova, which will cost buyers an estimated $24.95 apiece.
The last suspicious event of this ilk was the one-on-one hoop-de-do that featured an in-shape Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and a skills-departed Julius Erving.
That egregious make-believe event ripped us off for $19.95


Art in Review
Isa Genzken  Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Midtown Through Oct. 17
Critical writing on the German artist Isa Genzken makes sweeping claims for the radical nature of her work, though few of these claims are borne out by this show.
It includes pieces from 1980 through the present, which may be part of the problem.
The collection of painting, sculpture and photography looks scrappy, and little of it feels fresh.


Norman D. Erlanger, Stockbroker, 83
Norman D. Erlanger, a retired stockbroker, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Erlanger died of heart failure, said his son, Michael.


Dean Foods Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


Jubilation Welcomes King Hussein Back to Jordan


Reviews/Film; A Melodious Variation On Feminist Awareness
Maria Novaro's "Danzon," an unusual work of Mexican feminism opening today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, is the gentle and earnest story of one woman's voyage of self- discovery.
It concerns Julia (Maria Rojo), a telephone operator in Mexico City whose principal joy is the form of ballroom dancing for which the film is named.
Julia and her dance partner, Carmelo (Daniel Rergis), have been meeting weekly for six years, which is the full extent of their relationship when Carmelo mysteriously disappears.
Julia sets out to find him and manages, in the process, to find herself.
Julia's journey, which is slowly and sensitively rendered, plays a bit like the Good Housekeeping version of a Pedro Almodovar story.
It takes her to a seedy hotel inhabited by prostitutes and to the Veracruz waterfront among the sailors, where she wanders the docks in a red dress.
It also makes her a new friend in the form of Susy (Tito Vasconcelos), a transvestite entertainer, with whom Julia patiently practices her dancing although neither of them is sure who ought to lead.


Worldly and the Spiritual Clash in New Age Divorce
Few things are more jarring than a forced collision of the spiritual world and the legal.
Such is the case in a divorce court here, where a woman who claims to be the medium for a 35,000-year-old warrior has been trying to explain herself, and the riches she made off a movement that swept the nation in the 1980's.
J.Z.
Knight, perhaps the most popular of the New Age spirit-channelers, was on the witness stand Wednesday and today, sorting through the financial and metaphysical bramble of her empire.
But the real target of this prolonged legal inquiry is Ramtha, the spirit from the Cro-Magnon era who Ms.
Knight says has been speaking through her for the last 15 years.
God, Spirit or Fake?
In many ways, this marital property dispute has put the New Age movement itself on trial, providing details into how and why so many people have spent so much money on such celebrity spirits as Ramtha.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Rangers Get First Preseason Victory
After opening their preseason with two ties in two games, the Rangers finally won tonight, getting first-period goals from Darren Turcotte, Mark Messier and Joe Kocur to defeat the Los Angeles Kings, 7-2, at San Diego.
The Rangers, though, had to hold off a third-period rally by the Kings, who are now 0-1-1 since their captain, Wayne Gretzky, announced this week that he will be out indefinitely because of a herniated disk in his upper back.
Los Angeles got goals from Mike Vukonich and Jim Hiller early in the final period to close to within one goal, but Adam Graves scored midway through the third and Tony Amonti added another goal 1 minute 32 seconds later to extend the lead.
The Rangers' final two goals were scored by Sergei Zubov and Tie Domi in the last five minutes.
The Rangers and Kings play again Saturday night at Phoenix.
Devils Hold Off Flyers in Preseason Game
The Devils limited the Philadelphia Flyers to seven shots in the first two periods and posted a 4-1 exhibition victory last night at the Spectrum.
Zdeno Ciger, Bruce Driver, Brian Sullivan and Jarrod Skalde scored the goals for the Devils.
Eric Lindros scored the Flyer goal in the third period after the Devils had built a 4-0 lead.


On Matters of Health, Women's Magazines Give Solid Advice
To the Editor:
I was very disturbed to read Elizabeth M. Whelan's "Alarm Clocks Can Kill You. Have a Smoke" (Op-Ed, Sept. 8), in which she criticizes the health coverage in women's magazines, including Glamour.


Dr. John A. Collins, 58, Educator Who Led Change in Transfusions
Dr.
John A. Collins, a medical educator who led an Army research team in Vietnam that made a significant change in blood transfusion practices for casualties, died on Monday.
He was 58 years old and lived in Stanford, Calif.
He died of a heart attack while playing golf on vacation in County Galway, Ireland, his family said.


Sounds Around Town
Escovedo at Tramps
Alejandro Escovedo, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Alejandro Escovedo writes as if he can see all of America from his own tiny spot on the highway: the rock-folk songs on his recent album "Gravity" (Watermelon) are as broad as the horizon, yet each carries a grain of personal conviction, of experiences lived, not dreamed.
In "Bury Me," a man runs from the shadows of his past, and the opening riff comes straight from Elvis's "Mystery Train." Elements of country, blues, even jazz have been processed through his psyche; the arrangements allow for cello, mandolin, piano and pedal steel, but guitar is always there at the core.
Sometimes it's his proof, sometimes his apology; sometimes he just lets it drown out his voice.
Shows are tomorrow at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M., with headliner Tracy Nelson.
Tickets are $12.50.
Post-Feminist Punk
The Breeders, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, Lower East Side, (212) 982-4052.
The Breeders, featuring Kim Deal from the Pixies, Tanya Donelly from Throwing Muses and Josephine Wiggs from the Perfect Disaster, are a post-feminist, punk-rooted version of the all-star jam.
What makes them peculiarly feminine is the extreme physicality of the sound: the bass pulses like a naked heart, the guitars make their point with a minimum of theatrics and the story lines follow women to the edge.
The Breeders peel away alternative rock's skin: their recent EP, "Safari" (4AD/Elektra), is blood and instinct, rather than poses and ideas. show time is tonight around 12:30 A.M.; doors open at 9:30 P.M.
Tickets are $10.
Hillbilly Spin
Bad Livers, the Rodeo Bar, 375 Third Avenue, at 27th Street, Murray Hill, (212) 683-6500.
Like good, faithful traditionalists, the Bad Livers preserve the spirit as well as the technique of old- timey folk music: the string band lineup includes mandolin, banjo, slap bass and accordion, and the tunes get a corn-whisky barn-dance spin.
The Bad Livers cover all the classic hillbilly and bluegrass topics: love, death and cheating.
When the members really begin to cook, they push against ancient boundaries into a more modern breed of cow-punk.
Sets begin tonight at 10:30.
There is no cover charge, but there is a two-drink minimum at the tables.


Newly Empowered Owners Rescind Order to Realign
Seventeen days after Commissioner Fay Vincent resigned under fire, the owners who replaced him as baseball's ruling body yesterday rescinded his order to realign the National League.
The executive council, led by Bud Selig of the Milwaukee Brewers, took the action coupled with the Chicago Cubs' agreement to withdraw their lawsuit challenging Vincent's order.


Technology Solutions Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Advisory Group Calls Many Bus and Subway Routes Erratic
Surveying conditions from the rider's vantage point -- waiting at the stop -- a study by a New York City Transit Authority advisory group has concluded that "many bus and subway routes operate with erratic and undependable service, undermining customer confidence."
The report, released yesterday, points out that the Transit Authority measures on-time performance by clocking buses and subway trains when they arrive at the end of their routes.
That method ignores gaps in service and late arrivals at stops along the routes.


Juno Lighting Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


40-Million-Year-Old Extinct Bee Yields Oldest Genetic Material
By extracting gene fragments from insects preserved in amber for up to 40 million years, two independent teams of scientists have obtained the oldest DNA ever recovered from fossils.
Both groups of researchers succeeded in extracting fairly long sequences of nucleic acids, the building blocks of genes, from extinct insects embedded in amber found in the Dominican Republic.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about the Catskill Food Festival misstated the hours.
The festival is on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.


Paris-Bonn Effort Aids The Franc
The turmoil in the European currency markets abated somewhat today as a joint effort between France and Germany succeeded in stabilizing the value of the franc.
Analysts said the volume of buying and selling in the foreign exchange markets slowed substantially, and that the odds were improving that Europe's tattered monetary system would hold together.


Siege Tactic: Cut Off Water and Light
When dusk falls in Sarajevo, thousands of families are cast back into a 19th-century world of candles and oil lamps.
Bathing, even brushing teeth, involves measuring out precious water from plastic canisters and bottles.
For most, telephones are a receding memory.
Since Monday, when the last power line serving this city of 400,000 people was put out of action by shellfire, the only buildings with electricity have been those with emergency generators.
And these buildings, including some hospitals and clinics, are running so low on fuel that they operate the generators, and the equipment powered by them, only intermittently.
The Water Supply Dries Up
Since it was founded in its modern form over five centuries ago, Sarajevo has had abundant water from springs and from the runoff of the snow-capped mountains around the city.
But under the siege, water has become desperately scarce.


Saberhagen Is Eight-Ninths as Impressive as Gooden
The 1993 starting rotation for the Mets remains an abstraction of blind optimism and genuine uncertainty.
There will have to be an addition made, likely from outside the organization.
And there will have to be a lot of medical hopes realized.
The concept, though, isn't altogether crazy, and the last two nights have infused the abstraction with an encouraging dose of realism.
Barely 24 hours after Dwight Gooden turned in his first complete game of 1992, a 3-2 victory over the Cardinals, Bret Saberhagen calmly and economically posted eight shutout innings in what became a 4-3, 14-inning loss at Busch Stadium.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the plan by Bradlees Inc. to acquire and reopen six Alexander's Department Stores that closed in bankruptcy this year in the New York region misstated the opinion of the chairman of Alexander's on the prospect of bankruptcy court approval.
The chairman, Robin Farkas, said he did not expect objections from the court, not that he did expect them.


Restaurants
The remarkable success of three-month-old Carmine's in the theater district underscores several trends among New York City diners.
For one, New Yorkers, in spite of all the talk about a new abstemiousness, love to tackle quantities of food that would make a Jewish mother cry uncle.
Second, these culinary sophisticates still have a vestigial soft spot for the outmoded Italian-American red-sauce restaurant.
And it is also evident that the public craving for bargains is stronger than ever, whether it is a $19.92 lunch special or a place where you can split a $9 mountain of calamari four ways.
Carmine's in Times Square is a cleverly conceived and assiduously refined concept that meets all those cravings. (The original Carmine's is on Broadway and 90th Street.) The owners certainly had a successful history to draw upon: they own the highly successful trio of Oriental restaurants called Ollie's Noodle Shop and Grille and the two Dock's Oyster Bar and Seafood Grills.


TOSHIBA BUILDS TINIEST ELECTROMAGNETIC MICRO-MOTOR
The Toshiba Corporation of Japan said yesterday that it had developed the world's smallest electromagnetic motor, with a diameter of 0.8 millimeter, or about 0.03 inch.
The tiny motor, which can spin as fast as 10,000 revolutions a minute, is too small and too weak to do anything practical now.
Experts say, however, that in perhaps 10 years, such motors might be used in tiny micro-machines that could crawl through tiny pipes to remove obstructions, or thread through the digestive tract or bloodstream to diagnose ailments.


Santo Domingo Journal; For Columbus Lighthouse, a Fete That Fizzled
For years, President Joaquin Balaguer has faithfully traveled somewhere in his country each week to inaugurate a new road, apartment building or aqueduct, all pieces of a vast body of public works that his associates say is his fondest legacy of his many years in power.
But as it nears its inauguration early next month, the biggest project of all -- a huge lighthouse in honor of Christopher Columbus -- has become a lightning rod for critics and a source of trouble like few others in his long career.


Judge Is Confirmed To Court of Appeals
George Bundy Smith was confirmed by the State Senate today as an associate judge on the Court of Appeals, the state's top court.
Mr.
Smith, who is 55 years old and had been a justice in the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan since 1987, was nominated for the post last month by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
He will occupy the seat on the seven-member court vacated by Fritz W. Alexander 2d, who became deputy mayor for public safety in New York City.
Mr.
Alexander had been the first black judge appointed to a full term on the court.
Judge Smith, who also is black, becomes the second.
His term is to last 14 years.


Oldsmobile's Review Casts a Shadow Over Leo Burnett
ARE there worms in those shiny apples that have become emblematic of the Leo Burnett Company?
No one is suggesting the Chicago advertising giant known for giving away apples -- reminders of its eponymous founder, whose secretary put out a bowl of apples the day Burnett opened in 1935 -- will soon be selling them on street corners.


Review/Art; Matter Turned Into Light and Space
Robert Irwin is an optical magician who doesn't believe in fooling the eye.
For more than two decades, this 64-year-old maverick West Coast Minimalist has been known for creating installation pieces whose mysterious (and beautiful) visual effects are also utterly comprehensible.
Mr.
Irwin, whose impressive installation work at the Pace Gallery in SoHo is his first New York City exposure in seven years, began his career in the late 1950's as a maker of streamlined abstract paintings with roots in Abstract Expressionism.
But in the 60's, his art performed a kind of disappearing act.
By the late 60's he was makingpale cast acrylic wall pieces that were almost invisible, except for the shadows they cast.
In 1970, he dispensed with the art object entirely.
As in the work of several other artists working in Los Angeles, including James Turrell, Maria Nordman, Douglas Wheeler and Larry Bell, light and space had become his primary materials, visual experience his main subject.


CURRENCY MARKETS RESISTING POWERS OF CENTRAL BANKS
Figures released yesterday by the Federal Reserve and other central banks suggest that the ability of the leading economies to defend their currencies on the world's foreign-exchange markets has slipped markedly in the last three years.
The figures show that currency trading has grown by about 50 percent during that period, to an estimated $1 trillion each day.
At the same time, the money that the central banks have stockpiled to buy their own currencies when they are weak and to carry out other transactions has grown much more slowly.


Colony Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Philadelphia's Workers Seek Court Relief
Unions representing 15,000 nonuniformed city workers asked a court today to prevent the city from carrying out a new labor contract that was imposed by Mayor Edward G. Rendell.
Most of the workers were on the job as usual today.


Banks Reject Sole Canary Wharf Bid
Lenders to Olympia &amp; York's Canary Wharf project here have rejected the only firm bid for the troubled real estate development, further clouding the project's future, bankers said today.
An executive at one of the banks said that the project's 11 largest creditors, meeting in New York on Monday, had voted 7 to 4 to turn down the bid.
The bid had been made this summer by a group including Paul Reichmann, the head of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.; Laurence Tisch, the chairman of CBS Inc. and the Loews Corporation; Lewis Ranieri, the Wall Street investor, and Sanford I. Weill, the chairman of the Primerica Corporation.


Byrd Is on the Outside, And Looking Inward
As with most things that have happened to the Jets this year, Dennis Byrd's move from defensive tackle to defensive end has fallen short of expectations.
In a way, Byrd is the personification of the Jets' season to this point.
"It's been harder than I thought it would be," Byrd said.
"But I really enjoy playing defensive end. I just want to. . . ."


Abroad at Home; The Bush Constitution
President Bush's veto of the family leave bill, announced at night to avoid public notice, actually deserves close attention.
For it gives us an insight into Mr.
Bush's view of what government should do in our society -- his view of politics and the Constitution.
The legislation would require employers of 50 or more people to grant them 12 weeks of unpaid leave for births or family emergencies.
He was vetoing it, Mr.
Bush's message said, because "we must have flexibility in our workplace to meet the challenge" of foreign economic competition.


Short Sales Outstanding Rise Again on Nasdaq
Furthering a trend that has persisted throughout the year, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered of all over-the-counter stocks rose between mid-August and mid-September for the eighth straight month, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
The latest monthly figures reflect trades that took place on the Nasdaq system reported as of Sept. 6 and settled as of Sept. 13.
They are a widely watched gauge of investor sentiment, since they reflect the activities of a large contingent of professional sellers who specialize in ferreting out overvalued companies.


Natural Gas Prices Plunge In Wake of Selling Wave
Natural gas prices fell sharply yesterday as producers exploited the steep price advance of September to sell huge volumes of gas, analysts said.
The contract price for November delivery dropped 12.9 cents to settle at $2.474 per 1,000 cubic feet.
Other energy contracts were also weak, with October heating oil falling 0.7 cent, to 63.26 cents a gallon, and domestic light sweet crude falling 21 cents, to $21.79 a barrel for November delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Bernice Gera, Umpire, 61
Bernice Gera, the first female umpire in professional baseball, died of kidney cancer Wednesday in Memorial Hospital West in Pembroke Pines, Fla.
She was 61 years old.
In 1972, Mrs.
Gera, who fought in courtrooms for the preceding five years to achieve her goal, gained national attention when she umpired a Class A minor league game between the Geneva Rangers and the Auburn Phillies of the New York-Penn League.


COMPANY NEWS: Safety Questions; Did Storm Endanger A Nuclear Plant?
When the worst hurricane in decades roars over a nuclear plant and the plant declares an "alert," the second-lowest ranking in a four-stage emergency system, is that good news or bad?
A month after Hurricane Andrew hit South Florida, antinuclear groups are calling for an investigation into the level of damage at Turkey Point, the nuclear reactor in southern Dade County owned by the Florida Power and Light Company.


Citicorp Prices Credit Card Trust
Citicorp yesterday priced a $1.33 billion global issue of floating-rate credit-card-backed certificates.
The two-part issue is being sold through the Citicorp Standard Credit Card Master Trust 1992-3.
The class A part of the issue -- $1.25 billion of senior certificates due in 1998 -- was priced by the lead managers, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company and Citicorp, to float 30 basis points above the three-month London interbank offered rate.
The Libor is the basic interest rate to which many Eurodollar loans and deposits are tied.


Clinton Hits Hard in New Jersey (Close), Relaxes in New York (Ahead)
About 2,000 people came to hear Gov.
Bill Clinton talk about health care at the Merck &amp; Company headquarters here today, and with egalitarian self-interest, each came with a personal agenda for the candidate to address.
Gloria McGinty, a logistics controller at the big pharmaceutical concern, cares for her 84-year-old mother-in-law and she wanted to know if Governor Clinton shared her view that Medicaid coverage is unfair to the ailing elderly who receive home care.
Wesley L. Shoop, a parasitologist in the Merck laboratories, was interested in whether the candidate's proposals to control medical costs would suppress pharmaceutical research investments.
Charles L. Garay, president of a small air purification products plant on Hazelwood Avenue who is paying $500 a month in health-insurance premiums for his 75 employees, said suppressing medical costs was all he wanted to hear about.


Archdiocese Imposes Wage Freeze on 2,400
The Archdiocese of New York, buffeted by what it described as sharply spiraling costs, has imposed a salary freeze on its estimated 800 priests and 1,600 lay employees, a spokesman for the Archdiocese said early this morning.
Because of the freeze -- which took effect on Sept. 1 -- employees of the Archdiocese will not receive the annual 3.5-percent raises that are customarily awarded on the anniversary of the first day of employment, said the spokesman, Joseph Zwilling.


PLEA DEAL IS SEEN IN TOKYO SCANDAL
Shin Kanemaru, Japan's most influential politician, was reported tonight to be readying an admission that he received $4 million in illegal political contributions from a company linked to mobsters in a widening scandal that is threatening to engulf the Cabinet of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
Under a deal between Mr.
Kanemaru and government prosecutors, described tonight by Japan's leading news organizations, Mr.
Kanemaru's admission of what amounts to a technical violation of campaign contribution laws would be made in return for a $1,700 fine and an end to the prosecutors' inquiries linking him to to Japanese mobsters.


The Perot Tease
Ross Perot won deservedly high marks in the spring for energizing millions of disenchanted voters, for talking sensibly about the Federal deficit and for throwing a healthy scare into the political parties.
But by summer he had shown himself to be an ego-tripper, trifling with other people's fears.
He built a huge army of eager soldiers and then, unable to pay the price of political daring, abruptly fled to his bunker.
Ross Perot trifles still.
On all the same talk shows where he first promoted his candidacy, Mr.
Perot now hints that he may rejoin the race.
He says his decision will rest on whether the remnants of his volunteer army beg him to return.


Capilano International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Tobacco Measure Fails in Senate
The Senate today killed by an overwhelming margin a measure that would have reduced the tax deductibility of advertising and promotion for tobacco products.
The measure, introduced by Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, was one of several amendments offered today to a $31 billion tax bill slowly moving through the Senate.
The revenue gained from reducing deductibility to 80 percent from 100 percent was to be transferred to state governments to back anti-tobacco ad campaigns aimed at children, pregnant women and minorities.


INSIDE
Tactics of the Siege
In the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, electricty and water are in such short supply that nightfall turns the city back to the 19th century, the aim of the Serbs who besiege it.
Page A10.
Mayor Bradley Won't Run
Saying, 'The time for change has come," Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles announced that he will not seek a sixth term.Page A12. Vote to Restore Leaves
The Senate voted to override a veto of a bill mandating leaves for family emergencies.
But the House seemed unlikely to follow suit.
Page A16.
The Cubs Finally Win One
Baseball dropped its order to realign the National League, which would have switched the Chicago Cubs to the West against their will.
Page B9.
Child v.
Parent
A lawsuit by a 12-year-old boy who wants to choose his parents went to trial in a case that could alter the legal rights of children.
Page A20.


Four N.F.L. Players Get Five Days of Freedom
Four National Football League players who are seeking to be unrestricted free agents won a temporary restraining order today that grants them five days to pursue a contract with any of the league's 28 teams.
The four players -- Philadelphia Eagles tight end Keith Jackson, Cleveland Browns receiver Webster Slaughter, Detroit Lions running back D. J. Dozier and New England Patriots defensive end Garin Veris -- are all without N.F.L. contracts.
They had made their request to United States District Court Judge David Doty after a Federal jury earlier this month struck down the league's system of free agency, known as Plan B, finding it violated antitrust laws.


Corrections
A report on Aug. 31 about the wedding of Billie Tekel and Barry Elias misidentified the clergyman.
Rabbi Alexander Levin performed the ceremony, substituting at the last minute for a colleague.


Edberg, Once More With Feeling
Avoidance is still his preferred public posture, and unlike his peers Mats Wilander and John McEnroe, he's not a closet rock star.
In fact, he's not a closet anything.
But Stefan Edberg craved tennis's No. 1 spot, and to retrieve it, he shed a few layers of introversion on the court and discovered himself.
"I still just think of myself as a sort of nice guy who is capable of playing great tennis, a guy who keeps his distance," said Edberg from his hotel suite here as he prepared to lead Sweden into its Davis Cup semifinal against the United States.
"But maybe sometimes in the past, I was too nice and not so professional. You've got to stamp your authority sooner or later."


Fed Looks Into 'Squeeze' In Treasuries
The "squeeze" on the Treasury's seven- and 10-year notes has become tight enough to prompt the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to collect information on dealer positions and study the dynamics of the shortage of securities.
A squeeze, which forces some traders to pay very high premiums to borrow the securities they want, is not necessarily illegal.
But it can be if there is collusion involved in creating a shortage of securities.


Seymour Weiss, Long an Adviser On Military Policy, Is Dead at 67
Seymour Weiss, a defense and foreign-policy expert who was a retired top State Department official and adviser to President Ronald Reagan, died Wednesday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 67 years old.
He died of liver cancer, his family said.


Emons Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Festival Films Look Back in Affection
MOVIES have never been more self-conscious about their history.
If one had to choose a defining phrase for the mood of world cinema today, "esthetic self-awareness" might be the most pertinent.
And this sense of an art refreshing itself by rummaging through its past runs through many of the 26 programs in the New York Film Festival, which opens tonight at Lincoln Center with Agnieszka Holland's psychological drama "Olivier, Olivier."
In its 30th season, the festival is presenting films from 18 countries, including Iran, which is represented (for the first time) by Abbas Kiarostami's "And Life Goes On." A look at the devastating effects of an earthquake, the film will be shown tomorrow and Sunday.


COMPANY NEWS
CENTEL CORP., Chicago, announced that it and Sprint Corp. had filed  applications with the Florida Public Service Commission and the Illinois Commerce Commission for approval of Centel's merger with Sprint.
In May, the companies announced a merger agreement.
PANASONIC CO., Secaucus, N.J., introduced several notebook-sized computers including one that uses a new low-power chip designed to conserve battery life.
Panasonic's model CF-1000 notebook, available in November for a suggested retail price of $2,299, can run up to five and a half hours, or twice that if a second battery pack is installed, the company said.


Irwin Toy Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Stride Rite Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Paul Tully Is Dead at 48; Top Democratic Strategist
Paul Tully, the political director of the Democratic National Committee and one of his party's pre-eminent strategists, was found dead in Little Rock, Ark., today.
He was 48 years old.
Coroner Steve Nawojczyk of Pulaski County said Mr.
Tully's body was found about 3 P.M. today by a maid at the hotel where he was living in Little Rock.
Pending results of an autopsy, the coroner said Mr.
Tully appeared to have died of natural causes.


Senate Votes to Override President's Veto of the Family-Leave Bill
Challenging President Bush on a major campaign issue, the Senate voted 68 to 31 today to override his veto of the family-leave bill.
But the House delayed action as the Democratic leadership tried to round up votes.
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said the challenge of finding 289 votes, the two-thirds majority needed to override a veto in the current House, would be "difficult." There were only 241 ayes and 33 absentees when the House adopted the bill two weeks ago.


Robert Caviano, 42; Founded AIDS Group
Robert C. Caviano, a founder of Lifebeat, the music industry's organization to fight AIDS, died on Sept. 22 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 42 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Caviano died of AIDS complications, said Frances Pennington, a spokeswoman for Lifebeat.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about the trial of David Hampton, the imposter and con artist who is fighting charges of aggravated harassment against the playwright John Guare, referred incorrectly in some editions to the former president of Channel 13, who had been a target of Mr.
Hampton's deception.
He is John J. Iselin.


Jewelmasters reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 1


Digging In Against the Serbs' Svengali
The Serbian-born business executive from California who was handpicked in July by hard-liners in Belgrade to be Prime Minister of Yugoslavia speaks with a voice that often seems at odds with those who named him to the post.
The Prime Minister, Milan Panic, was initially dismissed by some Western skeptics as a fig leaf for the hard-liners, an accusation that he is keenly aware of.
But, he responds, "I was never a Milosevic guy," referring to Slobodan Milosevic, the staunch Serbian nationalist who is thought to be the real power in Yugoslavia.
"I am a free democrat."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Showing the Good Ol' Boys How to Play Their Own Game
Barbara Christmas looked absolutely victorious in a tailored suit and pearl earrings as she came back into town recently to settle political scores with the Good Ol' Boy establishment.
She had survived the worst of the local politics, the accusations that she was a radical feminist interested in furthering gay and lesbian rights in the dense and righteous world of south Georgia politicking.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about debate over potential changes in the New York City police complaint review board misidentified Richard Schwartz.
He is Rudolph W. Giuliani's campaign manager.


Safety-Kleen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


Congressional Delegation Will Undergo Some Shifts
About the only question left concerning the Congressional elections in New Jersey six weeks from now is whether Republicans will outnumber Democrats in the delegation for the first time since 1964.
With one seat lost to redistricting and four Representatives retiring, including the senior Democrat and Republican, it is already certain that the New Jersey delegation will be a lot less powerful.


From Musica Sacra
Musica Sacra opens its season with a concert entitled "Songs and Psalms of the Divine," at 3 P.M. tomorrow at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Richard Westenburg is to conduct the choral ensemble in a program including "Spem in Alium," Thomas Tallis's 40-voice motet; Richard Strauss's "Deutsche Motette"; Schoenberg's "Friede auf Erden"; a new work by Gerre Hancock commissioned by Musica Sacra, and music of Gabrieli, Schutz, Bruckner and Randall Thompson.
The 60-voice Musica Sacra Chorus will be accompanied by organ and brass.
Tickets are $25.
Information: (212) 874-3104.


'P' as in Passing


Western Hanover Just Misses Triple Crown
Fake Left ended Western Hanover's bid for the pacing triple crown with a strong stretch run to win the 47th Little Brown Jug today in a photo finish.
Fake Left, handled by a substitute driver, Ron Waples, won in 1:544/5 in only the sixth race-off in Jug history.
It was the first race-off ever involving four horses at the Delaware County Fairgrounds.


Review/Opera; A Familiar Treatment In the Met's 'Butterfly'
Having slid through the Metropolitan Opera's repertory off and on for the last 33 years, the company's production of "Madama Butterfly" is about to slide through a 34th.
Motohiro Nagasaka's design -- with its two-dimensional cutouts and oversize cherry blossoms -- has a tired and dowdy look and was probably not too handsome to begin with.
Fabrizio Melano's current staging looks distracted, as if stagecraft had been more or less abandoned to the whims of its principals.
They sang sturdily on Wednesday night and sometimes gave pleasure.
Adamant in its intimacy, "Madama Butterfly" would seem to resist the grandiose treatments that Franco Zeffirelli has visited on other Puccini productions at the Met.
And so with no splendid alternative on the horizon, this production out of another age (Dimitri Mitroupolis was its original conductor) plods along, relying on the composer's immensely lyrical gifts to rescue it from indifferent performance.
This is perhaps the paradox of Puccini's music: pictorial powers so great that they achieve success even when accompanied by the drabbest of stage pictures.
These forces may even, through sheer inertia, invite indifference.
Why work too hard when Puccini does the work for you?


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
Eighth Avenue will be closed from 23d to 29th Street from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Eighth Avenue Festival.
The west side of Broadway will be closed from 66th to 72d Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Broadway Mall Street Festival.


Review/Film; Vampire With Red Eyes And a Sense of Humor
When a foreign actress makes the kind of impression Anne Parillaud made in "La Femme Nikita," she is likely to find herself fielding American movie offers.
So there is always the danger that she will wind up in something like John Landis's "Innocent Blood." Mr.
Landis's latest overlong, overproduced spectacle finds this elegant beauty playing a blood-soaked, red-eyed vampire.
Her voice is sometimes electronically altered a la "The Exorcist," just to add an extra element of fun.
In much the same spirit, there's the scene in which Miss Parillaud handcuffs her arms behind her back as the prelude to a sexual encounter.
No less tasteful is the initial nude shot of the actress as she makes vampire jokes by candlelight, referring to her potential victims as "food." Meanwhile, on a comparably droll note, Robert Loggia's Mafia kingpin is seen beating a colleague to death with a toaster oven during the film's first 10 minutes.
This scene, like most of the movie, is played as if it were amusing.
In France, where Miss Parillaud is best remembered for her Cesar-winning performance as a chic hit-woman in an evening dress, rest assured that no one will be laughing.


Art in Review
Ava Gerber  Fiction/Nonfiction 21 Mercer Street SoHo Through Sept. 26
Ava Gerber's first solo show is a lively affair, very much in the vein of much recent art dealing with feminist issues where the focus is on abuse and the materials and images are provocative at a gut level.
To these elements, Ms.
Gerber adds a zany, absurdist humor that might seem inappropriate to its subject but that actually makes the show more affecting than it might otherwise be.


New Jersey Sells Refunding Issue
New Jersey yesterday priced for public offering a $146.4 million issue of refunding certificates of participation.
The issue was won in competitive bidding by a group of underwriters managed by Lehman Brothers.
The tax-exempt certificates were priced to yield from 3.20 percent for a security due on June 15, 1993, to 5 percent for one due on Dec. 15, 2000, the underwriter said.


Transactions
Football  National Football League  LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Resigned Napoleon McCallum, running back.
Waived Thomas Benson, linebacker.
Hockey  National Hockey League
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Announced a working agreement with St.
Thomas of the Colonial Hockey League.


Art in Review
David Maisel and Robert Dawson  The Opsis Foundation 561 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 24
The limits of photography as a tool for expressing concern about the environment are painfully apparent in this show of work by two photographers who depict the Western landscape.
Robert Dawson presents a series of handsome black-and-white prints from his "Water in the West" project, in which he seeks to illustrate the many uses to which this natural resource is put.


Dennis Thim, Fashion Journalist, 33
Dennis Thim, the European editor and correspondent of Women's Wear Daily and the fashion magazines W and M, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Paris.
He was 33 years old and lived in Paris.
He died of AIDS-related causes, the publisher of the three periodicals, Fairchild Publications, reported at its New York headquarters.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Bush Ad Strikes, but Problems Loom
To the relief of gloomy Republican advertising connoisseurs, Bush campaign officials this week finally broadcast a television commercial that they thought might actually help their cause.
But it takes more than one good commercial to sell a product -- or a President -- to a public that is looking at the new brand on the market.
And despite the high hopes for this ad, the campaign's revamped advertising team has inherited serious problems that could frustrate efforts of its Madison Avenue executives, who are better known for selling automobiles than Presidents.


IMPEACHMENT VOTE CLEARED IN BRAZIL
Striking a pair of blows to President Fernando Collor de Mello's chances of avoiding impeachment, Brazil's Supreme Court has voted to deny the President more time for his defense and has ruled that the impeachment vote in congress may proceed by public roll-call.
Following up on the rulings, announced Wednesday night, the president of the Court, Sydney Sanches, told the president of the Chamber of Deputies today that the Court would not consider any more appeals.


Astrosystems Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Yankees Look Good Now and Look Forward to Later
This is the race for fourth place.
The fans yawn.
The players all seem to be rookies.
The soda goes flat.
This was the big milestone last night at Yankee Stadium: For the first time this season, a Tiger pitcher struck out more than six men in a start.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Wednesday showing the possible impact of cable television legislation misstated the royalties that broadcasters are expected to receive from cable companies.
The highest estimate has been $1 billion, not $3 billion.


BANK OF NEW YORK PLEDGES $750 MILLION TO LOAN PLAN
The Bank of New York, seeking to secure regulatory approval of an expansion plan, said yesterday that it intended to make $750 million in housing loans to low- and moderate-income areas over the next decade.
Bank of New York said the program would take effect once Federal banking regulators approve the bank's application to acquire 64 New York-area branches of Barclays Bank.
The bank signed the deal with a national housing group, Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now.
The agreement came three days after some New York community groups sought to block the branch sale, charging the bank excludes minority neighborhoods from its community lending plans.


People
*
James E. Murphy, 56 years old, chairman and chief executive at Burson-Marsteller, New York, was promoted to the new position of chairman and chief executive at Burson-Marstellar U.S.A., New York.
Andrew Cooper, 44, president and chief operating officer, will succeed Mr.
Murphy as president and chief executive.
And Kenneth Rietz, 51, executive vice president of public affairs at Burson-Marsteller, Los Angeles, was promoted to the new position of president of West Coast operations, responsible for the Los Angeles, Sacramento and San Francisco offices.


Germany Accuses East's Spy Chief of Treason
The former head of East Germany's highly successful spy service was charged today by German prosecutors with suspected treason, espionage and bribery over a period of more than 30 years.
According to a summary of the charges brought by the Federal Prosecutor's Office in Karlsruhe, the accused, Markus Wolf, personally directed some of the most notorious East German spies, including Gunter Guillaume, who was infiltrated into West Germany in 1956 and succeeded in becoming an aide to Chancellor Willy Brandt.
After Mr.
Guillaume was unmasked in 1974, Mr.
Brandt resigned.


American Safety Closure reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Review/Art; Russia's Fling With the Future
"THE GREAT UTOPIA," the survey of Russian and Soviet avant-garde art opening today at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, intends to overwhelm the viewer, and unfortunately it does.
With more than 800 paintings, sculptures, drawings, photographs, textiles, ceramics, furniture and architectural models, occupying almost the entirety of the newly renovated building, it must surely be, as the museum boasts, the largest show in the history of the Guggenheim.
At least, it feels that way.
One retreats from it like Napoleon from Moscow, bedraggled and confused.
It includes compelling works, many of which have been extracted for the first time from provincial Russian museums, where these objects languished for the better part of this century because of the indifference, if not outright hostility, of the Soviet authorities.
Yet the impact of the many remarkable things on view is hopelessly diluted by the exhibition's sheer size, seesawing quality, and its gimmicky and self-indulgent installation.


At the Bar; In Quayle's home state, a lawyer and ex-backer doesn't like the Republican attacks on the bar.
Among the otherwise forgettable ad hoc groups supporting this year's Presidential tickets, one seems particularly odd.
In fact, it could be called "Masochists for Bush-Quayle," for it is made up of what have become the Republicans' favorite whipping boys and girls: lawyers.
On Sept. 15 the Bush campaign unveiled the names of the 100-member steering committee of Lawyers for Bush/Quayle '92.
These practitioners are alike in several ways.
If, as their favorite candidates contend, America has too many lawyers, none considers himself to be among the surplus.
None of them have ever filed a frivolous lawsuit or harmed American competitiveness.
All firmly believe that when the President and Vice President chastise lawyers, they are clearly talking about someone else.


Resourcecan Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CUNY Was Known as 'Proletarian Harvard'
To the Editor:
In your Sept. 15 news article on new admissions requirements for the City University of New York, you misstate historical fact when you write, "until now, the only requirement for entering the  [ city ]  university has been a high school diploma."


Critic's Notebook; Fiction and Reality: Blurring the Edges
IN the charming early Federico Fellini film "The White Sheik," a young bride named Wanda, who has arrived in Rome for her honeymoon, wanders off in search of her longtime idol, the White Sheik, the hero of one of those photographed comic strips so popular in Italy in the 1950's.
Her head crammed with romantic illusions, Wanda cannot see -- not at first, anyway -- that her glamorous idol is really a fat, vulgar parody of Rudolph Valentino, a small-time actor and buffoon who carelessly lies about his life in order to seduce naive women like herself.
She is offered a small part in the comic strip, dresses up as a harem girl, and earnestly plays out her role -- she, alone among the actors, mistakes the illusions of art for real life.
These days, Wanda's inability to distinguish between reality and fiction has become such a common malady that it often feels as though Pirandello were writing the news.
Vice President Dan Quayle attacks Murphy Brown, the fictional anchorwoman played by Candice Bergen, for undermining traditional family values by deciding to become a single mother, and in this week's season premier of the show, Murphy Brown strikes back, having already elicited even further condemnations from Mr.
Quayle.


On Matters of Health, Women's Magazines Give Solid Advice
To the Editor:
While there is much of merit in Elizabeth M. Whelan's criticism of the print media's coverage of the hazards of cigarette smoking, there is also a good deal of misrepresentation ("Alarm Clocks Can Kill You. Have a Smoke," Op-Ed, Sept. 8).


Dynamics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  Senator Al Gore
TODAY: 7:10 A.M., CBS (Channel 2) "CBS This Morning."  Senator Al Gore Vice President Quayle
FRIDAY: 9 P.M., PBS (Channel 13) "Talking with David Frost," half-hour interview with each.
President Bush
MONDAY: 7 A.M. ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," taxes.
WEDNESDAY: 7 A.M. ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," crime.
FRIDAY: 7 A.M. ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," health care.


Righteous Anger Spilled Over at Police Rally; Review Board's Makeup
To the Editor:
As a citizen brought up to think of the police as my public friends, I can agree with Phil Caruso, head of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, that members of the Civilian Complaint Review Board should have some "experience in what a police officer has to go through to enforce the law" (front page, Sept. 18).


Is Enlightened Ice Age Ushering In the 90's?
So Wayne Gretzky glides off the ice at about the same time that Manon Rheaume glides on.
Is this the coincidence of a superstar's bad back and an expansion team's good publicity, or is it the face-off metaphor of the season?
Could it mean that such faded stars as Gretzky, Larry Bird, Magic Johnson, Mike Tyson and Joe Montana will be replaced by someone newer and more interesting?
Or could it actually mean that the Gross 80's are over in sports, that an era of explosive growth, traditional heroes and a school for scandal is finally giving way to the Net 90's reckoning over money, sex and morals?
Manon Rheaume became the first woman to play in one of the four major pro sports leagues last Wednesday night, spending a period in goal for the Tampa Bay Lightning in an exhibition game.
That ice hockey made the breakthrough is significant; the weakest economically of the four major team sports, it also has the greatest potential to reach out and lure new fans, women as well as men.
Meanwhile, there is a curious sense of stagnation among the others.
Are they mature industries that have gone as far as they can, or is this just a period of retrenchment before the next leap forward?


Foote, Cone to Lose No Nonsense Hose
The Kayser-Roth Corporation in Greensboro, N.C., has decided not to extend the contract on its No Nonsense panty hose account with Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, which has handled the brand since 1986.
The account is being moved to Lois/U.S.A. in New York, which was one of five participants in a review last fall that Foote, Cone had survived.
In a staff memo, Mitchell T. Engel, executive vice president and managing director at Foote, Cone, wrote that the agency had also "survived three new ownership reorganizations, five different presidents and six different marketing heads."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- North Carolina; Presidential Race in North Carolina: Fierce Fight Across Cultural Divide
The talk turned to family values, and Representative David E. Price, seeking to score a partisan point, told his audience, "You'd think if the President was so interested in keeping families together, he'd be willing to support time off for new mothers."
With that, a tall man in the back row jumped to his feet and said: "Family values got nothing to do with economics. It's whether you teach your children to love the Lord."


Iran-Contra Figure Points to Wider Role for Bush
Richard V. Secord, a leading figure in the Iran-contra affair, said today that he believed that President Bush was more involved than has been acknowledged in the arms-for-hostages deals with Iran in the mid-1980's.
But Mr.
Secord added that he had no direct evidence to support that conclusion.
In an interview granted to promote sales of his new book about the Iran-contra operations, Mr.
Secord disputed Mr.
Bush's frequent contention during the 1988 Presidential race that he was "out of the loop" during important White House deliberations over arms sales to Teheran.


Self-Help Guides on Law Grow Into Big Business
When it comes to lawyer bashing and changing the legal system, President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle have nothing on Ralph Warner.
Mr.
Warner is the co-founder and publisher of Nolo Press, a longtime producer of legal self-help guides.
He and his company have been taking on the legal profession for the last 21 years -- not over the volume of corporate litigation and class-action suits that has enraged the White House, but in areas that Mr.
Warner finds far riper for change.


Tough Help for Homeless; New Dinkins Policy Is to Provide Housing To Those Striving to Improve Themselves
The Dinkins administration's new strategy for dealing with the homeless effectively acknowledges that its initial, generous policy had the perverse effect of encouraging many impoverished New Yorkers to declare themselves homeless -- and that a new system was needed to make sure that only the truly homeless were served.
The administration is now trying, even if belatedly in the view of critics, to grapple with an issue that permeates the broader debate over welfare in America: does the welfare system create incentives that weaken the work ethic and other values society wants to encourage?


Review/Film; Day-Lewis as Hawkeye in a Cooper Classic
"Come, friends," a scout says typically in James Fenimore Cooper's novel "The Last of the Mohicans." "Let us move our station, and in such a fashion, too, as will throw the cunning of a Mingo on a wrong scent, or our scalps will be drying in the wind in front of Montcalm's marquee, ag'in this hour tomorrow."
Modern readers who find "The Last of the Mohicans" heavy sledding will be glad to know they are not alone.
"Cooper's word-sense was singularly dull," Mark Twain wrote in his famous essay "Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offenses." And: "If Cooper had any real knowledge of Nature's ways of doing things, he had a most delicate art in concealing the fact." And: "It would be very difficult to find a really clever 'situation' in Cooper's books, and still more difficult to find one of any kind which he has failed to render absurd by his handling of it."


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Anheuser-Busch Companies, St.
Louis, filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $735 million of debt securities. *
Baxter International Inc., Deerfield, Ill., a maker of hospital supplies and medical equipment, is offering $150 million of 5 percent notes due in 1995 at par through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Insurance Stocks Surge Except for Continental
Insurance company stocks surged yesterday on the expectation that the high losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki would finally force property-casualty insurers to raise their prices on business insurance.
The rally in a host of highly regarded insurance stocks came after an announcement by the Continental Insurance Company that it had suffered losses totaling $200 million.
Continental, which also said it was lowering its dividend for the first time since 1853, did not share in the rally and its stock price plunged by $6.125, to $24.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The ability of nations to defend their currencies has slipped markedly in the last three years, figures released by the Federal Reserve and other central banks show.
Currency trading has grown by 50 percent in three years, to an estimated $1 trillion daily, about as much as central banks' foreign-exchange reserves.  [ Page A1. ]
The turmoil in the European currency markets abated as a joint effort between France and Germany stabilized the value of the franc and improved the odds that Europe's tattered monetary system would hold together.
But analysts said the franc and several other weak currencies remained vulnerable.  [ D1. ]


Mexico May Renegotiate Free Trade, or It May Not
Three days after President Carlos Salinas de Gortari appeared to rule out any renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement, he now appears to have ruled it back in.
Or something like that.
Under persistent questioning on Monday on the television interview program "John McLaughlin's One on One," Mr.
Salinas said that if Bill Clinton became President and demanded a new agreement, "I would say we have done a very good effort, but no more renegotiation."


Senior Navy Officers Suppressed Sex Investigation, Pentagon Says
In a blistering critique of the Navy's inquiry into sexual assaults at an aviators' convention last year, a Pentagon report made public today says that senior Navy officials deliberately undermined their own investigation to avoid negative publicity.
The report said some admirals had sabotaged their agents' efforts because of their own hostility toward women.
It is the first time the Pentagon has directly accused senior Navy officials of suppressing their own investigation into the assault of at least 26 women, including 14 officers, at the Tailhook Association convention in Las Vegas, Nev.
Internal Bickering
The report portrays a leaderless inquiry mired in internal bickering that failed to grasp the scope of the crisis.
At one point, the report said, the commander of the Naval Investigative Service, Rear Adm.
Duvall M. (Mac) Williams Jr., and the Assistant Navy Secretary for Manpower and Reserve Affairs, Barbara S. Pope, had a "screaming match" in a Pentagon corridor about female aviators, with Admiral Williams comparing female Navy pilots to "go-go dancers, topless dancers or hookers."


It's Foley, Not Flutie, but So What?
The football progress at Boston College can be measured by the small piece of paper on a cafeteria bulletin board that caught Glenn Foley's eye.
"It said, 'I need tickets for Michigan State,' " said Foley, the quarterback of the undefeated Eagles.
"It's the first time I'd seen something like that."


G.M. Official Will Become A Top Executive at Textron
When rising corporate stars get job offers from other companies, making decisions about what to do generally takes some time.
Lewis B. Campbell is an exception to that rule.
On Wednesday, less than 24 hours after it had extended an offer, Textron Inc., the conglomerate based in Providence, R.I., announced that it had lured Mr.
Campbell away from his position as vice president and general manager of the GMC Truck division of the General Motors Corporation to become its chief operating officer.


Do Government Rogues Traffic in Drugs?
To the Editor:
Why is it that any time there is a voice suggesting there might be a connection between drug trafficking and rogue elements of our Government, there is a powerful one like A. M. Rosenthal's ("Movies, Drugs, Elections," column, Sept. 11) to deny this voice with catch phrases like "left-wing paranoia."


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, Lower East Side.
Readings of their own poems by Mike Tyler, Ron Cephas Jones, Pete Spiro and Bahiyyih Watson.
Today at 10 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
LECTURE AND SLIDE SHOW, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, Upper West Side.
A discussion of the autumn festival of Durga Puja, celebrated in Bengal, led by Rachel Fell McDermott, an instructor of comparative religion at Barnard College.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
The lecture is part of a weekendlong Indian festival at the museum.
Lecture is included in museum admission: $5; $2.50 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5315.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The General; Schwarzkopf Says 2 Camps Courted Him
Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf says the campaigns of Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot both sounded him out about running for Vice President.
Opening a promotional tour for his new book, "It Doesn't Take a Hero," with an interview with Barbara Walters to be broadcast Friday on the ABC News program "20/20," the former commander of allied forces in the Persian Gulf war said in a transcript of the interview that he turned down the overtures because he is "apolitical."


On Matters of Health, Women's Magazines Give Solid Advice
To the Editor:
Elizabeth M. Whelan's "Alarm Clocks Can Kill You. Have a Smoke" (Op-Ed, Sept. 8) attacks women's magazines' health reporting as "silly." What readers may not realize is that Dr.
Whelan is known as a mouthpiece for the chemical industry.


Mayor Dinkins Seeks Support in Puerto Rico


Cybermedic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Market Place; A Survival Move For KLM Airlines
FOR years, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines has been able to survive largely because of its aggressiveness in bringing passengers from one part of the world to its hub in Amsterdam and flying them out to another.
In the tiny Netherlands, KLM cannot rely on a large domestic market the way American carriers or those in other large countries can.
But despite its country's smallness, KLM has been able to become the world's eighth-largest carrier.
It serves 157 cities in 6 continents, connecting the Netherlands with the rest of the world with a fleet of Boeing 747's much like the great Dutch trading ships did in the past.


Maple Leaf Gardens reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


For Children
Roosevelt Island Tramway  Second Avenue, between 59th and 60th Streets Upper East Side (212) 832-4543 Recommended for all ages Daily
The Swiss-made tram rises 246 feet as it carries passengers between East 59th Street and Roosevelt Island, which is in the middle of the East River and officially part of Manhattan.
It's a cheap thrill at $2.80 for the round-trip, and children accustomed to buses and subways might find the tram an unexpected ride normally reserved for alpine slopes.


METRO DIGEST
ON THE TRAIL WITH CLINTON
Gov.
Bill Clinton chose a big pharmaceutical company in Rahway, N.J., for a major speech about health care.
And with egalitarian self-interest, many in the crowd of 2,000 people came to hear the bottom line: how his plans would affect their families, their careers, their employees.
Then it was on to New York City.
And for Robert Abrams, campaigning to unseat Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the timing of that visit could hardly have been better -- even if much of the lunchtime crowd had dissipated when Mr.
Clinton finally arrived at Bryant Park.
B6.
NEW YORK CITY  A NEW COURSE ON THE HOMELESS
The Dinkins administration's new strategy for dealing with the homeless effectively acknowledges that its initial, generous policy had the perverse effect of encouraging many impoverished New Yorkers to declare themselves homeless -- and that a new system was needed to make sure that only the truly homeless were served.
A1.


Devils Name Stevens Team's New Captain
The Devils removed BRUCE DRIVER as team captain yesterday and replaced him with SCOTT STEVENS.
Driver, who is the team's representative with the players' union, was named alternate captain along with JOHN MacLEAN, who is recovering from reconstructive surgery in his right knee.


Review/Film; Appliance With Craving For Flesh
"The Refrigerator" is not the first film in which an inanimate object embarks on a lethal rampage against humanity, but in its crude way it is one of the most amusing.
Written and directed by Nicholas A. E. Jacobs and shot on the Lower East Side of Manhattan on a minuscule budget, the comic horror film is set mostly in a tenement apartment dominated by a battered old Norge refrigerator that is quite literally from hell.
From the moment Steve and Eileen Bateman, a young married couple fresh from Ohio with big city dreams, move into their grubby apartment, there are ominous growlings from the kitchen.
The refrigerator door has a way of opening itself a crack, out of which pours a ghastly sulfurous light.
Sometimes the appliance spontaneously defrosts onto the floor, depositing what look suspiciously like rivers of blood.


Cabano Transportation Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 18


Fighting Intensifies in Armenian-Azerbaijani War
Fighting between Azerbaijan and Armenia over the Armenian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh intensified today amid reports that military and civilian deaths had climbed to more than 500 this week.
Fighting was going on in the the north, east and southeast of the disputed enclave after an offensive by Azerbaijan forces trying to drive Armenians out.


IRAQ MAY APPROVE U.N. AID TO KURDS
In an apparent softening of Baghdad's position, the Iraqi Foreign Minister said today that his Government had no objection to the United Nations' mounting a new relief operation this winter to help Kurds in the north of the country.
But the Foreign Minister, Mohammed al-Sahaf, also urged the United Nations to negotiate a new agreement with Baghdad under which the organization's relief agencies would help needy people in other areas of the country as well, officials here said.


Gtech Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 24


Topics of The Times; Global Cooling?
Men are cooler than women, and
everyone
is cooler than the little red "normal" line on the thermometer, according to a paper published this week in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
The commonly accepted notion that 98.6 degrees is normal came from Carl Reinhold August Wunderlich, a German physician who recorded the temperatures of 25,000 Leipzigers in the mid-1800's.
But now three doctors in Baltimore have reached the unsettling conclusion that the right number is 98.2 -- a little lower for men and a little higher for women.


Review/Art; A Mulatto-Chinese Cuban With a Gift for Fusion
This is a big year for Wifredo Lam (1902-1982).
Two major exhibitions are scheduled for Europe, another will be mounted at the Studio Museum in Harlem in January and at present "Wifredo Lam: A Retrospective of Works on Paper" is on view at the Americas Society.
The attention is well deserved -- Lam is an exceptionally interesting, if uneven, artist -- but why is it coming now?
The fact that his career has been seriously under-examined has something to do with it; but so does the fact that he is an amazing paradigm of cross-cultural interaction.
Born in Cuba to a mulatto mother (half-Spanish, half-black) and a Chinese father, he was reared a Roman Catholic, but was early introduced to the blend of African religions and Christianity called Santeria.
He lived in the Caribbean, Spain, France and the United States and married a Spanish woman, then a German, then a Swede.
Acutely conscious of his third-world background, he operated ambitiously on the stage of international art.
And of all the early modernist painters who brought "primitivism" into their work, it was he who made it his primary subject.


Global Bankers' Muted Happy Hour
Adventure may be the life of commerce, as Walter Bagehot, the 19th-century English economist, once said, but caution, he added, is the life of banking.
And during a monetary crisis, bankers, whether commercial or central, are fretful, even downright dull.
"Slightly muted," is how Curtis J. Hoxter, head of Hoxter Inc., a New York public relations firm, characterized the weeklong gathering of approximately 2,000 bankers for the annual International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
The meetings ended today.


Frank P. Briggs, 98, a Publisher And Truman's Senate Successor
Frank P. Briggs, a rural newspaper publisher from Missouri who succeeded Harry S. Truman in the United States Senate in 1944, died on Wednesday at Samaritan Memorial Hospital in Macon, Mo.
He was 98 years old and lived in Macon.
He was admitted to the hospital on Monday to be tested for pneumonia, his son, Tom, said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; CLINTON PROPOSES MAKING EMPLOYERS COVER HEALTH CARE
Gov.
Bill Clinton, who has long sought to capitalize on public concern over rising health-care costs, said yesterday that if elected President he would require private employers to provide health insurance and would have the Federal Government supplement health-care protection for the unemployed.
Expanding on his universal health-care proposal in a speech to employees of a pharmaceutical firm in Rahway, N.J., Mr.
Clinton said his plan would include rigorous cost controls on prescription drugs and medical procedures, encourage competition among insurance companies and guarantee access to health care.


Art in Review
Ilya Kabakov  Ronald Feldman Gallery 31 Mercer Street SoHo Through Oct. 17
The Russian Conceptualist Ilya Kabakov, probably the best and certainly the most prominent artist to emerge in the West during glasnost, often seems like a novelist or playwright who has inexplicably set up shop in the house of art.
His current show -- his third -- resembles a walk-in short story, a New Yorker cartoon or a one-act play in which the viewer has a walk-on part.
Its strength lies in the fact that its narrative unfolds easily and spontaneously; its weakness is the fact that it is almost more interesting to read the artist's synopsis of the piece and its intended effect in the accompanying brochure than to experience it firsthand.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.05
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.06
5.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.91
5.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.96
5.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.99
6.08
7.34
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.48
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.48
8.99
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.42
6.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Art in Review
Geoffrey Biddle  Klarfeld Perry Gallery 472 Broome Street SoHo Through Oct. 24
In his project called "Alphabet City," Geoffrey Biddle uses gritty black-and-white photographs to offer a poetic look at life in a poor and mostly Hispanic neighborhood in the East Village.
Mr.
Biddle exhibits large pictures of residents taken in the late 1970's alongside pictures of the same people a decade later.
Accompanying these before-and-after pairings are excerpts from statements made by the people while looking at the earlier photographs of themselves.


Sports of The Times; N.F.L. Brass: The Future's In the Bronx
IF there is not some clause in their contract forbidding their attendance at a baseball game, the top officials of the National Football League just might want to head over to Yankee Stadium tonight to watch their own future in action.
His name is David Cone.
Cone throws as hard as any professional quarterback, but he is not likely to change sports.
He will be a free agent and he will make a ton of money just as soon as the Toronto Blue Jays have stopped renting his arm for their annual bid for the World Series.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 611 retail money market mutual funds decreased by $670.3 million, to $384.06 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 377 taxable retail money market funds were down $113.8 million, to $307.37 billion, while the assets of the 234 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $556.5 million, to $76.69 billion.


In Manhattan Park, Nominee Lets Abrams Share a Vital Spotlight
Just before Bill Clinton took the stage to address a mid-afternoon crowd in Bryant Park in midtown Manhattan yesterday, he whispered to the woman introducing him to be sure to first call attention to a pair of local politicians on hand.
The crowd seemed impatient, what with Mr.
Clinton's arrival 150 minutes behind schedule.
But Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President who was doing the introductions, took a moment to bring the Senate candidate Robert Abrams and the Congressional candidate Carolyn Maloney on stage, and when Mr.
Clinton faced the crowd he recognized them graciously -- even if he did refer to Ms.
Maloney as "Carol."


Righteous Anger Spilled Over at Police Rally; To Combat Racism
To the Editor:
I commend you for your strong indictment of the City Hall police demonstration (editorial, Sept. 18).
But what is missing is any suggestion of the steps to combat racism and illegality in the Police Department.


Vallone Plan Offers Police Review Role
Seeking a compromise in a debate that has pitted the Mayor against much of the police force, Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone is proposing to give the police union some influence in the makeup of an all-civilian review board to investigate police misconduct, lawmakers said yesterday.
Because the Speaker controls the majority of the 51 votes in the Council, his bill has a better chance of success than any other.
Mr.
Vallone would not discuss the details of his proposal yesterday, but he said that he had come to the conclusion that "police expertise is absolutely essential in order for the board to have credibility." A Bitter Debate


2 Held in Scheme to Cheat Wary Lottery Winner
When a refugee from Vietnam who lives in Queens won $8.3 million in the New York lottery last February, he expressed fear that he would soon be victimized by people trying to steal his winnings and said he did not want his winning publicized.
He was apparently right.
Two men were charged yesterday in an elaborate scheme to steal $180,000 in from Xuan Lien's winnings.
One suspect is a retired police officer.
The other is an auxiliary police officer in Chinatown.


Mozart's 'Magic Flute'
The New York City Opera will begin performances of Mozart's "Magic Flute" at 1:30 P.M. tomorrow at the New York State Theater.
Amy Burton will be making her debut as Pamina and Rachel Rosales is the Queen of the Night; Richard Drews sings Tamino; Jeff Mattsey is Papageno; John Calvin West is Sarastro, and Philip Cokorinos is the Speaker.
All the principals, other than Ms.
Rosales, are singing their roles for the first time at City Opera.
"The Magic Flute" is to be conducted by Scott Bergeson and sung in an English translation by Andrew Porter.
Tickets are $10 to $68.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


Paul E. Garber, 93, First Curator Of National Air and Space Exhibit
Paul E. Garber, whose childhood fascination with a kite inspired a lifelong love of aviation that led to the founding of the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, died on Wednesday at the Arlington Hospital in Arlington, Va.
He was 93 years old and lived in Arlington.
His family did not disclose the cause of death.


Pacts Elude New York City And Unions
A year after most of New York City's contracts with municipal labor unions expired, contract negotiations are stalled, union officials and mayoral advisers say.
Each side blames the other for the failure to make progress in the talks, whose outcome could have a major impact both on the city's fiscal standing and on the mayoral election next year.


TV Weekend; 3 of the Golden Girls in a New Home
Spiraling health-care costs, age discrimination: the elderly may not have much to laugh about these days but, at least as far as television entertainment is concerned, oldsters remain a hoot.
Absent Bea Arthur, NBC's "Golden Girls" has been resurrected on CBS as "The Golden Palace" (Fridays at 8 P.M.), and the old girls are, well, as irrepressible as ever.
And then "Frannie's Turn," also on CBS (Saturdays at 8 P.M.), offers a wacky domestic menagerie that includes a dotty mother-in-law who watches a television shopping network to order items like a "Star Trek" ankle bracelet.
Oh, you kids!
In "The Golden Palace," Rose Nylund (Betty White), Blanche Devereaux (Rue McClanahan) and Sophia Petrillo (Estelle Getty) have bought an Art Deco hotel in Miami Beach as an investment for what they envision as their quiet retirement years.
But the Golden Palace turns out to be teetering on bankruptcy, and the women are forced to return to hard, full-time work.
Their skeletal staff includes Chuy (Cheech Marin, formerly of Cheech and Chong), a Mexican chef with in-law problems; Roland (Don Cheadle), a black would-be entrepreneur serving as house manager, and Oliver (Billy L. Sullivan), an abandoned 12-year-old with street smarts.


In His Own Words
GOV. BILL CLINTON  In comments yesterday at Merck Pharmaceuticals in Rahway, N.J.
"We are rationing health care today. If you don't believe it, look at the infant mortality rate. Look at the low-birth-weight rate. Look at the people who don't have long-term care who need it. Look at the people who don't get medicine who need it. We are rationing health care today, but we are doing it in sneaky, bureaucratic, confusing, absolutely indefensible ways, and we ought to change it.
I want to keep consumers with a variety of choices, including access to local health care networks put together by insurers, hospitals, clinics and doctors -- managed care networks that will receive the money they need to meet a consumer's full health care needs over a lifetime.
By limiting a network's total spending, without interfering at all with its practices, the state-by-state budgets that I recommend will create real incentives for hospitals, clinics, doctors and consumers to reduce bureaucracy, eliminate unnecessary duplicative technology and practices and cut waste on their own.
This is very, very important.
We've got to quit having the Federal Government try to micromanage health care and instead set up incentives for the private sector to manage the costs down within limits, beyond which we absolutely must not go in spending.
These things will really help, especially when we provide the same incentives for small businesses to band together in large pools."


Diner's Journal
Eating for Less
The phenomenally popular promotion of $19.92 lunches by dozens of New York City restaurants continues, although on a smaller scale.
Some have added $24.92 dinners, most of which are offered before or after theater hours.
Be sure to call ahead to check the hours.
Among the Manhattan restaurants participating in the lunch and dinner discounts through Nov. 20 are:


2 Cheese Makers Pick New Agencies
Two cheese makers are smiling and saying "Agency."
The Stella Cheese Company in Milwaukee has named Romann &amp; Tannenholz Inc. in New York to handle its estimated $2 million to $3 million account, previously at Cramer-Krasselt in Milwaukee.


Kohl Denies Secret Plan to Force European Union
Political and monetary disarray in Europe reached the point today that the German Government was forced to deny assertions that vigorous German support of the French franc in the money markets was part of a secret campaign by Paris and Bonn to push ahead with European union even over the objections of their neighbors.
Reports in The European, a British-based English-language weekly, and Die Welt, a German daily, that Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Francois Mitterrand had agreed on a joint plan to advance European unity were denied by Mr.
Kohl's spokesman, Dieter Vogel.


Alcide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Advice of Stalin: Hold Korean War P.O.W.'s
Stalin advised Communist leaders in China and Korea to hold back 20 percent of American pilots captured during the Korean War and use them as bargaining chips with the United States, according to Soviet documents delivered to the United States Government today.
Accounts of these conversations were included in a thick file handed over to former United States Ambassador Malcolm Toon, in Moscow on his third trip as co-chairman of a joint commission investigating the fate of P.O.W.'s and other Americans held in the Soviet Union after World War II.


Tony Tamburello, Pianist and Vocal Coach, 72
Tony Tamburello, a jazz pianist and a vocal coach whose clients included Tony Bennett, Judy Garland and Juliet Prowse, died on Tuesday at Our Lady of Mercy Hospital in the Bronx, near his home.
He was 72 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said Mary Chiappa, a family friend.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidates on the Issues; Two Proposals for Health Care
Medical prices are rising about twice as fast as other consumer prices.
The United States spends far more on health care than any other country.
Medicare and Medicaid eat up a growing share of the Federal budget.
But 35 million Americans have no health insurance.
THE PROPOSALS
President Bush would grant tax credits to poor people and tax deductions to middle-income people to help them buy private health insurance.
He would allow self-employed people to deduct 100 percent of the cost of their health insurance premiums (up from the current 25 percent).
He would encourage small businesses to pool their purchasing power to buy health insurance at a discount.
Under Governor Clinton's plan, a new entity, composed of consumers and providers of health care, would establish national limits on health-care spending, with a separate budget for each state.
Employers would have to buy private health insurance for their employees.
The Government would guarantee insurance coverage for people who are not working; they would pay premiums that rise with their income.
The Government would provide tax credits to small employers to help offset the cost of health insurance in the early years of a transition period.
Small businesses could band together, form large groups and buy insurance at a discount.
ARTFUL DODGES
Mr.
Bush does not say how he would control health costs.
Many experts doubt that his plan would slow the rise in medical prices.
Health insurance premiums could rise faster than the tax credits and deductions allowed for the purchase of such insurance.
Insurers would have to offer coverage to all applicants, regardless of their medical problems.
This virtually guarantees an increase in premiums for healthy people, but the Bush plan says nothing about that.
Governor Clinton does not say exactly how he would finance coverage for people who are not employed.
He says, "We will dedicate Federal savings from cost controls to expanding coverage to all." But hardly anyone believes that such savings would finance expanded coverage for all who need it.
Mr.
Clinton is also vague about the future of Medicaid, the Federal-state program for 30 million low-income people.
He says it will be folded into a new program of "private coverage" through publicly sponsored purchasing groups.
SCORECARD
The Bush Administration has put together a coherent proposal, but Mr.
Bush suffers from a public perception that he ignored this issue for nearly three years.
Mr.
Clinton has not confronted the true cost of his program; he asserts that his proposal "does not require new taxes." But he benefits from a public perception that Democrats are more concerned and knowledgeable about health care.


Los Angeles Mayor Won't Run Again
Mayor Tom Bradley announced today that he would not seek a sixth term next year, after 20 years in office during which he presided over the transformation of Los Angeles from what was barely more than a collection of suburbs into one of the world's major cities.
"The time for change has come," Mayor Bradley said at the New Otani Hotel in downtown Los Angeles.
"I have served a record five terms as your Mayor. Others should now have the opportunity and responsibility to bring their vision to bear on the future of this great community."


Key Job Shifts At Anheuser
The Anheuser-Busch Companies announced several management changes yesterday in the wake of the departure this week of a top marketing executive, John N. MacDonough, to be the new president of Miller, a unit of Philip Morris.
Anheuser-Busch said that Stephen J. Burrows, 40 years old, had been named to replace Mr.
MacDonough as executive vice president for marketing of Anheuser-Busch International.
He will also fill the new post of vice president, international marketing for the parent corporation.
His promotion is likely to quiet speculation in industry trade publications that his future at Anheuser-Busch was somewhat uncertain.


Topics of The Times; No Litmus Test Needed Here
If Judge Emilion Garza of the U.S.
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals is considered again for a Supreme Court vacancy, the Bush Administration won't even have to ask how he feels about abortion.
Judge Garza has gone shamelessly out of his way to answer that litmus-test question without being asked.
His court was considering the Louisiana law criminalizing abortion the other day.
All three judges agreed that the Supreme Court decision in June reaffirming Roe v.
Wade rendered Louisiana's law unconstitutional.
But Judge Garza, who was a finalist last year for the vacancy that Clarence Thomas filled, was not content with this simple judgment.
In a special, unnecessary concurrence, he wrote: "Because the decision to permit or proscribe abortion is a political choice, I would allow the people of the state of Louisiana to decide the issue for themselves."





CHRONICLE
CHAKUFWA CHIHANA, a trade union leader and human rights activist from Malawi, will receive the ninth annual Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award.
Mr.
Chihana, who has fought for the rights of workers in his southern African homeland, defying the dictatorial government of President KAMUZU BANDA, has been imprisoned or exiled numerous times.


Reviews/Theater; Women Taking Their Places, Rightful or Not
Two young men (Eric Lutes and Eric Nolan) are drinking at a neighborhood bar and commiserating with each other about the good old days when men were manly and women didn't spend so much time working out in gyms.
This smug lamentation is interrupted by the arrival of two women, one of whom (Deborah Laufer) happens to have had a long, disastrous affair with Mr.
Lutes.
What follows this accidental encounter in Theresa Rebeck's "Big Mistake" is an abrasive and humorous look at a sexist battleground.
The dialogue in this one-act play (by the author of "Spike Heels") has the rudeness of David Mamet but with a decidedly feminist sound.
Ms.
Rebeck's comedy, the first of five short plays written by women in an anthology entitled "I'm Sorry . . . Was That Your World?," is rough on the male characters while not forgetting that the women also bear responsibility.
Ms.
Laufer's character seems to have a serious case of masochism, and her friend (Kathryn Langwell) is burdened with a heavy career chip on her shoulder.
One comes out of this play feeling a certain sympathy for the quietly efficient bartender (Jessica Hecht) who has to put up with conversations like this every night.


Breakthrough Eludes Mideast Talks
Israeli and Arab delegates ended their sixth round of negotiations today, having inched a bit closer to one another but with no substantive breakthroughs.
The Syrians, the Palestinians, the Jordanians and the Lebanese all agreed, though, to resume their respective negotiations with Israel on Oct. 21.
They are to meet for another month then in Washington, except for a short time-out for the United States elections.


FDP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Reviews/Theater; Kyogen, the Comic Relief for Noh
Kyogen plays, a tradition in Japan since the 14th century, are small-scale folk comedies that are often presented as interludes during evenings of Noh drama.
In them, acting and mime take precedence, although the plays can express an aura of grandness within a framework of intimacy.
This is very much the case with "Utsubozaru," or "The Monkey-Skin Quiver," the second of two plays performed on Wednesday by the Nomura Kyogen Theater during a three-day engagement at the Japan Society.


Norex America reports earnings for Year June 30


Foreign Chips Rise in Japan
Foreign semiconductor makers increased their share of Japan's market to 16 percent in the second quarter of this year from 14.6 percent in the first quarter, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, announced today.
The United States has been pressing Japan since the mid-1980's to buy more semiconductors, or computer chips, from American and other foreign manufacturers.
The American industry contends that foreign companies should account for 20 percent of the Japanese market, based on their competitiveness in other markets.


Dinkins Joins Velazquez On Victory Trip to San Juan
Having helped her to an upset victory over an influential Congressional veteran, Mayor David N. Dinkins went to Puerto Rico today with Nydia M. Velazquez and used her triumphant homecoming to gather political capital of his own.
In a whirlwind day of political payback that spanned the New York-to-San Juan air bridge, Mr.
Dinkins walked the streets of Old San Juan, escorted Ms.
Velazquez to a luncheon in the Governor's mansion and all in all appeared to be campaigning himself.


Righteous Anger Spilled Over at Police Rally
To the Editor:
"New York's Finest Mob" (editorial, Sept. 18) on the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association demonstration at City Hall makes it abundantly clear your normally liberal viewpoint does not extend to police officers.


A Breakthrough Judge: What She Always Wanted
The views from Pavia &amp; Harcourt's 12th-floor offices in midtown Manhattan are commanding, and the carpeted halls, in soft pastels, are adorned by modern Italian paintings.
But Sonia Sotomayor, a partner at the commercial litigation firm, was boxing up her things the other day to take another job.
The new one comes with a pay cut, scant carpeting, dingy lighting and a room without a view.
Ms. Sotomayor is thrilled.


Income Gap Thins Middle-Class Blacks
Two economic trends wedging rich from poor in the United States -- the rise of the two-income family and the loss of blue-collar jobs -- have widened the gulf between haves and have-nots in the black population, a new Census Bureau report shows.
The percentage of high-income black families more than doubled from 1967 to 1990, according to the new figures.
At the same time, the proportion of black families at the lowest income level grew by 50 percent.
In 1990, more than one black family in nine earned less than $5,000 a year.


Defaced 'Unity Wall' Is Repainted
The "Unity Wall" mural in Crown Heights, depicting scenes from Noah's Ark, interracial cooperation, and black and Jewish cultural symbols, is being replaced after being repeatedly defaced.
The mural, painted on the exterior of a building at President and Utica streets, was intended as a gesture of understanding and peace.
It was conceived after racial disturbances ripped through the Brooklyn neighborhood last summer after a car driven by a Hasidic man struck and killed a 7-year-old black child, Gavin Cato, near the intersection where the mural was later painted.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  GREATER CURRENCY RISKS
As the volume of currency trading has soared in recent years, the ability of the world's leading economies to defend their currencies on foreign markets has slipped markedly, according to figures released by the Fed and other central banks.
A1  DARKNESS IN SARAJEVO
Electricity and water are in short supply in the besieged Bosnian capital.
When dusk falls, thousands are cast back into a 19th-century world of candles and oil lamps.
Bathing is difficult, and contaminated drinking water is causing illness.
A10
Yugoslavia's leader is at odds with those who named him.
A10  MISSING AMERICANS: VIETNAM WAR
The Secretary of Defense when American troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in 1973 said the Pentagon believed that some prisoners might have remained in Laos, contrary to President Nixon's statement that all were heading home.
A8  MISSING AMERICANS: KOREAN WAR
Documents from Soviet archives say that Stalin advised Communist leaders in China and Korea to hold back some captured American pilots as bargaining chips.
A10
Fighting has intensified between Armenia and Azerbaijan.  A10  IN DEFENSE OF EUROPE
Prime Minister Major of Britain told the House of Commons that Britain was committed to closer European union.
But he said the details of monetary and political cooperation needed more deliberation.
A3  BONN DEFENDS ITSELF
The disarray in Europe reached the point that the German Government was forced to deny assertions that it is part of a secret campaign with Paris to push European union over their neighbors' objections.
A3  CLOCK TICKS ON IN BRAZIL
In a blow to President Collor's hopes of avoiding impeachment, Brazil's Supreme Court has denied him more time for his defense and ruled that the impeachment vote in congress may be open, not secret.
A5  ANOTHER MIDEAST ROUND ENDS
As the sixth round of peace talks ended in Washington, Israeli and Arab negotiators had inched a bit closer to one another but had made no substantive breakthroughs.
A6  IRAQ BENDS A BIT
Apparently softening Baghdad's position, the Iraqi Foreign Minister said his Government had no objection to a new United Nations' relief operation to help Kurds in northern Iraq get through the winter.
A6  THE $4 MILLION ANSWER IN JAPAN
Japan's most influential politician was said to be preparing an admission that he received $4 million in illegal contributions from a company linked to mobsters.
A9  Santo Domingo Journal: A Columbus celebration fizzles.
A4  National A12-20  CLINTON EXPANDS HEALTH PLAN
Bill Clinton expanded on his universal health care proposal, saying he would require private employers to provide health insurance and would have the Federal Government supplement health-care protection for the unemployed.
A1  A CAROLINA POLITICAL DIVIDE
Governor Clinton is making the Republicans work hard in North Carolina, where the crucial question is:Will Mr.
Bush be hurt more by a flat economy and a tax increase, or will Mr.
Clinton be hurt more by social issues and questions about his character.
A19  PROBLEMS FOR BUSH AD TEAM
Despite the high hopes for the first Republican attack ad, the campaign's revamped advertising team has inherited serious problems that could frustrate efforts of its Madison Avenue executives, who are better known for selling automobiles than Presidents.
A19  LATE TRIBUTE TO AN OUTSIDER
A woman who survived attacks from the Good Ol' Boy establishment and defeated six men in a Congressional primary in Georgia is now finding the checkbooks of that establishment opening to her.
A18  HARSH CRITIQUE OF NAVY INQUIRY
A Pentagon report says senior Navy officials deliberately undermined their inquiry into sexual abuse of women at a naval aviators convention to avoid negative publicity.
A1  BUSH ACCEPTS A TEST BAN
As part of a deal to win financing for an $8 billion research project in Texas, President Bush has accepted curbs on underground nuclear testing, and both houses passed the legislation last night.
A1  NEW AGE ON TRIAL
A divorce case involving a woman who says she is the medium for the spirit of a 35,000-year-old warrior has in ways put the entire New Age movement of the 1980's on trial.
A1  VOTE TO SAVE FAMILY-LEAVE BILL
The Senate voted to override President Bush's veto of the family-leave bill, but the House delayed action as the Democratic leadership took on the challenge of rounding up the votes it would need.
A16  BUSH AND ARMS SALES
A figure in the Iran-contra affair said he believed President Bush was more involved in the arms-for-hostages deals with Iran than has been acknowledged.
A12
MAYOR BRADLEY WON'T RUN AGAIN
Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles announced today that he would not seek a sixth term next year after two decades that have seen the transformation of Los Angeles into one of the world's major cities.
A12  BLACK INCOME GAP WIDENS
The gulf between haves and have-nots has grown wider in the black population, with fewer families earning middle-range incomes.A12  SON-PARENT DIVORCE TRIAL
A 12-year-old boy who wants to choose who will be his parents began a trial that could substantially alter the legal rights of children and broaden the debate over the structure of contemporary families.
A20  Kentucky court overturned sodomy law.
A13  Law Page B16  Metro Digest B1  RETHINKING HOMELESS POLICY
News analysis: Mayor Dinkins's new strategy on homelessness effectively acknowledges that his initial policy had the effect of encouraging many people to declare themselves homeless -- and that a new system was needed to insure only the truly homeless were served.
A1  Weekend C1-34  Sports B8-13  Obituaries A21-22  Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33  Editorials  The Perot tease.
George Bush's stall on debates.
The cemetery called East Timor.
Topics: No litmus test needed.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Hello again, suckers.
Anthony Lewis: The Bush Constitution.
Curtis Moore: Bush's nonsense on jobs and the environment.
Business Digest D1


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"AL-ANDALUS: THE ART OF ISLAMIC SPAIN," Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Executive Changes
AIR MIDWEST INC., Wichita, Kan., a unit of Mesa Airlines Inc., named Dick Paquette president and chief operating officer.
FOODMAKER INTERNATIONAL, San Diego, a unit of Foodmaker Inc., which operates and franchises Jack in the Box and Chi-Chi's restaurant chains, named Tony Wang president.


Man in the News; Persistence Pays Off: Jerrold Lewis Nadler
Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler's introduction to politics came when he was 7 years old and his father, "a dyed-in-the-wool Democrat," was a struggling poultry farmer in New Jersey.
"I started becoming politicized when I was growing up because there were two names that were never pronounced except with disdain," recalled Mr.
Nadler, who on Wednesday night won the Democratic nomination for Congress from a distinctly urban district that stretches from the Upper West Side to Coney Island.


Ciatti's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28


White House Called Ready to Cut Atom Tests to Keep Texas Project
Eager to save an $8 billion research project for politically important Texas, the White House signaled today that it would accept limits on nuclear testing, senior Congressional Republicans and Administration officials said.
The limits had been added to a bill that included money for the Texas project.
The Administration agreed to accept the new rules, which would eventually ban nuclear tests, after a day of intensive negotiations in which lawmakers added a provision that would allow resumption of testing under limited circumstances, the officials said.


Review/Photography; Storytelling With a Deceptive Simplicity
It is fitting that the retrospective of Duane Michals's work at the International Center of Photography, should come to town at the same time as the Rene Magritte show on view a few blocks down Fifth Avenue at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The photographer's admiration for the Belgian Surrealist master is well known, and in one of his most famous photographs the ghostly figure of Magritte, wearing a bowler hat, is double-exposed onto a blank canvas. (A companion show of Mr. Michals's recent work is at the Sidney Janis Gallery, 110 West 57th Street, through Oct. 10.)
In some of his work, Mr.
Michals has attempted to construct photographic equivalents of the perceptual puzzles posed by Magritte, or by the Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges.
Thus in "Someone Left a Message for You," four photographs show a pen writing, in backward script, the phrase "As you read this, I am entering your mind." Mr.
Michals pays homage to another influence, Lewis Carroll, in "Alice's Mirror," a seven-part sequence (not included here) that features gigantic eyeglasses and a mirror within a mirror within a mirror, all of which are crushed in the end by a giant's hand.


Parolee Arrested in Slaying While Held in Second Case
A 31-year-old convicted murderer, released from prison five months ago, was arrested on Wednesday and charged today in the slaying two weeks ago of a 38-year-old mother of two in the bedroom of her house here on the North Shore.
A neighbor of the victim, Patricia Van Nostrand, said she was relieved to hear of the arrest, but expressed anger on learning that the suspect was a parolee, convicted of killing a man in Queens in 1983 in an argument over a marijuana cigarette.


Classical Music in Review
Manhattan Chamber Orchestra Symphony Space


Patents; A Clay Supplement For Livestock Diets
The American Colloid Corporation of Arlington Heights, Ill., which says it is the world's biggest supplier of bentonite clay, this week patented a method of using the clay to neutralize toxins in animal feed that stunt the growth of cattle.
Feedgrains are often contaminated by fungus, particularly during droughts, and the fungus produces toxins that retard animals' growth, said Lawrie Beggs, agricultural sales manager for the company.


What Is a Healthy Weight?
Over the years weight charts have varied strikingly.
And there is no significant agreement among helath professionals about when a person is overweight or whether it is harmful to gain a little weight as you age.
When Consumer Reports asked 68 health professionals what they considered ideal weights, most of them preferred this chart, from the Government booklet "Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guideline for Americans." It acknowledges that people over 35 are likely to weigh more than people between the ages of 19 and 34.


Classical Music in Review
Ryan Brown Violinist Merkin Concert Hall


Scuffleburg Captures Rain-Soaked Pegasus
The wind was howling and the rain was pouring and it was 11:15 at night on the toteboard clock.
But Julie Krone came riding out of the mist aboard William Haggin Perry's long shot, Scuffleburg, to win the $500,000 Pegasus for 3-year-old colts at the Meadowlands tonight.
It was the second straight victory in the race for Perry, who won last year with Scan; the second in three years for Krone, and the fourth for the trainer Scotty Schulhofer in a career that led to the Racing Hall of Fame this summer.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Eighth Avenue will be closed between 23d Street and 29th Street from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Eighth Avenue Festival.
The west side of Broadway will be closed between 66th Street and 72d Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Broadway Mall Street Festival.
Fifth Avenue will be closed between 82d Street and 62d Street from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. for the Museum Mile Race.
Broadway will be closed between 41st Street and 23d Street from noon to 3 P.M. for the Korean Day Parade.
TOMORROW
Fifty-second Street will be closed between Lexington Avenue and Seventh Avenue from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the 52d Street Festival.
Ninth Avenue will be closed between 42d Street and 57th Street from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Ninth Avenue Fall Festival.
Madison Avenue will be closed between 41st Street and 26th Street beginning at noon for the Islamic Society Parade.
PARKING RULES
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City on Monday and Tuesday.


A Top Japanese Admits Guilt
Japan's most powerful politician, Shin Kanemaru, admitted to prosecutors today that he had accepted $4 million from the former head of a company linked to organized crime figures.
The admission, which was expected, was submitted in writing to prosecutors as part of a deal under which Mr.
Kanemaru will not have to answer questions about other allegations.
But it may be weeks or months before it is clear whether the 78-year-old Mr.
Kanemaru will be able to retain his post as head of the richest and largest faction in the governing Liberal Democratic Party or resign his seat in Parliament.


Magic Johnson Quits Panel on AIDS
Magic Johnson resigned today from the National Commission on AIDS, contending in a letter to President Bush that the Administration had "utterly ignored" the commission's recommendations and "dropped the ball" on AIDS.
Mr.
Johnson, the 33-year-old basketball star who announced last Nov. 7 that he was infected with the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS, was appointed to the commission by Mr.
Bush later that month.
Since then he has expressed growing disappointment with the Administration's AIDS programs, saying that the Administration had ignored or opposed the commission's proposals.


Senate Rejects Bush's Plan On Debt-Reduction Checkoff
After a debate colored by Presidential politics, the Senate voted overwhelmingly today to kill a campaign proposal offered by President Bush to permit taxpayers to earmark up to 10 percent of their income tax payment to reducing the national debt.
The measure, introduced by Senator Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, was one of a medley of amendments offered today to a $31 billion tax bill moving through the Senate.
The Smith amendment would have mandated that Federal spending be slashed by the same amount as the total debt payments designated by taxpayers.


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING  Curtis Beats Conner  It had been billed as a contest between D. C. and D. C. -- Dennis Conner and Dave Curtis -- and that's how it ended yesterday.
Curtis, a 46-year-old sailmaker from Marblehead, Mass., beat Conner, the 50-year-old San Diego America's Cup helmsman, in the final race of the I.B.M./Etchells world championship.
Sixty-six 30-foot Etchells competed in the six-race regatta, which was organized by the Larchmont Yacht Club and sailed on Long Island Sound.
Conner, who won the 1991 Etchells world championship, placed fourth in this year's series with 61 points.
In second place was Larry Creaser of Nova Scotia, with 41 points, and third was Larry Klein of San Diego, with 48.7 points.
The victory for Curtis, with 34 points, marked his seventh world championship.
GOLF  Daly Takes the Lead  Warmer temperatures and John Daly's growing familiarity with the En-Joie Golf Club course helped produce a five-under-par 66 yesterday, and that moved Daly into the lead of the $800,000 B.C.
Open in Endicott, N.Y., after two rounds.
Daly, making his first appearance in the tournament and playing the course for just the third time, played a faultless round with five birdies that left him at nine-under-par 133 after 36 holes.
Phil Mickelson helped create a three-way tie for second by coming through with the tournament's best round, an eight-under-par 63.
Joining Mickelson one stroke behind Daly were the 1990 champion, Nolan Henke, and the first-round leader, Ken Green. (AP)
Douglass Leads Seniors: Dale Douglass shot a four-under-par 68 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead after the first round of the Senior Tour's $800,000 Nationwide Championship in Alpharetta, Ga.
The 56-year-old Douglass had six birdies and overcame his only mistake -- a double-bogey on the second hole -- to take the lead on the par-72, 6,781-yard Country Club of the South course.
Tied at 69 were George Archer, Don Bies, John Paul Cain and Bob Brue as 21 players in the field of 78 shot par or better on a course soggy from an all-day rain on Thursday.
Brue had a chance to tie for the lead, but had a bogey on the 18th hole, missing a five-footer for par. (AP)
Faldo Tied for Lead in Belgium: Nick Faldo birdied five of the last seven holes and shot a four-under-par 67 yesterday to tie his fellow Englishman Barry Lane for the second-round lead in the Belgian Open in Knokke, at 136.
Lane shot his second straight 68.
Ian Woosnam fell out of first place when he shot a 70.
He trails by one stroke.
Faldo is all but assured of setting a one-season record for earnings on the European PGA Tour.
He needs only to finish in the top 49 for that distinction.
Faldo has won $981,824 this year, $5,000 short of the record set in 1990 by Woosnam. (AP)
King in Tie With Stacy: Betsy King had a birdie-eagle-birdie run on the front nine yesterday en route to two-under-par 70 and a share of the second-round lead in the Los Coyotes L.P.G.A.
Classic in Buena Park, Calif.
King, who began the round at four under, is tied with Hollis Stacy, who shot 71 yesterday, with a total of six-under 138.
The first-round leader, Tani Tatum, and Tracy Kerdyk were one back at 139.
Tatum shot a 73 and Kerdyk had a 71.
King began her birdie-eagle-birdie run on No. 2 to get to eight under.
She then bogeyed Nos. 5 and 7 before a birdie at No. 8 put her at seven under. (AP)


3,000 on Strike at G.M. Plant; 2d Labor Dispute in a Month
About 3,000 workers walked off their jobs today at a General Motors Corporation plant in Lansing, Mich.
The striking workers, members of the United Automobile Workers union, build bodies for the Oldsmobile Achieva, Buick Skylark and Pontiac Grand Am models.
An additional 4,200 G.M. workers in Lansing, who make chassis for the cars, were idled shortly thereafter.


Taiwanese Opera
The Ho Lo Taiwanese Opera Troupe is to present "The Wrong Verdict" at 7:30 tonight and at 2 P.M. tomorrow at the Taipei Theater, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street, midtown Manhattan.
Taiwanese opera, or ko tsai hsi (drama of songs), combines Taiwanese theater and folk songs with elements of Beijing Opera and Western set design.
Tickets are $8; $5 for the elderly and students.
Information: (212) 373-1850.


Review/Film Festival; Love in a Dance Palace: Cinderella Wins Prince
Inside the bright, brassy confines of an Australian dance palace, a kitschy melodrama unfolds.
It is the story of Scott (Paul Mercurio), a contender for the Pan-Pacific dance trophy who may suddenly have sabotaged his chances by daring to do steps of his own, and Fran (Tara Morice), the homely, spunky girl who dreams of becoming Scott's partner.
It is a tale of scheming for the trophy, of a corrupt contest official (who hawks his own educational video, titled "Dance to Win"), and of Scott's ambitious parents, who hope their son's triumph can make up for their own broken dreams.
Baz Luhrmann's Australian film "Strictly Ballroom" is, in short, pure corn.
Those who wonder whether Fran will be beautiful once she takes off her glasses are not approaching Mr.
Luhrmann's material with the lightheartedness it deserves.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; Awaiting Perot's Revival, Utah Faithful Say He 'Never Died'
The fervor of Ross Perot's volunteers as they await his hustings revival in their campaign office here is reminiscent of the folk song of the diehard union workers who dreamt they saw Joe Hill and spread the leader's new gospel: " 'I never died,' said he."
"Well, Mr. Perot never declared, so how can he have dropped out?" said Marie-Rose George, Utah coordinator for the Perot Presidential campaign, a mercurial movement that, she and her fellow volunteers now know with unyielding certainty, he never really quit and will, in any event, soon be rejoining.
Dreams of the Round Table
As Mrs.
George prepared to head to Dallas and a roundtable showdown meeting Monday with Mr.
Perot and the other 49 state coordinators, ritual was in the air.
She massed fresh fax demands and petition pleadings and she imagined the "great big table" in Dallas where he would consult them and ponder their advisements, as if a slave to their plea to come back and go for it.


Romanian Gypsies Are Skeptical About Germany's Financial Help
Romanian Gypsy leaders have reacted skeptically to the German Government's offer of about $20 million to reintegrate Romanian citizens being deported from Germany.
The offer was announced Thursday in Bucharest after representatives of the two Governments signed a treaty providing for the deportation of Romanians living illegally in Germany.


INSIDE
Jersey City Lures 1,000 Jobs
Jersey City persuaded a subsidiary of the First Chicago Corporation to relocate in a battle showing governments' desperation for jobs.
Page 23.
Dioxin Threat, Revised
Government scientists say that dioxin is not a cancer threat to most people but that animals suffer harm from very small doses.
Page 9.
De Klerk to Meet Mandela
South Africa began freeing prisoners, clearing the way for the President to meet with Nelson Mandela.
Page 3.
On the Way to Mars
An American spacecraft lifted off to map Mars and to seek evidence that life might have existed there.
Page 5.
Johnson Quits AIDS Panel
Magic Johnson left the National Commission on AIDS, calling its work a disappointment.
Page 5.
Russia Lifts Travel Curbs
Russia and the United States agree to lift travel restrictions on journalists and business people.
Page 4.


PRICE TAG: A Household Tool Kit


When Polls Swing, Don't Blame Fickle Voters
To the Editor:
Several recent items in The Times have commented on the variability in the results of recent Presidential preference polls, for example, your Sept. 7 front-page article includes the statement that "this year has been notable for wild swings in the polls, and the surveys of the past few weeks suggest that the trend is continuing."


Is the Novel Dying? Hope and Despair From Eight Who Should Know
The novel is alive and well, but subject to occasional spells of depression about its future.
That, more or less, was the majority opinion among eight practitioners of the art, who discussed "The Death of the Novel, the Life of the Novel" on Thursday evening at Town Hall in midtown Manhattan.
The event, organized by the Lannan Foundation, a private arts organization based in Los Angeles, brought together Harold Brodkey, Michael Cunningham, Oscar Hijuelos, Norman Mailer, Paule Marshall, Norman Rush, Mona Simpson and Barbara Probst Solomon.
They submitted to almost painfully sensitive and complex questioning by Michael Silver blatt, the host of "Bookworm," a weekly interview program on radio in southern California.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
CAN A SMILE HELP TO CURE?
If you smile at patients, help them read their own charts, let them sleep all night without waking them up for tests, provide a kitchen where they can make a sandwich or brew a cup of tea -- in other words, if you treat each patient like a person rather than an illness -- will they get better faster?
That is the question behind a $2 million experiment at Beth Israel Hospital.
Page 1.
NO RAISES FOR CHURCH EMPLOYEES
The Archdiocese of New York, struggling to control rising costs, has frozen the salaries of 1,600 lay employees and the monthly stipends of 1,500 priests.
The freeze is the latest of a series of steps taken by the archdiocese to cut its expenses, including closing schools and cutting the work force of Catholic Charities.
Page 25.
SUSPECT SAID TO HAVE BLOODY KNIFE
The police officer who arrested the black teen-ager accused of fatally stabbing a rabbinical scholar in Crown Heights last summer told a jury how he found a bloodied knife and dollar bills in the suspect's pocket.
In cross-examination, the defendant's lawyer raised questions about the credibility of the police work done that night.
Page 25.
TWO GAY TEACHERS SPEAK OUT
Two gay teachers publicly criticized a school board in Queens for refusing to let teachers use a curriculum guide that urges children to respect and appreciate gay people.
The teachers said the board's action created an atmosphere intolerance in schools.
Page 25.
POST OFFICES FOR A NEW ERA
After eons of complaints and jokes about numbingly long lines ending at short-tempered clerks, the United States Postal Service is trying to remake its image as a behemoth of a bureaucracy.
And perhaps nowhere has that idea been taken to such lengths as in the Queens division, which also includes Brooklyn, Staten Island and part of Nassau County.
Page 24.
REGION
A BLOW TO LAW ON HATE CRIMES
A State Superior Court judge in New Jersey declared an important section of the state's two-year-old hate-crimes law unconstitutional on free speech grounds.
The ruling makes New Jersey the latest government to run into legal trouble because of efforts to construe hate speech as a form of illegal conduct.
Page 26.
A LOSING BATTLE AGAINST THE SEA
Wind-whipped waves, 10 to 15 feet high, pounded into shore all day in the New Jersey shore town of Sea Girt.
And Mayor William MacInnes said that no matter what this storm did, coast towns would someday lose their unrelenting battle with the sea -- unless they got aid from the state or Federal government.
Page 26.
ABRAMS HITS THE STUMP
Ending a week and a half of self-imposed isolation, Robert Abrams finally took up a microphone to ask for votes in his race against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York.
Page 24.  3 WORKERS KILLED ON TURNPIKE
Three construction workers were killed and two others injured when a truck crashed through a wooden barrier while the men were working on the New Jersey Turnpike in Bayonne.
Page 26.
Traffic Alert Page 25.


No Headline
I just thought she forgot about me. -- GREGORY KINGSLEY, 12 years old, referring to his natural mother.  [ 5:2. ]


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 12 on Sister Joseph Maria Scaglione, director of the Grace Institute in Manhattan, misidentified her Roman Catholic order.
The order, which runs the institute, is the Sisters of Charity, not the Sisters of Mercy.


Court Grants Boy Wish to Select His Parents
Gregory Kingsley, the determined 12-year-old boy who went to court to change his parents, realized his goal today when a juvenile court judge here ended the parental rights of his natural mother and allowed the boy's foster parents to adopt him.
The ruling by Thomas S. Kirk, a state circuit court judge, is believed to be the first time in which family rights were ended based on a legal action brought by a child.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Wednesday about the trial of David Hampton, the impostor and con artist who is fighting charges of aggravated harassment against the playwright John Guare, misstated Mr.
Hampton's age.
He is 28 years old.


Conviction in Case Of Bogus Contracts
A New Jersey man was convicted by a Federal jury in Manhattan yesterday of orchestrating an elaborate scheme to defraud investors of more than $15 million, using fabricated contracts that indicated he provided corporations with tickets and travel to professional sports events.
The man, Jeffrey S. Burd, 33 years old, of Edison, was convicted in Federal District Court on 12 counts of wire fraud, said Otto G. Obermaier, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.


Fannie Mae Opposes Mortgage Legislation
The Federal National Mortgage Association notified the House Banking Committee today that it opposed a compromise bill to regulate mortgage guarantees.
The opposition of the politically powerful company threatens to scuttle the legislation, which has been painstakingly drafted over the last three years by members of Congress who want to insure that Fannie Mae never seeks a Federal bailout the way savings and loan institutions have.
Officials at Fannie Mae, a Government-sponsored, publicly traded company that buys and guarantees mortgages, have consistently said that this fear is groundless.


Analyzing End-of-Line Lines at The New Yorker
SOME people we know at The New Yorker have been calling our attention to the current issue -- the last one produced under the editorship of Robert Gottlieb -- saying their own deconstructive analyses reveal cryptic allusions to the journalistic transition going on at the magazine.
For all we know they may be right.
The most significant thing, they say, is that nowhere in the 120 pages did Mr.
Gottlieb include a farewell like the one written by William Shawn, his predecessor, or like the goodbye that Tina Brown, his successor, wrote when she recently left Vanity Fair.


Arrest Procedures in Stabbing Questioned
The police officer who arrested the black teen-ager accused of fatally stabbing a rabbinical scholar in Crown Heights last summer told a jury yesterday how he found a bloodied folding knife and blood-stained dollar bills in the suspect's pocket.
In his second day of testimony in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, the officer, Mark Hoppe of the 71st Precinct, also pointed out blood stains on the blue jeans the youth wore that night.
And he told of chasing the suspect, Lemrick Nelson Jr., down a street, over a fence and then taking him over to be identified by the victim, Yankel Rosenbaum.


Dual Effort To Survive By GlenFed
GlenFed Inc., owner of Glendale Federal Bank in Glendale, Calif., the nation's fifth-largest savings and loan association, is fighting for its life.
Confronted by a California economy on the ropes and Federal regulators embarrassed by their failure to prevent widespread collapses in the savings industry, GlenFed is battling on two fronts.


Franc Defended, but the Battle May Go On
France and Germany appeared today to have won the week's battle against the currency markets to maintain the value of the franc, providing Europe an opportunity to salvage what is left of its monetary system.
The franc could still come under renewed pressure next week, and traders and analysts were reluctant to say that the currency crisis that has roiled European politics and economic policy was over.


Patents; Keeping Clouds Out Of Chilled Beer
Chemists at a Pennsylvania chemical company have developed a composition to further reduce "chill haze" in beer, a cloudiness that bothers some consumers and occurs when malt proteins in the beer are rapidly cooled.
Breweries already chill-proof standard beers by adding tannic acid, enzymes or silica gels to remove the proteins during production.
But heavy, high-malt brews still pose difficulties, said Reinhard H. Witt, supervisor of process research at the PQ Corporation in Valley Forge.
The company has long been a supplier of chemicals using silica, including the gels used by some beer companies.


The Stone Affair, Deconstructed
Always let the K.G.B. pick up the lunch tab or risk posthumous vilification.
That is seemingly the moral in the sad controversy over I. F. Stone, the left-wing Washington journalist who died in 1989.
Writing in the journal Human Events on June 5, Herbert Romerstein quoted a former K.G.B. agent, Oleg Kalugin, as saying that a well-known American journalist had been a Soviet agent.
The journalist, according to Mr.
Kalugin, had stopped taking K.G.B. money only after the 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.


Willard F. Rockwell Jr., 78, Head Of Family's Aerospace Company
Willard F. Rockwell Jr., who inherited his father's companies and expanded them into a modern aerospace conglomerate, the Rockwell International Corporation, died Thursday at his home in Pittsburgh.
He was 78 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


De Klerk Freeing Prisoners; Talks Today
The South African Government today began the release of hundreds of prisoners convicted of major crimes in the guerrilla war against apartheid, clearing the way for a meeting Saturday of the country's top black and white leaders.
The meeting between President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, their first since May, is to concentrate on the issue of violence.


The Gantlet Outside Sarajevo
The final leg of the trip into the Bosnian capital takes only minutes.
But most who make the dash past snipers will never forget it.
Page 2.


It's Leahy! But There's No Kicker to the Story
Pat Leahy showed up at the Jets' camp today, but the recently retired place-kicker was not there by invitation.
He wore a warm-up jacket, but only because there was an autumn chill in the air.
"I do kind of miss it, but I knew the time was up," said Leahy, who is in the New York area this weekend to attend a charity dinner.
"It was strange at first, but it was also something that I was prepared for, too. I think everybody was prepared and glad that we're staying now in one spot."


Bonds Is, Of Course, A Key to Victory
It is 5:40 P.M. at Three Rivers Stadium.
Barry Bonds stands at the plate, crashing baseball after baseball into the multiple decks in right field.
It's a sight the National League has seen too much of and too little of in 1992.
Clubs have crafted entire game plans to prevent Bonds from beating them.
He has had the bat taken out of his hands again and again.
His 31 intentional walks this season are the most in the majors.
His 123 walks are 31 more than anyone else in the National League.


Sports of The Times; N.C.A.A.'s Season of Discontent
FROM now until June, intercollegiate athletics will be in full bloom, with all the pageantry that has come to represent the industry.
This is also the season when the investigative arm of the National Collegiate Athletic Association embarks on its annual campaign of cops and robbers, tracking down reports of misdeeds and questionable maneuvers by representatives of ambitious athletic departments.
The college football season is barely four weeks old and word is already circulating that Auburn University may soon be receiving a preliminary letter of inquiry from the N.C.A.A. concerning the university's football program.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Vetoes Abortion Bill And Backs Federal Pay Cut
President Bush announced two legislative actions this evening, vetoing a bill that would have permitted abortion counseling in federally financed clinics and asking Congress to approve a pay cut for the highest paid Federal employees, including the President.
The legislative documents were hurriedly issued by the White House press office as the President was preparing to leave here after a day of campaigning.
Both announcements were made after the network news programs had already been prepared.
The hour of disclosure assured that they would receive minimum press exposure, but in each case it was for a different reason.


A Strained Relationship: Congress and the Capital
On Thursday evening, Congress voted to force the District of Columbia to hold a citywide referendum on the death penalty.
Six hours earlier, the lawmakers defeated a measure to provide financing for a District law that would enable unmarried city workers, including homosexual couples, to obtain health insurance covering their partners.


Review/Music; Masur Conducts Bruckner Ninth
The current subscription program of the New York Philharmonic, conducted by Kurt Masur, begins with a calculated bang and ends with an eloquent whimper.
Tobias Picker's brief "BANG!" for piano and orchestra, one of the orchestra's 150th-anniversary commissions, opens the concert, fanfarelike.
For all its imposing sonorous weight, the work is a trifle, based, the composer says, on the image of the toy gun that silently emits an unfolding banner reading "BANG!" The music is appropriately arresting, with a full, strident orchestral blare interrupted for a time by the emaciated sound of a celesta.


Kohl Says Monetary Line Aids Unity
Chancellor Helmut Kohl today rejected attempts to blame German economic and monetary policy for the recent turmoil on European currency markets and said he would press for rapid political and economic union in the European Community.
"Germany is our fatherland; Europe is our future," Mr.
Kohl told the German Parliament.
His remarks only obliquely acknowledged the concern about being overwhelmed by Germany that underlay much of the opposition to the treaty on European Community monetary and political union, which was narrowly supported in a referendum in France on Sunday.


U.S. Imposes New De-Icing Rules To Lower Risk of Plane Accidents
Responding to a crash last March at La Guardia Airport in New York in which 27 people were killed, the Federal Aviation Administration today imposed new rules intended to minimize the risk of accidents caused by snow and ice that build up on the wings of jetliners.
The F.A.A.'s action reflected a change in approach to the hazard of ice on wings.
The agency has now established guidelines on how long a plane can sit in freezing precipitation after its wings are washed down with antifreeze.
In the past, pilots were simply forbidden to take off when ice, snow or frost was visible on their wings.


Sousa Concert Is Moved
A daylong concert today in Plainfield, N.J., to commemorate the Sousa Band centennial has been moved from Green Brook Park to Plainfield High School.
The school is at 950 Park Avenue, two miles south of Route 22 at the Somerset Street exit.
The number to call for information is (908) 756-5343.


Connors Wins the Battle of the Paydays
The handicap was not enough, nor was Martina Navratilova.
Jimmy Connors won a straight-set victory over Navratilova, 7-5, 6-2, in an intergender, made-for-pay-television match outdoors at Caesars Palace tonight.


Mayor Says Shift Possible On Oversight For Police
Mayor David N. Dinkins indicated a willingness yesterday to compromise with Council leaders on a crucial point in the debate over how to structure a new independent agency to investigate police misconduct.
But he and Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone remain far apart on who should select the members of the panel.
Speaking at a City Club luncheon, Mr.
Dinkins said he would consider mandating that some of the 13 members of the proposed review board have law-enforcement experience.


Rallies Put U.S. In Control In the Cup
It was not a bravura beginning for either of them, but the two singles players from the United States persevered and transformed uncertain starts into the most felicitous of endings to the first day of the Davis Cup semifinal.
The way Jim Courier saw it, he barely "squeaked through" his match against the inexperienced Nicklas Kulti in the first match between the United States and Sweden tonight on the clay court at the Target Center.
But Courier clamped down on Kulti at the right moments, thrice breaking him as he served to end sets, in the 4-6, 7-6 (7-1), 6-3, 7-5 victory that gave the United States the opener it craved.
"In Davis Cup everything revolves around momentum, and I hope this gave us some," said Courier, who raced into the waiting arms of teammate John McEnroe to celebrate after the 3-hour-41-minute workout.
The momentum held up.
In the evening's second match, Andre Agassi, now 17-4 in Davis Cup, also needed to recover from a first-set deficit, and in his case, the opponent was Sweden's centerpiece, top-ranked Stefan Edberg.
But Agassi's riveting passes and buckshot service returns eventually earned him a 5-7, 6-3, 7-6 (7-1), 6-3 victory and allowed the United States a commanding 2-0 lead in this three-of-five-match competition. 'I Did Pull It Together'
"Too bad that I lost the first set, but I did pull it together," said Agassi, who has won eight consecutive Davis Cup matches.
"I felt like it could go either way. He's like nobody else at the net."
Agassi, ranked No. 6 in the world, had to correct a 4-2 deficit in the third set but was helped along by Edberg's double faults and his own ability to scramble out of a 0-40 deficit in the eigth game.
He pushed the set to a tie breaker, which he completely dominated.
He then took a 2-0 lead in the final set when Edberg doublefaulted at break point and, as is Agassi's custom, he made certain to exploit his position as ringleader.
Courier was shaky in the opening set, and Kulti, using the uninhibited strokes of a confirmed but carefree underdog, wisely seized the opportunity right from the first game.
The 21-year-old Swede broke Courier, held his own serve for a 2-0 lead, and then broke him again in the seventh game.
But when Kulti, 0-2 against Courier in their two previous meetings, stepped up to serve for the set at 5-2, the world's No. 1 player showed signs that he might be inclined to assert himself.
Courier saved a set point with a forehand service return that slammed the net and then slipped across it, and broke Kulti with a forehand blast to the baseline.
The 22-year-old Floridian held serve in the ninth game, but Kulti sharpened up on his second chance to serve out the set, and ended it with an ace. 'I Got the Job Done'
"That was probably about as good as he can play, with the exception of a few crucial times when he let me back in," said Courier.
"I didn't expect it to be like that, but the bottom line is, I got the job done."
Concern was the dominant emotion on Courier's face in the second set, especially when Kulti ripped a backhand down the line to break Courier for a 3-2 lead.
Untantalizing visions of a 1-4 Davis Cup record, not to mention an upset by a 71st-ranked player, began to surface.
But Courier recomposed himself and nullified Kulti's edge when he served for the set.
Four unforced errors and a double fault from Kulti in the ensuing tie breaker helped Courier deadlock the match at one set apiece.
Finally the Yankee hankies, the flag-strewn rally handkerchiefs that were distributed to fans before the match, began to wave, but Courier was far from being in control.
"It was in doubt the whole match," Courier said.
"I was always coming from behind, and any time you're down a break, you're in trouble."
He rapped out a quick break in the first game of the third set and preserved his frontrunner status, but Kultialmost did the same thing in the fourth set.
The Swede was on the verge of leveling the contest at two sets apiece when, for the third time in this match, he faltered when given a chance to serve out a set.
Courier held for 6-5 and then pulverized Kulti with pressure in the next game, with the Swede surrendered his serve without winning a point.
MATCH POINTS
JIM COURIER rushed off the court for a restorative icing session just in case JOHN McENROE, who has been feeling woozy, requires a replacement in Saturday's doubles.
Courier informed Captain TOM GORMAN that he'd like to fill in for McEnroe if needed.
Unlike McEnroe, Courier has actually partnered with PETE SAMPRAS before.
Courier and Sampras won the 1989 Italian Open doubles together on clay, and the duo recently defeated Sweden's Davis Cup duo, STEFAN EDBERG and ANDERS JARRYD on red clay in the first round of the Barcelona Olympics.


Classical Music in Review
Mikhail Yanovitsky and Edith Chen Pianists Paul Recital Hall Juilliard School


CHRONICLE
There are many ways to tell the story of a person's life.
In the case of EUGENE R. SCANLAN, who rose from the kitchen of the Waldorf-Astoria to its executive suite and was once executive chef at the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami Beach, it will be done Tuesday evening with food.
Mr.
Scanlan, a former vice president of the Waldorf-Astoria, who is now general manager of the Union Club, will be honored for 50 years in the business by the hospitality and tourism division of the Cardinal's Committee of the Laity of the Archdiocese of New York.
The committee is the secular fund-raising branch of the archdiocese.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.15
5.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.79
2.88
5.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.82
2.91
5.14
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.91
5.99
7.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.41
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.40
8.94
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.41
6.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Unhealthy Price Controls
Doctors are shocked that even the American College of Physicians now believes Government should limit doctors' fees and hospital rates.
Price controls, the organization contends in a health care plan it has just released, aren't desirable.
But they're less horrible than the alternative -- intrusive oversight by insurance companies and health maintenance organizations.
A cynic might suppose that the physicians know they'd do better under Government rate-setting, which they could evade or manipulate, than under tightly supervised H.M.O.'s.
But doctors who believe the plan would allow them to evade H.M.O.'s are in for another shock.
This plan would propel H.M.O. growth.


Franklin J. Lunding Dies at 86; Built the Jewel Food-Store Chain
Franklin Jerome Lunding, who built a giant food-store chain and who was twice chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, died Thursday at Naples Community Hospital in Naples, Fla.
A former resident of Winnetka, Ill., he was 86 years old and had retired to Naples.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Hospital Study Tests Benefits In Giving Comfort With Care
If you smile at patients, help them read their charts, let them sleep all night without waking them up for tests, provide a kitchen where they can make a sandwich or brew a cup of tea -- in other words, if you treat each patient like a person rather than an illness -- will they get better faster?
That is the question behind a $2 million experiment being conducted on the sixth floor of Beth Israel Medical Center at 16th Street and First Avenue.
An entire hospital floor has been completely renovated so it looks warm and welcoming to patients with every variety of illness, and a staff of 54 is being retrained to make hospital stays more comfortable and less stressful.


A Summit Conference Between Nets and Mills
Before the Nets make a decision on the Detroit Pistons offer sheet signed by power forward TERRY MILLS, General Manager WILLIS REED plans to meet with Mills in Detroit on Monday.
The Pistons signed Mills to a five-year, $9.5 million offer sheet this month and the Nets have until 5 P.M.
Wednesday to match the offer or lose him to Detroit.
The contract includes a $2 million signing bonus, a first-year salary of $937,400 and a $5.5 million loan.
Before the Nets invest that kind of money, Reed wants to determine whether Mills will be motivated if the Nets force him to return.
Mills grew up in suburban Detroit and said last week that he would prefer to play with the Pistons.


Your Money; Preaching Gospel of ESOP's For Family-Owned Business
ALTHOUGH her official title at the Chemical Bank is vice president, structured finance, Deborah P. Baker takes obvious delight in the one bestowed on her by clients and colleagues -- "the ESOP lady."
Ms.
Baker preaches the gospel of employee stock ownership plans, or ESOP's, to privately owned businesses throughout the Northeast as a way to solve several problems at once, while minimizing taxes for the families who own the businesses.


Robert Abrams Hits the Campaign Trail


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days: President Bush MONDAY: 7 A.M.
ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," taxes.
WEDNESDAY: 7 A.M.
ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," crime.
FRIDAY: 7 A.M.
ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," health care.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Says He's Not Leaning Left but Taking a New 'Third Way'
Seeking to counter this week's Republican offensive portraying him as a leftist, tax-mad, big-government liberal, Bill Clinton today began an effort to once more position himself as a "third way" Democrat, neither of the left nor the right.
At the same time, the Democratic Presidential nominee sought to turn President Bush's attack against him, depicting his opponent as a "do-nothing" President who is "out of touch, out of ideas and out of time," and who clings to the "stale, failed rhetoric of the past."


U.S. Says 3,000 May Have Died In Serbian-Run Detention Camps
The United States has obtained reliable information that "as many as 3,000" Muslim men, women and children were killed in May and June at Serbian-run detention camps near the Bosnian town of Brcko, several senior Administration officials said today.
Reports of mass killings in Bosnia have been circulating since July, but Administration officials said that this was the first time that they had developed independent information corroborating such reports.


Corrections
A brief theater review on Wednesday about "The Mystery of Anna O" misstated the name of the actress who played the roles of Stephanie Gardner and Pappenheim.
She is C. C. Loveheart.


Patchwork Israeli Coalition Suddenly Looks Frail
The political coalition that forms Israel's new Government looked suddenly wobbly today, and an angry Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin scrambled to keep the situation from turning into a full crisis.
There was no sign that the Government was about to collapse, if only because its senior officials are just getting used to power and are unlikely to surrender it after 10 weeks in office.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  SERBS MAY HAVE KILLED 3,000
The United States has obtained reliable information that as many as 3,000 Muslim men, women and children were killed at Serbian-run detention camps near the Bosnian town of Brcko, officials said.  1  The journey to Bosnia's capital is like a passage through hell.  2  SOUTH AFRICA FREES CAPTIVES
The South African Government began the release of hundreds of prisoners convicted of major crimes in the guerrilla war against apartheid.
The move clears the way for a meeting today between President de Klerk and Nelson Mandela.  3  KOHL DEFENDS 'FATHERLAND'
Chancellor Kohl rejected attempts to blame Germany's monetary policy for the recent turmoil on European currency markets.
He said he would continue to champion rapid union for the European Community.  3  Gypsies react skeptically to Germany's offer of aid to deportees.  3  WARNING TO THE KHMER ROUGE
The United Nations Security Council's permanent members warned the Khmer Rouge that they would push ahead with their peace plan for Cambodia without the faction if it continued to refuse to disarm.  4  ON TO RUSSIA'S OUTER REACHES
Discarding another vestige of the cold war, Russia and the United States said they were lifting restrictions on travel by each other's journalists and business people.  4  Zelenogorsk Journal: Choosing profit over the pristine.  4  DAMAGE CONTROL IN ISRAEL
Prime Minister Rabin scrambled to keep a dispute over his Education Minister's blunt remarks from turning into a full-blown crisis.  4  National 5-10  WOOING PEROT'S PARTISANS
Responding to broad hints that Ross Perot will soon re-enter the Presidential race, President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton said they would send emissaries to Dallas on Monday to try to convince the Texas billionaire's followers that their candidate is the best alternative to a Perot candidacy.  1  THE TRUE ARKANSAS
A few days of meandering through Arkansas' back roads produces a picture far more interesting than either the Republican view of Arkansas as a left-in-the ditch backwater or Mr.
Clinton's portrayal of Arkansas as plucky, emergent Sunbelt growth state.  7  Gov.
Clinton portrays himself as neither of the right or the left.  7  Mr.
Bush calls his opponent bad for business.  6  Sticking to Ross Perot in Utah.  6  BUSH AND IRAN ARMS SALES
A former National Security Council aide says George Bush knew in 1986 that the United States was trading arms to Iran in exchange for the release of hostages.
The assertion contradicts Mr.
Bush's statements that he knew of the arms sales but not of their connection to the hostages.  1  DEAL ON SUPERCOLLIDER
President Bush's top political advisers overrode objections from his national security aides to produce a deal in which the White House dropped its opposition to a nuclear test ban in order to save an $8 billion research project in Texas, officials said.  1  CALIFORNIA GAY RIGHTS BILL
The California Governor signed into law a measure that protects homosexuals against job discrimination, at a time when the debate over gay rights looms large in national politics.  1  RULING IN CHILD 'DIVORCE'
The 12-year-old boy who went to court to change his parents realized his goal when a Florida juvenile court judge ended the parental rights of his birth mother and allowed the boy's foster parents to adopt him.  1  ATHLETE QUITS AIDS PANEL
Magic Johnson resigned from the National Commission on AIDS, saying the White House had ignored the panel's recommendations and had "dropped the ball" on AIDS.  5  BOUND FOR MARS
The Mars Observer, the first American spacecraft headed for Mars in 17 years, was launched yesterday on a planned 11-month, 450-million-mile voyage to map the planet and look for evidence that life might have once existed there.  5  NEW FINDINGS ON DIOXIN
A Federal panel concluded that dioxin was not a large-scale cancer threat except to people exposed to unusually high levels of the toxic compound, but added that the latest research vividly showed that even minute levels of dioxin caused biological havoc among wildlife.  9  The F.A.A. imposes new rules on airplane ice.  5  Beliefs: The missionary zeal of Robert Schuller.  10  Metro Digest 23  ARE HAPPIER PATIENTS HEALTHIER?
If hospital stays are made more comfortable and less stressful for patients, will the patients recover faster?
Don't make it a Mount Everest.
The brew-it-yourself cappuccino.
Compact total-body exerciser.
Price Tag: A household tool kit.
Arts/Entertainment 11-16  Eight novelists debate their art.  11  Film: "Autumn Moon." 12  "The Crying Game." 12  "Taking the Pulse." 11  "Strictly Ballroom." 12  "And Life Goes On." 13  Music: Midori and Masur.  11  Classical reviews.  14  Obituaries 27  Willard F. Rockwell Jr., head of giant aerospace conglomerate.
Franklin J. Lunding; built the Jewel food-store chain.
Walter Miller, lawyer and member of civic committees.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  What about the P.O.W. families?
Unhealthy price controls.
Keep Magic in the fight.
The Stone affair, deconstructed.
Letters  Russell Baker: A few useless tears.
Flora Lewis: Europe stumbles, for now.
Yael Dayan: A cold war relic in the Negev?
Paul Wilkes: Priests who prey.
Fred Jerome: Bad news for science news.


Corrections
An obituary article on Thursday about Gen.
James A. Van Fleet misstated the site of his D-day landing in Normandy.
The landing, in which the general's skills were credited with keeping casualties relatively light, was at Utah Beach, not Omaha Beach.


Turkey Acts Lawfully on Kurd Violence
To the Editor:
To eliminate any misunderstanding your Sept. 7 news article on Turkey may have created, let me say that the insurgent Kurdish Workers Party, known as P.K.K., is a Marxist terrorist organization that has been classified as such by Western countries, including the United States.
In recent years more than 2,000 people have fallen victim to this organization's indiscriminate violence.


Review/Film Festival; An Irish Terrorist in Human Terms
Neil Jordan, the Irish writer and director of "The Company of Wolves" (1985), "Mona Lisa" (1986) and "The Miracle" (1991), is one of a kind.
He makes melodramas that are often very funny, fantasies that are common-sensical and moral fables that are perverse.
At heart, he is a madly unreconstructed romantic.
In his view, the power of love can work miracles of a kind that would send Freud back to his own couch.
All of these things are evident in Mr.
Jordan's elegant new film, "The Crying Game," which will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 9:30 and tomorrow at 4:15 P.M.


Russia Ends Curb on Travel For Business or Journalism
Discarding another vestige of the cold war, Russia and the United States announced today the lifting of all restrictions on travel by each other's journalists and business people.
In effect, the agreement made it possible for American reporters and trade representatives to roam the far reaches of the vast Russian land for the first time in more than five decades.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN MEDICAL RESPONSE INC., Boston, named Ronald M. Levenson senior vice president and chief accounting officer.
AMERICAN SAVINGS BANK, Stockton, Calif., appointed Robert T. Barnum president and chief operating officer.
Mary Locatelli, director of audit and compliance officer, was named executive vice president.
ANHEUSER-BUSCH COS., St.
Louis, named August A. Busch 4th vice president of Budweiser brands.
ASHLAND OIL INC., Ashland, Ky., appointed Thomas L. Feazell senior vice president, secretary and general counsel.
GERBER PRODUCTS CO., Fremont, Mich., named E. Curtis Mairs executive vice president of human resources.
GREAT LAKES GAS TRANSMISSION CO., Detroit, a unit of the Coastal Corp. and TransCanada Pipelines Ltd., appointed Derek E. Henwood president and chief executive.
GUARANTY RISK SERVICES INC., New York, a unit of Enhance Financial Services Group Inc., appointed Kenneth R. Von der Heiden president.
HALLIBURTON GEOPHYSICAL SERVICES INC., Dallas, a seismic services and products unit of Halliburton Co., named George Steel president.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ACC CORP., Rochester, has been awarded a new class of international long-distance telephone licenses by Britain's Department of Trade Industry.
UNILEVER announced an agreement with the Czechoslovak National Property Fund to acquire the state-owned business Povltavsk Tukov Z vody, which produces and sells edible oils and fats, toilet soap and skin cream.


U.S. Launches A Spacecraft On a Mars Trip
The first American spacecraft bound for Mars in 17 years was launched yesterday on a planned 11-month, 450-million-mile voyage to map the planet, explore its geological and climatological history and look for evidence that life might have once existed there.
After a successful liftoff at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, the 5,700-pound Mars Observer spacecraft was cruising on course for a rendezvous with the red planet next Aug. 24.


Keep Magic in the Fight
Magic Johnson showed courage when he disclosed that he was infected with the AIDS virus, and responsibility when he joined the national commission that advises President Bush on the epidemic.
But yesterday, after only a year, Mr.
Johnson abruptly quit the panel, charging that President Bush had "utterly ignored" the disease.
Mr.
Johnson's anger is understandable.
But his resignation could diminish the AIDS commission at a time when it badly needs muscle.


Where Impulse Buying Hasn't Died
Lechters Inc. hopes to become the Gap of the housewares market by selling everything from measuring spoons to color-coordinated bathroom sets at affordable prices, cheaper than those of chains like Williams-Sonoma and Crate and Barrel.
The chain, based in Harrison, N.J., now has 455 stores in malls, strip centers and cities in 37 states, up from 234 in 1988; it hopes to be at 535 by the end of the year.


Europe Stumbles, For Now
Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, said Thursday that if Britain delayed ratifying the treaty of Maastricht, as Prime Minister John Major said he intended, others -- led by Germany and France -- may move toward monetary union on their own.
That would be a "two-speed Europe," separating the strong and the weak.
But "Europe," in the sense of institution-building, isn't dying.
Some countries may accelerate and some may drag behind.
Yet all the reasons that impelled a sometimes reluctant, stumbling Europe toward integration for the last two generations remain compelling.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Home State; Suddenly Arkansas's Being Noticed, But a First Glance Can Be Misleading
Forget George Bush's campaign fly-around this week aimed at depicting Arkansas as a sluggish economic backwater.
What really gets Ray Lewis is what he hears from his relatives in Mississippi.
"As backwards as Mississippi is, they go around telling Arkansas jokes," grumbled Mr.
Lewis, who farms in this picturesque mountain hamlet.
"I don't know who they think they are to be telling jokes about us."


Archdiocese of New York Imposes a Salary Freeze
The Archdiocese of New York, struggling to control rising costs, has frozen the salaries of 1,600 lay employees and the monthly stipends of 1,500 priests.
The salary freeze is the archdiocese's latest step to curb spending, said Joseph G. Zwilling, a spokesman for the archdiocese.
Over the last two years, the archdiocese has closed 10 schools; merged 6 schools into 3; reduced the work force of Catholic Charities from 410 to 263, and put together a task force of corporations to study its finances.


California Governor, in Reversal, Signs a Bill on Gay Rights in Jobs
At a time when the debate over gay rights looms large in national politics, Gov.
Pete Wilson signed into law today a measure that protects homosexuals against job discrimination.
The action by the Republican Governor, a year after he vetoed a similar bill, comes while other prominent Republicans are casting homosexuals as enemies of traditional family values.
In the current climate, gay groups up and down the state were braced for another veto from Mr.
Wilson and had mobilized for demonstrations this weekend, which will now be recast as celebrations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New orders for durable goods fell in August, the third drop in four months.
The unexpected decline of one-tenth of 1 percent raised fresh doubts about economic recovery.
Also, the National Association of Realtors said that sales of existing homes slipped 3.2 percent, despite the lowest mortgage rates in 20 years.  [ Page 33. ]
Personal income slumped one-half of 1 percent in August to a seasonally adjusted rate of $5.03 trillion, the worst drop in 19 months, as the effects of Hurricane Andrew more than offset what would otherwise have been a rise of seven-tenths of 1 percent.  [ 38. ]
The Senate voted overwhelmingly against President Bush's proposal to permit taxpayers to earmark up to 10 percent of their income tax payment to reducing the national debt.  [ 33. ]  International
The Japanese yen is emerging as perhaps the world's strongest major currency, at roughly 120 to the dollar, which could hurt Japan's already weakened automobile and electronics giants.  [ 33. ]
France and Germany appeared to have won their battle against currency speculators, at least for now, maintaining the franc's value and salvaging Europe's monetary system.  [ 33. ] Markets
The Dow industrials plunged 37.55 points, or 1.1 percent, to 3,250.32 on renewed concerns that economic weakness would hurt third-quarter earnings.
For the week, the Dow was down 76.73.  [ 41. ]
Treasury bond prices rose sharply as the durable-goods and personal-income reports led some traders to conclude the Federal Reserve might push interest rates down further.  [ 41. ]
Lawmakers are rushing to get a compromise futures markets bill onto the floor before Congress adjourns next week.  [ 42. ]
Natural gas futures prices rose modestly after a day of seesaw trading at the end of a wild week.  [ 42. ] Companies
The U.A.W. struck G.M. in Lansing, Mich., where the popular Pontiac Grand Am and other models are built, complaining that laborers are overworked.
But G.M. takes 39 hours to make a car, compared with 22 for Ford, an analyst said.  [ 33. ]
Lechters hopes to become the Gap of housewares by selling at lower prices than specialty chains like Williams-Sonoma.
The Harrison, N.J.-based chain has 455 stores in 37 states and is expanding aggressively in the New York City area.  [ 34. ]
GlenFed is fighting for its life.
The owner of Glendale Federal, the nation's fifth-largest savings and loan association, is trying to wring profits out of its 200-plus branches by cutting costs and making less risky mortgage loans, while bargaining with regulators for enough time to put its house in order.  [ 34. ]
Bell Sports has its eye on Europe's bare-headed cyclists.
The leading American maker of bicycle helmets estimates that only 5 percent of Europe's 105 million riders wear helmets, compared with 20 percent of America's 93 million riders.  [ 34. ] Today's Columns
Employee stock ownership plans can solve several problems at once for privately owned businesses, while minimizing taxes for the families who own them, Deborah P. Baker, a Chemical Bank vice president says.
Jan M. Rosen: Your Money.  [ 35. ]
Tiny bubbles of hardened gelatin that can store delicate proteins, viruses and even living cells without destroying them could ease administering many new drugs, say a team of university scientists who invented them.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 35. ]


Ex-U.S. Aide Says He Told Bush Of Iran Arms-for-Hostage Swap
A former national security aide in Ronald Reagan's White House said today that he told George Bush in the spring of 1986 that the United States was trading arms to Iran in exchange for the release of hostages.
This new information from Howard R. Teicher, who worked on the National Security Council staff as a Middle East expert, contradicts Mr.
Bush's repeated assertions that he knew generally about the arms sales to Iran when they were taking place but did not realize that they involved a direct swap of arms for hostages.


Review/Film Festival; World-Weary Youths Adrift in Hong Kong
Hong Kong, with its modern skyscrapers soaring over a misty harbor framed by a spectacular mountain backdrop, is one of the most photogenic cities in the world.
And it has never looked more imposingly spiffy than in Clara Law's gorgeous "Autumn Moon," which the New York Film Festival is presenting tomorrow at 1:30 P.M. and Monday at 9:15 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
But in Miss Law's elegiac comedy, the city also symbolizes a modern world in which technology and popular culture have all but erased cultural traditions that are centuries old.
In aerial shots of the city's skyscrapers, parks and beltways, Hong Kong could be any modern metropolis.
The young people adrift in this environment tote expensive cameras and film equipment, eat at McDonald's and drop the names of pop stars.
As they wander around, conversing in a careful, slightly broken English, they exude an uneasy melancholia that, given their ages, seems premature.


Japanese Troops Arrive in Cambodia as U.N. Warns the Khmer Rouge


Review/Pop; A Rock Band With Focus And a Feel For Ideals
At Tramps on Thursday night, the members of Soul Asylum were bashing at their instruments, cranking out loud, fast riffs and spitting out dark, dry observations as though it were 1986 all over again.
The mid-80's was the peak of the independent-rock era, a time when brash, brutal post-punk bands dominated college radio, and when the best of these bands -- the Replacements, Husker Du, Soul Asylum -- were just starting to move from small record labels and club audiences to higher, major-label stakes.
In 1986, Soul Asylum released a definitive album, "Made to Be Broken," on the Twin/Tone label in its hometown of Minneapolis; the grueling backbeat, scrunched pop hooks and hoarse, almost desperate vocals by Dave Pirner became the band's hallmark.
Since the mid-80's, the indie-rock sound has grown in popularity and been co-opted by the mainstream industry.
The Replacements' Paul Westerberg, has matured into a pop-rock singer and songwriter; Husker Du's Bob Mould has gone full circle to revise his punk roots.
Soul Asylum hasn't really changed.
The band released two albums through Twin/ Tone and A&amp;M Records between 1988 and 1990; next month it makes its Sony Records debut, "Grave Dancers Union."


Skalde Says He's Ready for Full-Time Duty
There is a strong contingent around the Devils that believes Jarrod Skalde should have made the National Hockey League team two years ago as a 19-year-old.
He was that impressive in training camp.
And he was just as impressive last year.
But Skalde failed to stick with New Jersey each time, being sent to the junior league two years ago and to the minors last year.
Now, after another solid preseason, he awaits another turn in his career as the Devils prepare to make their minor league assignments on Saturday.


Psst! Norris Is No Longer Just a Stealth Fighter
Until he beat Sugar Ray Leonard in February 1991, Terry Norris was a boxing secret.
No more.
Norris (32-3, 18 knockouts), who will fight Simon Brown (36-2, 27 knockouts) on Saturday night at Caesars Palace, is a recognized commodity now, but he wants to place no limits on his acclaim.


Durables Orders Fell In August
New orders for durable goods fell in August, the third drop in four months, the Commerce Department said today, reflecting a surprising degree of business caution and arousing fresh doubts about economic recovery.
The one-tenth of 1 percent decline was considerably more serious than it appeared, analysts said, not only because they had expected a rebound from July's sizable drop but also because of its widespread nature and the fact that orders sank 3.7 percent when military equipment was excluded.


Envoys Report Wave of 'Ethnic Cleansing'
Returning here from a one-day trip to the Serbian-controlled Bosnian town of Banja Luka, the co-chairmen of the international peace conference on Yugoslavia said tonight that a new wave of "ethnic cleansing" is under way in the region.
"We heard rumors," said Lord Owen, the European Community's chief negotiator on Yugoslavia and co-chairman of the peace conference.
"We went there, and they were confirmed. I don't think we've been hoodwinked. Far from it."


I'll Catch You Later, Says a Tearful Carter
Gary Carter, the affable, clutch-hitting catcher who brought his broad smile and his big bat down from Montreal in 1985 to help guide the Mets to their championship season in 1986, announced yesterday that he was leaving the Expos once again, this time to retire and begin what will be an almost certain journey to Cooperstown, N.Y.
He becomes eligible for the Hall of Fame in 1998.
As the 38-year-old Carter announced that he would call it quits at the end of this season, his 18th major league campaign in a career that began and will end with the Expos, a cloud replaced his trademark smile and he broke into sobs.


Stocks Fall 37.55 on Economic Fears
Stock prices tumbled yesterday on renewed concerns that continued economic weakness would hurt third-quarter earnings.
On the New York Stock Exchange, the 30 issues that make up the blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average fell by 37.55 points, or 1.1 percent, to 3,250.32.
For the week, the Dow was down 76.73.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Named Mike Squires, bullpen coach, special assistant to the general manager, and Dewey Robinson bullpen coach.
Retained Terry Bevington; Jackie Brown; Walt Hriniak; Doug Mansolino, and Joe Nosek, coaches for the 1993 season.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Jose Hernandez, shortstop, from Canton-Akron of the Eastern League.


Racing Through Snipers' Alley on Ride to Sarajevo
On the map, the trip across the lines of the Sarajevo siege doesn't look like much, just a quick journey from the outer suburbs into the city center.
In a rented Russian jeep, with jerry-cans of spare fuel making the vehicle into a mobile Molotov cocktail, it is a passage through hell.
Blackened, burned-out houses set back 50 yards from the road, eerily still, serve as snipers' hideouts.
Driving flat out, with windows closed and flak jackets pulled up around their necks, those making the trip can sometimes hear shots being fired and mortars exploding.
The litter of spent shell casings lie on the road, where there are gaping holes made by mortars, and the blasted wrecks of tanks and trucks.


Rising Yen: Japan's Mixed Blessing
Amid the commotion in the European foreign exchange markets, the Japanese yen has staged a rally and is emerging as perhaps the strongest major currency right now, a development that could hurt Japan's already weakened automobile and electronics giants.
The yen closed here on Thursday at 120.25 yen to the dollar, a high for Tokyo after rising as high as 119.83 earlier in the day.
Today the yen weakened a bit, closing at 120.85, Just last week the yen was as low as 125 against the dollar and at the beginning of August was down to 128.


Beliefs
Among television evangelists, the Rev.
Robert Schuller is the survivor.
He survived the "earthquake," as he calls it, of the Jim Bakker and Jimmy Swaggart scandals.
A year ago he survived a cerebral hemorrhage and two brain operations.
For 15 hours blood seeped from a blood vessel into his brain while he lay unconscious and unattended in an Amsterdam hotel room.
He was discovered when he was only 20 minutes this side of death.
The incident occurred the day before Dr.
Schuller was to see Pope John Paul II and then travel on to Russia to arrange the televising of his Sunday morning "Hour of Power" and other inspirational programs.


Pocket Beacons Save Stranded Hikers' Lives
To the Editor:
You report the agonizing death of a hiker, injured and stranded in Alaska (news article, Sept. 13).
Such accidents will continue.
However, in the last 10 years electronics have given such admirable adventurers infinitely better chances.


CHRONICLE
Now, narrow the focus to cheese only, and that's the reason, indirectly at least, for a celebration in Central Park this morning, with 50 sheep as the honored guests.
The Consorzio Pecorino Romano, an association of 300 producers of Pecorino Romano, an Italian cheese made from sheep milk, has pledged to finance the maintenance of the Sheep Meadow in Central Park for 1993.


Walter Miller, 64, Lawyer and Member Of Civic Committees
Walter A. Miller, who practiced law in Brooklyn for 64 years, died on Thursday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 87 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of heart failure, his family said.
A native of Brooklyn, Mr.
Miller was a 1925 Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Princeton University and earned his LL.B. at Brooklyn Law School in 1928.
He served on state and city panels including the State Health Planning Commission, a state Citizens Advisory Committee on the Care of the Aging, the Welfare Council of New York City and Mayor Robert F. Wagner's Committee on Youth and Work, of which he was chairman in the 1950's.
He became a founding director in 1934 of the Federation Employment and Guidance Service, a nonsectarian, nonprofit affiliate of the Federation of Jewish Philanthropies providing free assistance to job-seekers in need of training and placement.
He was its president from 1940 to 1960, a period when it cared for many war veterans.
Mr.
Miller kept on working until earlier this month in general practice as well as in corporate, probate, real-estate and banking law.
Among his clients were the Emigrant Savings Bank and Central Brooklyn Medical Group.
From 1977 to 1985 he served as general counsel for the Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory.
Mr.
Miller is survived by his wife of 63 years, Betti; three daughters, Judith Childs of Manhattan, Ann Curran of Pleasantville, N.Y., and Elizabeth Dodge of Montpelier, Vt.; a sister, Rosetta M. Adler of Matthews, N.C.; and five grandchildren.


Bridge
Many years ago a tobacco corporation, as a promotional move, distributed a million free copies of a short introduction to bridge.
Titled "The Biggest Little Bridge Book in the World," it became a standard at the Card School and survived the demise of that institution.
After selling more than 120,000 copies it has now reached its seventh edition, not as little as it used to be with 57 pages.
It can be obtained for $5, including mailing, from the Beverly Card School, 130 East 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022.
Jim Becker, the Beverly proprietor, has added limit raises, splinter bids and an explanation of the alert procedure to the contents.


WHITE HOUSE FIGHT ON COLLIDER DEAL
Presidential Bush's top political advisers overrode objections from his national security aides to produce a deal in which the White House dropped its strong opposition to a nuclear test ban, officials said today.
In return, the Administration saved an $8 billion research project in Texas, an important state in Mr.
Bush's re-election bid.
The White House also won a last-minute concession from Congress that could give Mr.
Bush a way to resume underground testing in the future and will, in the meantime, permit the Administration to present the compromise as something less than a reversal of longstanding policy, the officials said.
Conflicting Pressure for Bush
The struggle over the nuclear test ban brings into sharp focus the conflicting pressures on Mr.
Bush as Democrats in Congress use every opportunity they can to provoke a confrontation with him on major policy issues, or to force him to make legislative concessions, in the weeks remaining until the election.


Classical Music in Review
Sharon Isbin Guitarist Juilliard Theater


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; BUSH AND CLINTON TO SEND EMISSARIES TO PEROT MEETING
Responding to broad hints that Ross Perot will soon re-enter the Presidential race, President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton said yesterday that they would send emissaries to Dallas on Monday to talk to the Texas billionaire's followers.
Each group of emissaries will try to convince the gathering that its candidate is the better alternative to a Perot candidacy.
Officials from both the Republican and Democratic campaigns said they had accepted an invitation from Mr.
Perot to address a gathering on Monday of state leaders of United We Stand, America, the organization Mr.
Perot set up and financed after he quit the Presidential contest on July 16.
Mr.
Perot will also attend the meetings.


Review/Film Festival; After a Quake, an Iranian's Quest
The fragility of civilization is something that most of us prefer not to think about until something like Hurricane Andrew comes along to show how an overwhelming force of nature can reduce a community to Stone Age living conditions.
In "And Life Goes On," that catastrophe is a devastating earthquake in the north of Iran.
The Iranian director Abbas Kiarostami, accompanied by his young son, drives into the area only a day or two after the quake.
Although his ostensible goal is to find out what happened to some young actors who live in the area and who once worked with him, his real quest seems to be the gleaning of as much spectacular post-quake film as possible.


When Polls Swing, Don't Blame Fickle Voters; Party Affiliation
To the Editor:
Sampling error isn't the only explanation for the divergent findings of two otherwise largely similar opinion polls conducted in Florida last week (front page, Sept. 17).


Review/Film Festival; Of an Earl, an Old Love and Roger
Three superb short films by Mike Leigh of England, Denys Arcand of Canada and Michael Moore of the United States make up the program titled "Taking the Pulse," which will be shown at the New York Film Festival today at 4 P.M. and midnight.
Because they probably won't be presented anywhere else in this same combination, you may want to check if there are any seats left for the program.
The films don't have much in common, but seeing three such decisively idiosyncratic works together has a way of raising the spirits.
Mr.
Moore's 23-minute contribution, "Pets or Meat: The Return to Flint," is a sort of "Roger and Me 2." It's an engagingly tatterdemalion sequel to his 1989 hit documentary in which he examined the sad state of Flint, Mich., after mass layoffs by General Motors, and some of the ways in which private citizens and public boosters were coping.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Quayle Is Flexible to Debate, He Just Doesn't Know When or If
Throughout the summer, there was no debate from Vice President Dan Quayle about a format for the fall campaign debates.
After his searing "You're-no-Jack Kennedy" experience in the 1988 debate with Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, he might well have skittered away from any head-to-head exchange in 1992.
But no, he jumped eagerly at a chance to redeem himself in a debate, whatever the format.


Gay Teachers Say Board in Queens Is Intolerant
Two gay teachers stepped forward yesterday and publicly criticized a Queens school board for refusing to let teachers use a curriculum guide that urges schoolchildren to respect and appreciate gay people.
The teachers, Daniel Dromm and Kim Kreicker, said the decision by District 24 to reject the guide had created an atmosphere of intimidation and intolerance in schools that are among the city's most diverse -- with children from a variety of ethnic groups and family situations, including some with gay parents.
Other Boards Defiant
"Gay people throughout the city are no longer living in the closet," said Mr.
Dromm, a fourth-grade teacher at Public School 199 in Sunnyside.
"They are developing relationships and they are open about it. We, as educators, must face that need in the schools."


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH -- In an interview yesterday on WBBM-AM radio in Chicago
"It's not a question of family values. I have long favored family leave, but I don't believe in burdening the economy further and burdening the employers. I mean, we want more jobs for women, and I have very good proposals. We've got a great record on appointment of women, and so I think people ought to not just look at the title and listen to the Democratic rhetoric.


Observer; A Few Useless Tears
Interview with a sap:
Question: Is it true, sir, that you, a sap, have been watching the campaign closely even though you live outside the white-hot center of all wisdom, also known as Inside-The-Beltway?


Post Offices for a New Age: Will Fern Bars Be Next?
Gay Lee walked into the post office in East New York the other day and sensed something rather out of the ordinary.
Instead of the typical Postal Service decor -- the style of which, if it had a name, would be called Bureaucratic Tedium -- there were house plants, paintings by schoolchildren, a tree and a fish tank.
The sounds of jazz wafted softly from a speaker somewhere.
The lobby was spotlessly clean.


What About the P.O.W. Families?
America's Vietnam agony ended a generation ago but one issue won't go away -- the fate of several hundred servicemen who disappeared after being captured in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.
Few are likely to be alive.
But their families are entitled to know anything the U.S.
Government has learned about them, and anything it can still find out.
For the past year, the Senate P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Committee has worked diligently to provide such an accounting.
But this week President Nixon's national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, took the stand and the hearings quickly degenerated into refighting old policy battles.


Pamela Hollingworth; Lost for 8 Days in '41
Pamela Hollingworth, who drew national attention at the age of 5 when she was lost for eight days in a New Hampshire forest, died on Sept. 11 at her home in Orleans, Mass., on Cape Cod.
She was 56 years old and also had a home in Sarasota, Fla, where she retired recently.
She died of a heart ailment, her family said.


Jersey City Is the Victor In Relocation
In a battle illustrating how desperate real-estate companies are for tenants and governments are for jobs, New York City and New York State have accepted the loss of 1,000 jobs in Manhattan after calculating that it would cost them more than $50,000 a job to retain them.
The winner in the contest was Jersey City, which succeeded in persuading a subsidiary of the First Chicago Corporation, a bank holding company, to relocate its administrative and back-office operations to Newport Center, a sprawling office, retail and residential complex along the Hudson River.


Patents; Gelatin Capsules Revamped For New Generation of Pills
THEY are tiny bubbles of hardened gelatin, similar to the coated beads in a capsule of cold medicine.
But their inventors say these miniature spheres could make it easier to administer a wide variety of new drugs and genetic therapies.
Patented this week by a team of scientists at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Pennsylvania State University, the spheres are designed to store delicate proteins, viruses and even living cells without destroying them.


New Terminal Announced for Newark Airport
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey plans to build a new passenger terminal at Newark International Airport and renovate other buildings there to handle soaring numbers of international travelers.
The $110 million project will almost triple the number of international passengers the airport can handle per hour, to 3,000 from 1,100, said the Port Authority chairman, Richard C. Leone.


Harrison G. Platt Jr., Editor, 90
Harrison G. Platt Jr., an author and dictionary editor, died on Sept. 17 at Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Truck Kills 3 Workers on New Jersey Turnpike
Three construction workers were killed and two others injured this morning when a truck crashed through a wooden barrier while the five were working on the New Jersey Turnpike in Bayonne.
The accident occurred about 8:45 A.M. as the workers were making routine repairs to an overpass shoulder, said Trooper Ken Salazar of the state police.


Casting My Primary Ballot Required Too Much Persistence
To the Editor:
Today I went during lunch to vote in the Democratic primary.
I had received a card from the New York City Board of Elections informing me that my polling place would be at John Jay College on 10th Avenue and 59th Street.


Pentagon Still Uncertain About Lost Plane
To the Editor:
Mark Crispin Miller of Johns Hopkins University does your readers a great disservice in "Death of a Fighter Pilot" (Op-Ed, Sept. 15).
He argues that one of the United States FA-18 aircraft lost in the Persian Gulf war might have been shot down by an Iraqi airplane, an assertion he claims to be exactly the opposite of official Pentagon statements.
He is wrong.


Howard L. Hausman , Talent-Agency Executive, 77
Howard L. Hausman, a retired New York talent-agency executive, died on Tuesday at his home in Bradenton, Fla.
He was 77 years old.
He died after a long illness, said the William Morris Agency, from which he retired in 1981.


Jersey Shore Whipsawed by Pair of Storms
Wind-whipped waves, 10 to 15 feet high, pounded into shore from the Atlantic all day here.
Two more feet of beach vanished into the swirling surf.
And Mayor William MacInnes said this well-heeled coastal resort and all New Jersey coastline towns fretful about storm erosion were losing an unrelenting battle with the sea.
"We're trying to cope with a never-ending problem as far as erosion goes," Mr.
MacInnes said as he stood by the boardwalk on Baltimore Boulevard, salty spray and blowing sand stinging his face.
"It's beyond the scope of municipalities to take care of it. There isn't any town on the Jersey Shore that can handle erosion alone."


Mideast Arms Sales Reveal Policy Gap
To the Editor:
In "Sell Now, Pay Later" (column, Sept. 17), Leslie H. Gelb seeks a worthy end by dubious means.
As he properly points out, selling 72 F-15's to Saudi Arabia will only exacerbate the arms race in the Middle East.
But to claim that the best way to offset this sale lies in selling more parts to Israel while discouraging cash-strapped China and Russia from increasing their arms sales smacks of ineffectual hypocrisy.


Hate Law Is Rejected By a Court
A State Superior Court judge here declared today that an important section of New Jersey's two-year-old law against hate crimes was unconstitutional on free-speech grounds.
The ruling makes New Jersey the latest government to run into legal trouble because of efforts to construe hate speech as a form of illegal conduct.
State Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo said that the ruling, by Judge Joseph E. Sadofski, would be appealed.
Mr.
Del Tufo noted that two weeks ago, another Superior Court judge upheld the same statute, which imposes criminal sanctions for acts of "ill will, hatred or bias" intended to intimidate because of the victim's "race, color, religion, sexual orientation or ethnicity." People convicted for such acts faced stiffer penalties than they would if charged under other parts of the state's disorderly-persons law.


Panel of Scientists Finds Dioxin Does Not Pose Widespread Cancer Threat
An independent panel of scientists concluded today that dioxin was not a large-scale cancer threat except to people exposed to unusually high levels of the toxic compound in chemical factories and from accidents.
But the federally appointed panel said its study of the latest international research on the health and environmental effects of dioxin vividly showed that exceedingly minute levels of dioxin caused biological havoc among fish, birds and other wild animals.


Zelenogorsk Journal; When Grass Is Greener, There's an Urge to Build
On the sandy shores of the Gulf of Finland, where it curves above St.
Petersburg, lies a pristine swatch of pine and birch forests that somehow managed to escape Soviet development.
Vyacheslav Kozyritsky, the 41-year-old Mayor of Zelenogorsk, wants to change all that.
Where generations of Russian writers, artists and Communist bosses saw unspoiled nature, he sees opportunity -- for hotels, shopping centers, business parks, single-family housing, garden apartments, in short, a "New Petersburg" on a scale that would shock even the most ambitious American developer.


Compact Total-Body Exerciser
The popularity of stair-climbing machines in the fitness industry has led to the design of a new kind of portable exercise device for at-home use.
The Stairclimber Plus Total Workout System allows the user to strengthen the upper and lower body while getting an aerobic workout.
The equipment comes in two parts: the Stairclimber, which has plastic pedals attached to a platform, and the Bodycord, a stretch cord with handles that fits under the Stairclimber's base.


Cambodia Guerrillas Told to Stick to Peace Plan
Foreign Ministers of the Security Council's five permanent member nations warned the Khmer Rouge today that they would push ahead with their peace plan for Cambodia without the guerrilla faction's participation if it continued to renege on its commitment to comply with the terms of the accord.
The declaration was issued by the ministers after a meeting with Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who delivered a similar warning to the Khmer Rouge on Thursday.
Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said he would seek to exclude the faction from the free elections that the United Nations planned to hold in Cambodia in May unless it instructed its troops to disarm and admit United Nations officials to areas it controls.


Today, a Big Game. Next Year, the Big Ten.
In many ways, Penn State's 1992 football campaign will begin Saturday afternoon.
Although the unbeaten Nittany Lions have victories over Cincinnati, Temple and Eastern Michigan, the game against Maryland (0-3) at Beaver Stadium marks the first test for a team of uncertain potential.


Cone Sets Stage With Winning Audition
David Cone was crisp, clean and precise last night with fastballs that hummed and curveballs that nipped.
The former Mets right-hander mesmerized the Yankees in his return to New York and kept the Toronto Blue Jays rolling toward another American League East title.
Amid a steady, game-long downpour, Cone choked the Yankees on four hits through seven innings, striking out nine, as he outpitched Melido Perez and the Blue Jays posted a 3-1 victory at Yankee Stadium.
Toronto has defeated the Yankees 10 straight times.


The Brew-It-Yourself Cappuccino
With the increased availability of espresso and cappuccino in restaurants and with the proliferation of coffee bars, the taste for strong, Italian-style coffee is bound to become so compelling that more and more people will want to make good espresso at home.
It takes special equipment.
A wide variety of espresso-making equipment is on the market, from a small, old-fashioned stove-top pot for about $20 to a commercial-quality electric import at about $1,000.
The choices have to do not only with budget but with ease of operation, degree of automation and quality and consistency of the coffee.


Abrams Resumes Campaign
Ending a week and a half of self-imposed isolation, spent mainly on the telephone pleading for money, Robert Abrams finally took up a microphone today to ask for votes in his race against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
In speeches in Manhattan and Albany, his first since winning the Democratic primary Sept. 15, Mr.
Abrams said New Yorkers "deserve a Senator who should be investigating on behalf of the people and the public interest and not always be the subject of investigations himself."


Behind The Mask
At Boston's Wang Center on Sept. 18, they all had a ball, including the house.


Free Sounds, Not People
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein, in "Cage Played His Anarchy by the Rules"  [ Sept. 20 ] , sees a contradiction between John Cage the self-proclaimed liberationist and John Cage the enforcer of "fetishistic" and "meaningless" laws.
But that is because Mr.
Rothstein seems to think that Cage wanted to liberate people.
He wanted nothing of the kind.
He wanted to liberate sounds.
People, with their "memory, tastes, likes and dislikes," were in the way.
Getting rid of them was serious business -- not something you could leave to chance.
RICHARD TARUSKIN Berkeley, Calif.


A Timely Retreat for Exabyte's Insiders
SMACK on top of the most active list last Tuesday were shares of the Exabyte Corporation, a Boulder, Colo., computer company that announced that third-quarter earnings would not come close to analysts' expectations.
And right on top of a most-active list of their own months before were Exabyte insiders, who engaged in a flurry of sales of Exabyte stock.


Britain
Visitors to London will get back one of their favorite photo backdrops next month, when workmen take the wraps off Buckingham Palace.
Since the first week of August, the northeast front of the palace has been hidden behind scaffolding and plastic sheeting, as crews scour and repair the stone facade.
Buckingham Palace is among the most recent of London's landmarks to go under cover.
This summer most of the high scaffolding came off the front of Westminster Abbey, revealing its restored glory, and workmen are expected to unwrap both Victoria Tower at the Houses of Parliament, and St.
Stephen's Tower, next door at the Palace of Westminster, later this year, when work finishes there.


Dolores Ryan, Bruce Reynolds
Dolores Yvonne Ryan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Ryan of Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday to William Bruce Reynolds, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Reynolds of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph P. Graham performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Conception in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
Mrs.
Reynolds is an associate in the planning and management-services group of Salomon Brothers, the securities brokerage, in New York.
She graduated from Marymount College of Virginia.
Her father, who is retired, was a surgeon in Rockville Centre, L.I., and the director of surgery at Mercy Hospital there.


Arab-Israeli Talks: Slow but Not Lost
During one of the recent Palestinian-Israeli negotiations, the Palestinian delegates were going on at length about United Nations resolution 242.
An Israeli negotiator, Eliyakim Rubinstein, became exasperated and punctured the diplomatic bluster by recalling that the last time he had a physical the doctor told him that his cholesterol level was 242.
"Too bad it wasn't 726," one of the Palestinians remarked, referring to the United Nations resolution condemning Israel for deporting Palestinians.


The Murky Numbers Of the Jobs Debate
Both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton are basing part of their appeal to voters on proposals to create more jobs, but both rely on questionable statistics to bolster their positions.
Much of what they say is unprovable, economic experts assert, and some is plain nonsense, from the President's contention that his opponent's policies would cut more than two million jobs, to Mr.
Clinton's argument that his own programs would create eight million jobs.


Radio Days Resound In Bridgeport
WE, the studio audience, after being thanked for "coming out and braving the snow," watch the signals light up:
Stand By.
On the Air.
Applause!
The cast members file in, brushing themselves off.
One heads for the Coke machine, another for the pay phone to call his bookie.
Overheard amid the din: "I'm sweatin' bullets." "Lou, I need a Bromo." "This is radio, Wally."


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Up to now, Dick Francis has owned the horse racing mystery novel, and he still does.
But John Francome, who like Mr.
Francis was a prominent British jockey, is sprinting to catch up with the old master.
He has previously written four racing novels with James MacGregor.
Now, with STONE COLD (Headline/Trafalgar Square, $22.95), he is on his own, and coming up fast.
Mr.
Francome more or less follows the Francis formula.
A symbol of British righteousness is pitted against evil forces.
The symbol in this case is a talented apprentice jockey, Kelly Connor.
Early along in "Stone Cold," she is riding a horse that certain gamblers do not want to win.
She does win, but is disqualified.
Somebody has tampered with her weight cloth.
Nobody believes her.
The horse's trainer loudly accuses her of incompetence or even throwing the race.


Top Police Ranks Reach Labor Accord
The Dinkins administration has reached a new labor agreement with representatives of the 8,500 captains, lieutenants, sergeants and detectives in the New York City Police Department who had been working without a contract for more than two years, the city announced yesterday.
The agreement, which still has to be approved by the membership of the Superior Officers Council, covers the next 15 months and is retroactive to June 3, 1990, when the last contract expired.
The agreement provides for an immediate 3.5 percent increase in salary and a 1 percent increase at the end of the first year, as well as a welfare fund increase of $100 and other benefits.


Haulers Plead Guilty To Trash Rackets
Two brothers who operate a major trash hauling business in the Hudson Valley pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal racketeering, bribery, money laundering and tax evasion charges and agreed to sell or liquidate all the companies they control.
The brothers, Louis J. Mongelli and Robert A. Mongelli, entered their pleas in Federal District Court in White Plains and face a maximum of 20 years in prison.
Louis J. Mongelli Jr. also pleaded guilty yesterday to conspiracy to violate tax laws and faces a maximum of 5 years.


Of Bindlestiffs, Bad Times, Mice and Men
In John Steinbeck's 1937 classic "Of Mice and Men," two bedraggled hobos (or bindle stiffs) wander through the shimmering rural landscape of northern California during the Great Depression, taking odd jobs as they move from farm to farm.
Lennie is mildly retarded but strong.
His best (and only) friend, George, is smart and paternalistic, though he sometimes wonders aloud if his life wouldn't be easier without Lennie.
"Guys like us, that work on ranches, are the loneliest guys in the world," George says.
"They got no family. They don't belong no place." What they do have, they discover, is each other.


Where Teen-Agers Find a Trustworthy Adult
THE 14-year-old girl had come to the adolescent medicine clinic at Bridgeport Hospital to be treated for gonorrhea.
But that was only one of her problems.
Under direct but sympathetic questioning by Dr.
Joanna Wynne, the clinic's director, the girl revealed that her mother's live-in boyfriend was making sexual advances toward her.
The mother's drug problems and overall apathy made the teen-ager feel trapped.
The girl responded by seeking security outside her home, becoming sexually involved with a number of partners, Dr.
Wynne said.
"She wasn't looking for sex, she was looking for love," the director said.
"But her life was so distorted that it was the only way she knew how to act out her feelings of confusion, anger and loneliness."


A New Season Sings
Stars came out at the Metropolitan Opera, Sept. 21.


A Place For All Seasons
To the Editor:
In Phillip Lopate's article about the new Hotel Mercer  [ "Helping an 'Honest' Building Stand Tall," Sept. 13 ] , reference is made to the Sherry Netherland as a "specialty hotel" for "show-business folks." My late husband, Philip Landau, who was the general manager of the Sherry Netherland for 35 years until his retirement 10 years ago, would have been shocked at that description.
It is true that in the 60's and 70's the hotel became fashionable in Hollywood, but that was due to Phil's talents as a hotelier and the considerable charm of his personality, rather than to any decision to specialize in show business.


If I. M. Pei Were to Play Samurai
For a Karate Kid who wants to become Samurai Architect: a cardboard punch-out dojo, or martial arts studio, by Star Toys, of Spain.
Children 9 years old and older can assemble it; younger ones may need help.
It comes with rubber figures of Buddha and a samurai master.
In the dojo, the label says, warriors train to become "loyal, honest and brave, as cold as ice, fast as lightning, silent as a cat, biting as fire, firm as a mountain, a protector of the weak."


Happy Hoofbeats Out of the Past . . .
THERE are people like me in Detroit!
Or at Ford's headquarters in Dearborn, at least.
If I was unsure before, I know it now that I have put in some time at the wheel of a new Mustang convertible, the one with the big 5-liter V8 and the huge tires and ....
Ah.
And the eye-popping red body with the pristine white roof and the white leather upholstery and the white wheels with the chrome horses in their hubs.
This car is not only properly old-fashioned, it is dressed up like a tart on the town.
And I love it.


Amy Ilyssa Nick, Neil Elson Bader
Amy Ilyssa Nick, the daughter of Larry K. Nick of New York and Dr.
Judith Beiner of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Neil Elson Bader, a son of Sam and Lila Bader of New York.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Bader, 27 years old, is a television production associate at NBC Sports in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the president of Damon Andrews &amp; Company, a financial-management concern in New York.
Her mother teaches English and journalism at Spanish River High School in Boca Raton.
Mrs.
Bader is a stepdaughter of Sharon Nick of New York and Stephen Beiner of Boca Raton.
Her stepfather is a lawyer in Boca Raton.


Nancy Herron, Stephen Pratt
Dr.
Nancy B. Herron, the daughter of Judith Stapleford and Dr.
B.
Bernie Herron, both of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen D. Pratt, the son of Drs.
Sarah Pratt and Dean Pratt of Sheboygan, Wis.
The Rev.
Beverly Edwards, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Stone House Club in Little Compton, R.I.
Rabbi Benjamin Z. Rudavsky took part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Herron, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a resident in pediatrics and adult and child psychiatry at three hospitals in Rhode Island.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received her M.D. from Brown University.


Calls for Mitterrand to Go, Gracefully
If France had rejected a treaty on European union in a referendum last Sunday, President Francois Mitterrand would have faced loud demands for his resignation.
Now, with the treaty narrowly approved, he is instead hearing calls to retire.
It was not how he had planned things.
He had argued that defeat would not force him out of office since the vote on Europe was not a plebiscite on his Government.
He had also gambled that a solid victory would lift his sagging popularity after 15 months of setbacks.


TAKE A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
As a physician, I would comment that the only healing that ever takes place is self-healing.
One of the central tenets of homeopathy is that a microscopic dose of a medication can stimulate the self-healing properties of the body.
All we can ever do is to facilitate that process.
Among the more important lessons a physician learns is when to intervene, the consequences of the intervention and when to stay out of the way.
If homeopathy has the possibility to facilitate the healing process with a minimum of side effects, it should be investigated in a serious fashion by the mainstream medical community.
DAVID RILEY, M.D.
Santa Fe, N.M.


Some Points in Dispute At Rye Reading Room
We are writing to correct two misstatements of fact in the article about the Rye Free Reading Room that appeared on Sept. 6 ("It's No Longer So Quiet at the Library").
The library's annual budget for 1991 was $627,360, not $850,000.
Meg Stackpole is not one of those who "continue to amass signatures and write letters to try to reinstate Miss Brown," as stated in the next-to-last paragraph.


Odd Couple


S. Brooke Sydnor And C. M. Curran
S.
Brooke Sydnor, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Sydnor Jr. of Richmond, was married yesterday to Christopher M. Curran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Curran of Convent Station, N.J.
Joan Zeldon, an Associate Judge of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia, officiated at the Willard Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Curran, 24 years old, graduated from James Madison University.
She is studying for a master's degree in art therapy at George Washington University.
Her father is the president and the chief operating officer of James McGraw Inc., a distributor of industrial equipment in Richmond.


Pesticides Can Stop Beetles and Ants
The article in the Home Clinic column titled "The First Steps in Preventing Pests"  [ Aug. 23 ]  was a disservice, making a gross assumption that if consumers see signs of carpenter ants or powder-post beetles, they must in all cases "call an exterminator." Our company takes great exception.
Our firm, like so many, produces safe and effective pest-control products that allow homeowners to save thousands of dollars by allowing a do-it-yourself approach.
Best of all, consumers often do a far superior job.
We have one of the few products specifically labeled for termites and carpenter ants.
JAMES B. COWEN President, Roxide International New Rochelle


Books From The Times
THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE SOVIET EMPIRE.
Edited by Bernard Gwertzman and Michael T. Kaufman. (Times Books/Random House, paper, $15.) This chronicle of the seven last years of the Soviet Union is coextensive with the term in office of the country's last leader.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev took power on March 11, 1985; his resignation on Dec. 25, 1991, gave final notice to the world that the Soviet Union no longer existed.
As edited by Bernard Gwertzman, the foreign editor of The New York Times, and Michael T. Kaufman, a former deputy foreign editor, this collection of reporting by The Times's correspondents in the Soviet Union provides a factual and interpretive account of an era that is nearly as amazing in retrospect as it was when it was happening daily.


Spain
With an excuse like the 500th anniversary of the discovery of the Americas, who could blame Spain for spending wildly to make sure it was noticed this year?
An ultramodern city sprang up out of nowhere to house the World's Fair in Seville, Expo '92, which closes on Oct. 12, while Barcelona was given a "new look" costing a few pesetas short of $9 billion in time for the recent Olympic Games.
Madrid, meanwhile, has enjoyed the title of this year's European Cultural Capital.
Beyond the dazzle of these three quincentenary cities, though, Spain's metamorphosis from a sun-and-sand to an Old World tourist destination continues apace.
It often means, of course, giving the old a bit of a face lift.
For example, renovation work is now almost complete on the first-century Roman Theater at Sagunto near Valencia and a busy musical and theatrical program is already planned for next summer.
In Cuenca, famous for its "hanging" houses, the 16th-century Convento de San Pablo has been converted into a stunning new parador, to open in October.


Ralph Manheim Is Dead at 85; Translator of 200 Major Works
Ralph Manheim, for nearly 50 years a prolific and widely acclaimed English translator of major German and French works, including books by Hitler, Freud, Proust, Brecht and Grass, died yesterday at his home in Cambridge, England.
He was 85 years old.
He died of complications of prostate cancer, his family said.


Belittling the Diminutive
If Governor Clinton is elected, will he sign international treaties
Bill
? If Governor Wilson of California is the Republican nominee in 1996, will he insist on
Pete
?
We had this problem of diminutives in the 70's.
Jack Rosenthal, editorial page editor of The New York Times, recently noted as a guest columnist in this space that the "strained first-name informality" of politics turned James Earl Carter Jr. to
Jimmy
.
To this, Jody Powell, who was President Carter's press secretary, took exception, arguing that Miss Lillian elected to use the diminutive long before her son entered politics.


Playing It Safe by Installing a Deadbolt
A DEADBOLT not only increases the security of any door, but also is among the least expensive and easiest kinds of locks to install.
It consists of a sliding metal bar mounted horizontally in a door's edge and is operated by a key and a small knob called a thumbturn.
Most homes have deadbolts on their main entry doors, but it is wise to add them to doors leading to the garage or basement and to doors on outdoor storage sheds.


Whatever It Takes, Jets Hope They Have It
With losses in their first three games, the Jets have reached a point at which nothing is certain and nothing can be taken for granted.
That is the way they are approaching their game Sunday afternoon against the Los Angeles Rams (1-2) at Anaheim Stadium.
The Jets are desperate to achieve their first victory and a boost to their sagging confidence.


The Great Incumbency Machine
It looks suspiciously like a campaign ad, sweeping through a video medley of New York State Senator John B. Daly's greatest hits.
First the camera captures Daly on the Senate floor delivering an impassioned defense of his party's agenda.
The scene then shifts to an Albany news conference, where the seven-term Republican from the village of Lewiston thumps the podium while angrily demanding control over state welfare and Medicaid spending.
The short clip does Daly proud.
But in case anybody missed the point, an authoritative baritone spells it out as the pictures fade: "In Albany fighting for you, State Senator John Daly."


On Men and Women of Culture
The catalogue for Valentino's 30-year retrospective exhibition includes prefaces by Elizabeth Taylor, Mikhail Baryshnikov, John Fairchild
and
Henry Kissinger.
Why was the former Secretary of State included?
Giancarlo Giammetti, the chairman of Valentino, said through a spokeswoman: "We chose him because he's an American statesman. He's a modern, clever -- an intelligent man of culture and strategy who at the same time is not afraid to talk about fashion."
Thierry Mugler's first fragrance, Angel, available next month in France, sounds like a mad concoction.
Sold in a large blue star-shaped bottle, it is scented with the synthesized smells of cotton candy, chocolate, caramel, coffee, vanilla, plums and moss.


Streetscapes: The Busts in the Hall of Fame; Crusty Green Yields To a Uniform Brown
HOW do you like your heros, fossilized or face to face?
That could fairly sum up the issue drawn by the work going on at the Hall of Fame for Great Americans, a long neo-Classical walkway of bronze busts.
The hall is on New York University's old uptown campus at 181st Street and Sedgwick Avenue, now Bronx Community College.
Almost all of its 98 busts have been stripped of their crusty, irregular green finish and given new, uniform brown patinas to make them both recognizable and accessible.


Miss McCartney, Edward J. Claire
Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas McCartney of Freeport, L. I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Allyson, to Edward John Claire, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Claire, also of Freeport.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss McCartney, 23 years old, graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in elementary education at the Bank Street College of Education in New York.
Her father is a senior manager with Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, a private bank in New York.


A Small Menu Mostly From the Grill
RIDING the crest of the trend for grilled dishes is Chop Chop American Grill in Westport.
The word grill in a restaurant's name suggests not only fresh foods simply prepared but also telegraphs casual and informal, which suggests economical dining as well -- a suggestion not always borne out in the pricing.
Chop Chop American Grill is in a free-standing building that has housed several other restaurants in recent years (most recently Checkers).
A fence-enclosed outside dining area has been added in front, which is very pleasant as long as the weather remains cooperative.
Inside the rather dark, medium-small main dining area (there's a second dining room upstairs) the decor is simple, with creamy-tone stucco walls, velveteen cafe curtains, matching wall hangings and area separators, appliqued with patches of patterned fabric suggesting stylized cows.
We're not sure whether this free association is valid, though steaks are on the menu.


Suzanne Frost, Kevin Delane
Susan J. Edwards and Ronald X. Frost, both of Rockville Centre, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Marie Frost to Kevin John Delane, a son of Benita Delane of Cheshire, Conn., and the late John E. Delane.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Frost, 27 years old, is a senior account executive with Bernard Chaus Inc., a women's sportswear manufacturer in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Providence College.
Her father is an institutional securities trader and a principal at Morgan Stanley.
Her mother is a fifth-grade teacher at the Caroline G. Atkinson School in Freeport, L.I.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Helen Frost of Rockville Centre.


Traffic Alert
TODAY  Fifty-second Street will be closed between Lexington Avenue and Seventh Avenue from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the 52d Street Festival.
Ninth Avenue will be closed between 42d Street and 57th Street from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Ninth Avenue Fall Festival.


Well, at Least He Can Throw Strikes
Bill Pecota ducked before his pitch ever got to Andy Van Slyke.
"Why would you duck on a home run?" Van Slyke asked afterward.


Variety of Publishers Of Comic Books
"To Succeed in Publishing, an Idea and a Dream"  [ July 19 ]  featured Personality Comics as the only comic-book publisher on Long Island.
Well, that's not true!
There are several independents on Long Island, Double Edge being one of them.
We've been in business as long as Personality Comics.
Last year we published four issues of a comic book entitled "Time Gates"; 1992 will have three titles, "Spirit of the Dragon," "Tylor" and "The Town." We pride ourselves in giving the unknown artist, writers etc. a chance to see themselves in print.
We even try to use printing companies that are on Long Island.
RICH MACDOUGALL President, Double Edge Publishing Bohemia


TEST-MARKETING A PRESIDENT
Yes, Elizabeth Kolbert is correct.
Focus-group data can be used by cynical people to cynical ends.
But my experience is that incumbent politicians are no different than any other group of successful leaders in midcareer.
We all tend to assume that what got us to this point is all we need to know.
Who among us has not overlooked the obvious fact that we need to listen more?
Focus groups can be a wake-up call. BART WENDELL
South Acton, Mass.


Miami
FOUR days after Hurricane Andrew cut its swath of destruction through south Florida on Aug. 24, Miami's top tourism officials met here with a group of their counterparts from Charleston, S.C., where Hurricane Hugo came ashore in 1989.
One message from the South Carolina hurricane veterans: don't be misled by the surge of hotel bookings in the storm's aftermath as relief workers, insurance adjusters, construction crews and soldiers descend on the area.
Indeed, hotels rooms are scarce now in the Miami area, with occupancy rates averaging 80 percent, well above the 65 percent or so that is typical for the sluggish months before the peak winter season.
"But the problem is that the influx of people because of the cleanup and rebuilding displaces the normal fall tourism business," said Helen Stansell, executive director of the Charleston Convention and Visitors Bureau.
"And we found that you've got to work real hard to get people back."


Letting Your Computer Be Your Guide
PERSONAL-COMPUTER owners will soon have access to travel information drawn from the Zagat Survey guides to hotels and restaurants, which compile customers' opinions of the establishments.
The software, one of three noteworthy programs for travelers, brings together the Zagat information with mapping data, right down to street addresses, licensed from Etak, of Menlo Park, Calif., in a versatile and easy-to-use program developed by Axxis Electronic Publishing, of Haverford, Pa.
The product, Zagat-Axxis Cityguide, should be available in retail outlets starting Thursday.
The first three guides will be for New York, Chicago and Los Angeles, and will cost about $99 each, or all three for $249.


Doubleday Had It Right
To the Sports Editor:
Three cheers to Nelson Doubleday, owner of the New York Mets!
His position regarding the Fay Vincent "resignation" (The New York Times, Sept. 9, 1992) expressed not only the point of view of a major league baseball owner but, I'm sure, also many a baseball fan.
There is something about this whole issue and the way it is being handled that is wrong.
My impression as a fan is that Vincent acted with integrity, fairness and with a code of moral conduct while serving as commissioner.
He may have made some unpopular decisions with some of the owners.
But his boxscore from this fans' point of view is pretty good.


Howard P. Krieger, 74, Physician and Teacher
Howard P. Krieger, a prominent New York City neurologist, died on Friday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan and Montauk.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Dr.
Krieger, a medical teacher, researcher and clinician, was affiliated with Mount Sinai for more than 40 years.
He trained there, did research, practiced medicine and since 1975 was a professor at its medical school.


Without a Home, Castles Are in the Mind
ON the sort of sunny early September day that seems more suited to Little League practice than preparations for the football season, 10-year-old Troy Williams uncomplainingly endured the heat of his uniform as he ran laps and did push-ups and squat thrusts under the eye of his coach.
With the season's kickoff game only a few days away, Troy and his teammates focused on the tackles, touchdowns and end runs needed for victory on the field.
But reaching the goal post was, to some extent, the least of Troy's accomplishments.
Getting to football practice was more significant.


Ultrafast CT Can Save Lives
To the Editor:
As one of the original researchers into the use of Ultrafast CT to screen for coronary heart disease, I would like to reply to Dr.
David T. Nash's letter (Sept. 13).
His comments reflect common misconceptions among many physicians about screening for coronary atherosclerosis and a lack of familiarity of the recent literature dealing with coronary calcification and Ultrafast CT.
By quantifying the amount of coronary calcification with Ultrafast CT, the extent of atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries can be determined before the onset of clinical disease.
No other noninvasive technique has this capability.
Autopsies and Ultrafast CT studies have shown marked differences in the amount of calcium present in those who have sustained heart attacks and those who have not at all age levels.
A proposed "double blind" study of the use of Ultrafast CT was turned down by the National Institutes of Health in part because it was thought to be unethical to withhold treatment from the group with calcification.
Similarly, there will never be a trial of angiography in which a control group with atherosclerosis does not receive medical therapy.


On Renaming Glassboro College
As a taxpayer and native of New Jersey, I have been very interested in the question raised in the Sept. 13 "Q &amp; A," "How Glassboro College Got a New Name." Although readers were treated to an interesting interview with a generous and thoughtful benefactor, the issue of the name change goes far beyond a tribute to Henry Rowan.
Many alumni, students and citizens as well as the elected officials of Gloucester County, the Borough of Glassboro and several surrounding communities oppose the name change and the way in which the college administration arrived at the decision.


Ring Around the Birdbath and Other Chores
WHAT a busy time of year.
Perennials are divided.
Harvests are coming in.
Overgrown shrubs are moved.
Bare patches in the lawn are seeded.
On top of all this, the soil was moist from all the rain this summer.
The agenda of things to be done was long.


Mind Games for Children
YOU will not see any of the toys at Tenzing &amp; Pema -- the new Upper East Side store with the slogan "Presents of Mind" -- advertised on Saturday-morning television.
"Don't use the word educational," said the owner, Simon Abrahams, who also owns six Manhattan legwear shops called Leg Room.
The thinking child's toy store on Madison Avenue is named after the owners' son Tenzing, 8 years old, and daughter Pema, 7; their mother is Princess Yangchen of Sikkim.


Cynthia S. Pratt, Hammon Cottrell
Cynthia Southwick Pratt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Pratt Jr. of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Charles Hammon Cottrell, a son of the Rev.
Christine G. Cole of Hydes, Md., and J. Trowbridge Cottrell of Madison, Conn.
The bridegroom's mother, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Christ's Church.
Mrs.
Cottrell, 32 years old, is an interior landscape designer in Baltimore.
She and her husband graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father, a retired executive vice president for Avon Products Inc., the beauty-aids manufacturer in New York, is a business consultant.


The Executive Computer; New I.B.M. Line Emphasizes Service Contracts
SEEKING to regain its strength in the corporate market for desktop machines, the IBMPersonal Computer Company cut prices sharply last week across its existing PS/2 product line and introduced what it calls a "premium" line of machines -- backed by the most aggressive service and support policies in the industry.
That marked Stage 2 in the International Business Machines Corporation's four-stage strategy to reassert itself in the personal computer industry, where it has been battered in recent years.


Joan Rivers On 'Tonight'? Stay Tuned
Joan Rivers's exile from the "Tonight" show may soon be over.
Representatives for the comedienne, who has her own daytime talk show, have been talking with NBC about her appearing as a guest on "Tonight" with the host, Jay Leno.
This dialogue represents an unexpected thaw in Ms.
Rivers's relationship with the program now that Johnny Carson has left.
In 1986, Mr.
Carson stopped speaking to Ms.
Rivers, who had frequently been guest host of "Tonight," after she started a competing late-night show on the Fox Network.
This year, Ms.
Rivers complained that NBC refused to let her use clips from "Tonight" on her current show.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; A Tense Uncertainty Grows in the Campaign
Five weeks before Election Day, it is a tense time for Gov.
Bill Clinton, but an alarming one for President Bush.
Behind the happy, Trumanesque imagery of Mr.
Bush's whistle-stop tour through the Midwest this weekend are some hard political facts: a formidable deficit in the national polls, an unfriendly electoral map and now, the possible re-entry of his most tormenting critic, Ross Perot.


Miss Montalette And C. F. Samper
Bettina Amy Montalette, the daughter of Nicole Montalette of New York and Pierre E. Montalette of Paris, was married yesterday to Christopher Fleming Samper, a son of Barbara Samper of Danville, Calif., and J. Phillip Samper of Annapolis, Md.
The Rev.
William Pindar performed the ceremony at Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Samper, 27 years old, is the international sales coordinator for Media Vision of Fremont, Calif., a maker of audio circuit boards.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
She and her husband received master's degrees from the American Graduate School of International Management.
Her father is a retired vice chairman of the McKinley Allsopp investment bank in New York, where her mother is a lawyer.


A Morality Tale in Court and Tabloid
From a legal standpoint, the most telling moment in the morality tale of Amy and Joey may have occurred when Fred Klein, an unflappable career prosecutor, stepped out of the courtroom and found himself hurtling toward the floor with a microphone cord around his neck.
"It was like walking out on a Hollywood set," a still-astonished Mr.
Klein said.
"I've tried 32 murder cases, far more serious than this case, and I've never seen anything like it."


County Composer's 'Columbus' Debut
KEYBOARD performances are much in evidence this week, starting today at 3 P.M. when Eugene Istomin plays Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto at the State University of New York at Purchase with Paul Lustig Dunkel conducting the New Orchestra of Westchester.
Also on the program are works by Verdi and Falla and the world premiere of "Columbus," by the Westchester composer Elias Tannenbaum.
The numbers to call for more information are 682-3707 and 251-6200.
In Mamaroneck, the Emelin Theater's Distinguished Guest Artists Series begins Wednesday with an 8 P.M.  appearance by the pianist Richard Goode, while another young pianist, Gwendolyn Mok, opens the season for Performers of Westchester.
That cycle of recitals is given in private homes around the county, so music lovers can hear Ms.
Mok playing Haydn and Chopin sonatas and Ravel's "Gaspard de la Nuit" in Ardsley on Friday at 8:30 P.M. or in Bedford next Sunday at 4 P.M.
The number to call for Emelin Theater information is 698-0098, and the number for reserving seats for Performers of Westchester is 693-1151.


E. Mutarelli and V. Natili-Branca
Duchessa Eleanor Mutarelli di Saragnano, a daughter of the late Prof. and Mrs.
Alfred Iacuzzi, was married yesterday in Ronciglione, Italy, to Marchesse Valerio Natili-Branca, a son of the late Marchesse and Marchesa Virgilio Natili-Branca.
Giancarlo Blasi, the Mayor of Ronciglione, officiated at the town hall.
The bride is a public relations consultant and freelance journalist in Rome.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father was the chairman of the romance-language department of Baruch College.
She was the widow of Duca Giorgio Mutarelli di Saragnano.


Draft Evasion Means Others Pay the Price; Founders' Wisdom
To the Editor:
Enough already about Bill Clinton and the Vietnam draft!
The Bush re-election campaign continues to variously assert that a person must have experience in the United States military to be a respected and competent Commander in Chief.
In other words, since Bill Clinton did not serve in the Vietnam War he is unqualified to be President and unsuited to make the momentous decision of sending American troops into combat.


Who Started the Cold War?
To the Editor:
My congratulations to The Book Review for having unearthed the last living Stalinist in St.
Petersburg.
Milton H. Aronson's meretricious comments on the review of the new biography of Harry Truman (Letters, Aug. 16) have left me racked between horrified giggles and towering rage.


U.S. Returns Stolen Ancient Textiles to Bolivia
Ending four years of threatened lawsuits and negotiation, the United States has returned 48 ancient sacred textiles that the Coroma Indians of Bolivia say were stolen and illegally imported by American art dealers.
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady turned the textiles over to the President of Bolivia, Jaime Paz Zamora, in a ceremony at the Bolivian embassy in Washington on Thursday.
Their return is considered by legal experts, curators and anthropologists as an important step in stemming the illegal traffic in antiquities from Latin America.


Lisha J. Driscoll, Thomas Cahill Jr.
Lisha Jean Driscoll, a daughter of Claire N. Driscoll and Richard D. Driscoll, both of Hudson Falls, N.Y., was married yesterday in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., to Thomas Francis Cahill Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cahill of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas F. Parke officiated at the Bethesda Episcopal Church.
The Rev.
Paul Manning, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cahill graduated from Marist College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and received an M.B.A. from Simmons College.
She is a business systems analyst at EJV Partners, a software concern in New York.
Her father retired as a history teacher from South Glens Falls (N.Y.) High School.
Her mother is a school counselor at Queensbury (N.Y.) Middle School.
The bride's stepmother, Martha Driscoll, teaches business at Argyle (N.Y.) High School.


A Friendly Ghost Whose Job Is Fighting Illiteracy
When Liz Nealon was a little girl, she and her sister would sit in the backyard making up stories about Flash Gordon.
That was when she wasn't glued to "Captain Kangaroo."
Ms.
Nealon, now 37 years old, did the expected things -- went to college, got married and had a baby.
But much about her stayed determinedly youth-oriented.
She was among the visionaries who came together a decade ago to make MTV one of the most creative forces in television history; her last post with MTV was senior vice president of international programming.


Finding Their Own Rhythms


For Peter Gabriel, This Time It's Personal
Roll over, Sigmund Freud.
Therapy has come to even the rarefied sector of rock songwriters.
Lately, Bruce Springsteen and Axl Rose have told interviewers about their psychotherapy, and now Peter Gabriel has come up with a song about the process: "Digging in the Dirt." "Find the places I got hurt," he sings in his weary voice.
"Open up the places I got hurt." It's the first single from "Us" (Geffen 24473; CD and cassette), and a signal of Gabriel's changed intentions.
This time, it's personal.
At first, the album sounds like Gabriel hasn't budged much since he released "So" in 1986.
One new song, "Steam," returns to the 1960's soul riffs and Smokey Robinson-style wordplay of "Sledgehammer," from "So"; "Come Talk to Me" revives the booming drumbeats and grandiosity of older songs like "Biko" and "San Jacinto," although it also tosses in bagpipes, Senegalese drums, Russian choral singing and duduk, a Balkan flute.
The album's arrangements use musicians from India, Kenya, Brazil and elsewhere, but the melodies come from Gabriel's English roots: hymns, Celtic folk music, pop songs and 1970's progressive rock.


The Strangelove Economics of 1992
Recently, many politicians and economists have launched a new approach to the exploding U.S. deficit: Don't worry, be happy.
Tired of wrestling with how to untie our fiscal Gordian knot, these folks now suggest we simply learn to live with our red ink.
They advise us to indulge our urge to spend our children's money, advocating Strangelove Economics ("How I learned to stop worrying and love the deficit").


Fun Replaces Fast and Famous in Fifth Ave. Mile
Upholding the honor of the neighborhood and the nominal integrity of the race, Itamar Da Silva of Irvington, N.Y., and Luis Francisco of the Bronx finished 1-2 in the men's Metropolitan Mile down a rain-slicked Fifth Avenue yesterday.
They crossed the finish line at 62d Street ahead of a trio of ringers imported to improve the local field in the absence of the usual race for elite runners.
No such effort was made for the women's Metropolitan, and none was needed.
Alicia Moss Kelly, a 31-year-old Brooklyn school teacher who set the event record in 1990 with a time of 4 minutes 40 seconds, breezed to victory in 4:43.07.
She finished well ahead of Natalia Azpiazu of Manhattan (4:49.13) and Petra Huettemann of the Bronx (4:57.23).
Out of Nowhere
Da Silva, a 29-year-old Brazilian-born deli worker who said he had previously specialized in longer races, came out of nowhere to win the men's Metropolitan in a time of 4:00.37.


A Wise, Wary Simms: Just Like Instant Replay With Veteran in Pocket
For all its sophisticated formations and game plans and schemes and options, for all the X's and O's and the zone man (or is it man zone?), professional football is still basically a game of the simple things: running and passing, blocking and tackling.
And as Phil Simms has demonstrated for all these years, and especially last Monday night, it is a game of emotion.


Gypsies and Germans, Wronged
Gypsies, half a million of whom perished in Nazi death camps, again face threatening German mobs.
Bonn's answer is not to quell the mobs but to deport the Gypsies to Romania.
Germany will also pay Romania $20 million for transportation and job training.
Bonn's policy is repellent.
It also defies the spirit of international refugee conventions.
Gypsies face systematic discrimination and sometimes violent persecution in Romania, a situation unlikely to change much after today's Romanian elections.


Housing Plan: From Projects Into Co-ops
The New York City Housing Authority will begin selling 730 cooperative apartments next month to the working poor in the most ambitious effort by a city using Federal money earmarked for permanent housing.
The effort puts New York City ahead of other cities around the country that have applied for the funds, Federal officials said.


Silver Screen As Crystal Ball
To the Editor:
Going so public with such private matters seems totally out of character.
And yet, Woody Allen's whole career has been based on making strongly autobiographical films, sometimes calling his character Allen and casting the woman in his life as the leading actress.


A History of Hate
In his capacity as an adviser to a British television series entitled "The Longest Hatred," Robert S. Wistrich, who teaches modern European history at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, has put together as good a one-volume overview of anti-Semitism as exists in English.
ANTISEMITISM: The Longest Hatred (Pantheon, $25) is not, for the most part, a work of original research but rather a comprehensive and balanced report on the mass of research that has been done, some of it by the prolific Mr.
Wistrich himself.
"Antisemitism" begins with a masterly account of enmity toward the Jews from pre-Christian times through the Holocaust, including its aftermath in Germany and Austria.
There then follows a series of chapters on anti-Semitism in England, the United States, France, Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
A final section deals with the Arab world, where the struggle with Israel has resulted in a grafting of the whole vile tradition of Christian European anti-Semitism onto Islam's historically less hostile approach to the Jews.
No one can be equally sure-footed in all reaches of this far-flung subject.
Mr.
Wistrich is at his best describing the transformation of theological Jew hatred into the nationalistic and political anti-Semitism of 19th- and early 20th-century Europe.
In his chapter on the United States, he makes a small but unfortunate stumble, claiming that African-Americans, in contrast to white Americans, become more anti-Semitic the better educated they are.
That is not the case, although it does appear that anti-Semitism decreases less swiftly with educational level in the black community.
Anti-Semitism is a phenomenon whose absence is often as significant as its presence.
In this regard, Mr.
Wistrich ought to have focused at least as much attention on the evangelical Christian right as on Louis Farrakhan and the Black Muslims.
Despite a theology that looks to the eventual conversion of the Jewish people, the Christian right has leaned over backward to signal that Jews are not excluded from its "Judeo-Christian" political agenda.
There is no greater testimony to the marginalization of anti-Semitism in the United States today.


Individualist-Idealist Breaks the Rules
WHEN civic leaders of Rock Hill, S.C., envisioned an entrance for their new industrial park, they had in mind a redwood sign saying, "Tech Park." What Audrey Flack, the sculptor from East Hampton, gave them were four 22-foot-tall gilded goddesses.
Departing from expectations is hardly new to the 61-year-old Ms.
Flack.
Her 40-year career is the subject of a retrospective opening on Sept. 29 at the National Museum of Women in the Arts in Washington.
The exhibition and a monograph published by Harry N. Abrams Inc. are entitled "Breaking the Rules." From Ms.
Flack's celebrated Photorealist paintings of the 1970's to her sculptured deities of the 80's and now a proposed 10-story high monument in Queens, breaking the rules has been Ms.
Flack's major rule.


Donna Karan's Renaissance Husband
NAME: Stephan Weiss.
IDENTITY, OCCUPATION: Husband and business partner of Donna Karan.
Sculptor.
Designed bottle for the new Donna Karan New York perfume.
AGE: 54.
Q.
Your wife has said that the perfume smells a little bit like the back of your neck.
Could you describe that smell?


Today's Game Offers Easier Preparation
EVEN though game is available year round, fall is still the traditional time for serving it.
Not long ago, picking out the buckshot was as much a part of the ritual as hanging the birds in a larder for as long as two weeks before eating them.
And when you roasted a game bird, you made sure that it was larded with plenty of bacon so that it didn't dry out in the oven.
Now game birds of all kinds, hares and rabbits are being raised on farms where they are allowed to range freely.
This means that they are not as dark or lean as wild game, but they have more tender meat and a distinctive flavor.
They don't need to be gussied up with rich sauces either but can even be cooked on the grill without becoming tough.


Marcy Brownson and Edwin J. Wesely
Marcy Brownson and Edwin Joseph Wesely, a former chairman of CARE in New York, were married in New York Wednesday.
Judge Jack B. Weinstein of United States District Court in Brooklyn officiated at Windows on the World in Manhattan.
Ms.
Brownson, 48 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a financial adviser associate at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, an investment-management and research concern in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in journalism from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of William and Mildred Brownson of Stuart, Fla.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Jay R. Brandinger; Translating Research into New Products
DR.
Jay R. Brandinger has a resume that spans high-technology history, from the transmission of the first, pre-satellite, television signals between England and the United States to the creation of RCA's first video-disk players.
Last year, he turned 64 years of age, but he had no intention of either giving up flying -- he owns a Cessna Turbo 210 -- or retiring.
"I was, in fact, looking around," he said.
What he landed was the job of executive director of the state's Commission on Science and Technology.
His salary is $83,000.


Cat in the Hat Comes Back
Last year's boyz in the hood have changed headgear.
The new headcovering, popular with the hip-hop crowd, is in the shape of a tube.
The topmost end is tied with a narrow length of the same stretch jersey fabric.


Playing It Safe by Installing a Deadbolt
A DEADBOLT not only increases the security of any door, but also is among the least expensive and easiest kinds of locks to install.
It consists of a sliding metal bar mounted horizontally in a door's edge and is operated by a key and a small knob called a thumbturn.
Most homes have deadbolts on their main entry doors, but it is wise to add them to doors leading to the garage or basement and to doors on outdoor storage sheds.


Ms. Giammarino and David Anderson
Mary Catherine Giammarino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Giammarino of Haworth, N.J., was married there yesterday to David Andrew Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Anderson of Brookfield Center, Conn.
The Rev.
Daniel Smith, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Church.
Ms.
Giammarino, who is 31 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a managing director in the president's office at the March of Dimes in White Plains.
She graduated magna cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.


Marilyn Quayle Isn't 'Most Women'; Still a Male Preserve
To the Editor:
Marilyn Quayle in "Workers, Wives and Mothers" (Op-Ed, Sept. 11) incorrectly states that today's professional world is one "previously dominated by men."


Katherine Savits, Jeremy Rabinovitz
Katherine Rose Savits and Jeremy Rabinovitz plan to marry in December.
Ms.
Savits is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel M. Savits of Rockville, Md.
The prospective bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Rabinovitz of Brookline, Mass.
Ms.
Savits is the youth-program director for the Y.M.C.A. in Silver Spring, Md.
She graduated from William Smith College and received a master's degree in recreation programming and administration from the University of Maryland.


A Musical Celebrates Real Love
THERE have always been certain shows that are more successful Off Broadway than on, because their gentle pleasures are overwhelmed by the combination of a cavernous theater and the excess of glitter and glamour that producing on Broadway so often demands.
A case in point is "Once on This Island," a small musical that was so popular in its Off Broadway debut that it seemed a sure bet for a bigger and more illustrious arena.


Chaplin Blazed the Trail. Woody Allen Follows.
FOR ANYONE WHO HAS BEEN following the messy fracas between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow, and especially anyone who has seen his new film, "Husbands and Wives," the operative terms of the scandal are
art
and
life.
But whose art and whose life?
The answer seems self-evident. (Woody Allen's, you idiot! Who else's?) Yet as the public may observe for itself when Richard Attenborough's biographical film "Chaplin" is released at Christmas, the correspondences between Charlie Chaplin's life and work and Woody Allen's are remarkable -- so remarkable, in fact, that it almost seems Woody Allen has been sculpting his own life along the lines of Chaplin's.
He has been playing Zelig to Chaplin, the greatest of American film icons, perhaps hoping to achieve the same results both professionally and personally.


The 'Minister Of Fun' Exits Under a Cloud
For two months, Britain's feisty tabloid newspapers had yapped at the heels of David Mellor, arguing that the Cabinet official who was sometimes called "the Minister of Fun" seemed to be having a bit too much of it.
First, there were embarrassing disclosures over the summer that Mr.
Mellor, whose Cabinet brief included sports, the news media and the arts, had been carrying on an extramarital affair with a Spanish actress.


Paying for the Fall of Communism
HANS SOSSNA is dismantling Stahlkordwerk, the factory he helped construct just six years ago.
Rusted furnaces, pieces of machinery and discarded timber lie scattered beneath the harsh fluorescent lighting of a plant that once produced steel 24 hours a day.
Outside, more scrap metal is piled beside a barbed-wire fence that rings a former Soviet military base.
Before Communism collapsed, the wire from Stahlkordwerk was bought by another East German company, a tire manufacturer named Pneumant.
But now Pneumant has lost out to the likes of Michelin and Goodyear and nobody wants the wire from Mr.
Sossna's factory here, midway between Berlin and the Polish border.
Of 300 workers, only 12 remain.
The other 288 have joined the growing ranks of unemployed in Germany, where the jobless rate in what was East Germany has risen to more than 15 percent.


When TV Is A Snap
The cooler days and longer nights of autumn bring increased interest in indoor activities, and video viewers in search of equipment will find a number of innovations.
One radically new device links video with still photography and enables viewers to show their snapshots on the television screen.
Outwardly, Kodak's new Photo CD players resemble ordinary CD players, and they will indeed play music through a stereo system.
But when connected to a television set they will also display video versions of photographs after the image has been transferred to a small videodisk.


TEST-MARKETING A PRESIDENT
Yes, Elizabeth Kolbert is correct.
Focus-group data can be used by cynical people to cynical ends.
But my experience is that incumbent politicians are no different than any other group of successful leaders in midcareer.
We all tend to assume that what got us to this point is all we need to know.
Who among us has not overlooked the obvious fact that we need to listen more?
Focus groups can be a wake-up call. BART WENDELL
South Acton, Mass.


Kris R. Estes, Stephen E. Binder
Kris Risser Estes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Estes of Dallas, was married there yesterday to Stephen Eliot Binder, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Binder of New Haven.
The Rev.
Dr.
Don Benton, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Rabbi Gerald Klein took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Binder, 30 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University.
She received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago, as did her husband.
Her parents are investors.


Devils Find That Holik Was Worth the Wait
The early prognosis on Bobby Holik, the Czechoslovak forward the Devils acquired in a deal with Hartford last month, appears to justify Lou Lamoriello's contention that patience in trades pays off.
Despite pressure from all sides, Lamoriello, the president of the Devils, waited for more than a year to trade the disgruntled goaltender, Sean Burke, because he was looking for a player the Devils could use immediately.


Allison Shipley, Mr. Granados 3d
Allison Parks Shipley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter V. Shipley of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Ernesto Granados 3d, the son of Maria Isabel San Antonio of Cranford, N.J., and the late Mr.
Granados 2d.
The Rev.
Riley E. Jensen performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in Summit.
Ms.
Shipley, who is 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a senior associate in Parsippany, N.J., for the personal financial services group of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm.
She graduated from Kenyon College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the president and chief operating officer of the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.


Cable TV
To the Editor:
Your Q &amp; A column of Aug. 23 addresses an issue of growing concern for many co-op owners -- bulk-rate contracts between co-op boards and cable television companies -- but does not clarify how this arrangement only applies to certain cable providers.


Susan A. Melick, Mark F. Bresnan
Susan Allerton Melick, a librarian at the Photograph and Slide Library of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and Mark F. Bresnan, a librarian at the Frick Art Reference Library, both in New York, were married yesterday in Cedar Grove, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles A. Jenkins, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Community Church of Cedar Grove.


Welcome to the Major Leagues, Bud Selig Presiding
"Your chancellorship, how are you?" an old friend asked Allan H. (Bud) Selig, the slight, bespectacled and blue-blazered fellow standing in bas-relief in front of a big, bright abstract painting in the Milwaukee art museum.
"Hello, Ed," said Selig, with a faint smile.
Selig, the owner of the Milwaukee Brewers baseball team, had recently been given a new title in baseball.
But "chancellorship" it was not.


A Time for Statesmen. Or for a Pause.
THE names of Jean Monnet, Konrad Adenauer, Alcide de Gasperi and Charles de Gaulle were being invoked last week by their successors, to recall the high ideals and aspirations that underlay the foundation of the European Community but that lately seem to have been lost in bickering.
Many Europeans were asking themselves whether their current leaders are up to the task of bringing Europe closer to unity, or even of preventing the loss of what has already been achieved.
Much of the monetary and political chaos of the last few weeks has been an object lesson in inept political leadership and in the narrow national vision that the Community's original architects sought to transcend.


U.S. to Sell Helicopters to Israelis To Balance Jet Deal With Saudis
The White House said today that the United States had agreed to send Army helicopters to Israel and to store other military equipment there in an effort that the White House said was aimed at "the preservation and maintenance of Israel's qualitative military edge."
The move, announced today by Washington and Jerusalem, is intended to compensate Israel for the sale of top-of-the-line F-15 fighter jets to Saudi Arabia.
The United States and Israel have reportedly been negotiating a military cooperation package in the context of the Saudi deal.


Where Stars Labor Modestly
Chamber music, aside from its sophistication -- its elitist appeal in the noblest sense of that maligned adjective -- has an inherently idealistic component.
Star performers earn more money and glory in solo recitals and concertos.
Humbler artists enjoy greater security in the embrace of a well-established orchestra.
But Gidon Kremer's festival in Lockenhaus raises even the idealism of chamber music to new heights.
Situated in a tiny Austrian village on the Hungarian border, it scorns the fancy hotels and exorbitant prices and music-business entanglements of the big festivals.
Instead, Mr.
Kremer invites mostly young instrumentalists and singers, and enlists them in the performance of repertory both familiar and unfamiliar, including a hefty proportion of contemporary music.


POSTINGS: Touro on Lexington Avenue; Classes in a Landmark
The finishing stages of a year-and-a-half, $750,000 renovation now winding down at 160 Lexington Avenue didn't stop classes in the women's and graduate divisions of Touro College from starting there on Sept. 14.
Indeed, the brass letters "Touro," on the Lexington Avenue facade of the landmark -- whose main entrance is on 30th Street -- signal a new academic era.
The five-story structure opened as the New York School of Applied Design for Women in 1909.
In 1944 it became the New York Phoenix School of Design.
Thirty years later Pratt was added to the name when Phoenix merged with the Pratt Institute of Brooklyn.
Its art-school days ended in the 80's when Altro Health and Rehabilitation Services turned it into a vocational training center.
Touro, a liberal arts school whose specialty is Jewish studies, bought the landmark for $2.25 million from Altro in 1990.


Rebecca Fannin, John Delmar
Rebecca Amelia Fannin, the editor in chief of International Business, a monthly magazine published in Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Davies Delmar, a lawyer in New York.
Judge Lorin Duckman of Criminal Court in the Bronx officiated at the couple's home in New York.
Ms.
Fannin, who is 37 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Ohio University in Athens.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James A. Fannin of Lancaster, Ohio.
Her father is a history professor at Ohio University in Lancaster.
Her mother, Norma Jean Fannin, is a kindergarten teacher there.


New Terminal For Pittsburgh
Starting at 5:50 A.M. on Thursday, after a single night of mass movement and logistical precision, Pittsburgh plans to open the nation's newest airport terminal complex, just down the runway from its cramped, 35-year-old terminal building.
Officials say the overnight changeover will be the climax of four years of construction that has created a modern airport at a cost of $700 million.
Although it will use the existing runways 16 miles southeast of downtown Pittsburgh, the new terminal will radically alter air travel into and out of the city.


An Idea That Never Left the Ball Park
AS October approaches, the Mets are out of the pennant race and the Yankees look as though they would be happy just to play .500 ball.
But back in 1964, the Yanks were in the World Series against the St.
Louis Cardinals.
And the Topps Company, famous for its baseball cards if not its chewing gum, began marketing baseball coins.
Topps distributed thousands of coins featuring 164 players.
It didn't fabricate them but farmed out the work to several companies.
The finished coins were shipped to Topps and inserted into a package as a bonus with a baseball card and a stick of gum.


Mullen Re-Signs With Penguins
Right wing Joe Mullen agreed to terms on a new contract with the Pittsburgh Penguins yesterday.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a shelter for homeless families in the Bronx gave an incorrect address for one complex of the Help Bronx apartments.
It is at 785 Crotona Park North.


Roll Over Basho: Who Japan Is Reading, and Why
"JAPANESE writers are very aware of what we're doing on this side of the Pacific and very well informed about American fiction, about American culture," says the novelist Jay McInerney.
"Yet we're terribly ignorant in this country of Japanese fiction, Japanese culture. It is, I think, far more accessible than we might imagine."
In an effort to correct this cultural trade imbalance, PEN, the writers' organization, brought Mr.
McInerney together in New York with Haruki Murakami, a best-selling novelist in Japan, who is a visiting fellow in East Asian studies at Princeton University.
Following are excerpts of the conversation between Mr.
McInerney, whose novel "Ransom" is set in Japan, and Mr.
Murakami, two of whose novels ("Hard-Boiled Wonderland and the
End of the World" and "A Wild Sheep Chase") are available in English translations. Mr. McInerney and Mr. Murakami later expanded their observations for The Book Review.


Crusading Clergy Shape the Course of Dance
THE GRANDMOTHER OF THE Rev.
Al Carmines once warned him, "A praying knee and a dancing foot never grew on the same leg." Fortunately, he didn't believe her.
In fact, as a minister of the Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village during the 1960's, Mr.
Carmines helped shape the course of American modern dance.
He is not the only clergyman to have done so.
Thanks to their efforts, dance performances are flourishing at Judson, as well as at St.
Mark's Church and other New York houses of worship.
Earlier this month, in recognition of three decades of support, the Rev.
Howard Moody, Judson's senior pastor, received a Bessie, an award established by Dance Theater Workshop to honor achievements in dance and performance art.


Cornell Kicker Has Quite a Field Day
Cornell kicker Mike Cochrane set one school record by attempting six field goals and tied another by making three of them yesterday as the Big Red defeated Lehigh, 29-23, on Cornell's home field in Ithaca, N.Y.
Along the way, Cochrane also tied a personal record by kicking a 46-yard field goal.
He later added kicks of 44 and 34 yards.


Balancing Growth and Value Funds
In buying stocks, money managers tend to favor one of two investment strategies: growth or value.
To measure the success of these approaches, Lipper Analytical Services has developed two indexes, one consisting of 30 high-ranking growth stock funds and the other of 30 value stock funds.
These two investment styles do not work equally well in all investing climates, as the chart shows.
Therefore, most investment advisers recommend that individuals' portfolios include stock funds from each camp.


Art Program Infuses a School With Joy
KATHERINE DAMKOHLER had the radical idea that school could be a joyful place.
As the principal of the Sacred Heart School, a Roman Catholic elementary and middle school in the center of the city here, she said she watched bubbly kindergarteners become sullen middle-school students and wondered what was wrong.
"I always felt there was something missing in the school," the principal said, explaining why two years ago -- although funds were scarce -- she added art, music and dance to the curriculum.


Woman and Strawberry Make a Censor Nervous
FAIR play and truthfulness are only two of the issues that keep network executives vigilant.
They also have to decide what passes the test of tastefulness.
One fragrance advertiser says that in matters of taste, censorship should be banned.


The Know-It-All New Yorker of 'Civil Wars'
With her curtain of long velvety hair, Windex-blue eyes, porcelain skin, hey-look-me-over walk and black palazzo pants, Debi Mazar looks like a hip club-culture Snow White.
But if the look is part Disney, part SoHo, the sandpaper voice is pure New York: a lush outer-borough accent, machine-gun delivery, and "you know" and "like" studding her sentences like raisins on a Danish.
"It's funny, but sometimes people notice me for my voice, you know?" Ms.
Mazar (pronounced MAY-zar) says as she shoves a Bendel's shopping bag under the table at a sidewalk cafe off Bleecker Street.
"The other day I was in a store wearing sweats and no makeup, and this woman says, 'You sound just like that girl on that TV show, "Civil Wars." ' Then she comes closer, like inspecting me, and says, 'You
are
that girl!
But you don't have your eyes on.
What's the matter?' I've got to tell you, it freaked me out."


Catherine Canade, Jeffrey Washenko
Catherine Angela Canade, the daughter of Angela T. Canade of Brooklyn and Austen D. Canade of Westerleigh, S. I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Allen Washenko, a son of Elizabeth Elkins of St.
Michaels, Md., and Carl Washenko of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Ralph A. Bove, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Pompei Church in New York.


Regional Airports Servicing More Travelers


Mutual Funds; A New Landscape for Global Bonds
THE crisis in European currency markets has taken a harsh toll on mutual fund investors whose funds own foreign bonds and notes.
These funds lost more than 2 percent of their value on average in two weeks that ended last Thursday, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
This devaluation of mutual fund shares caught many investors by surprise, especially those in short-term global income funds.
But obstacles in creating monetary union in Europe may actually be good news for holders of long-term global bonds who are able to ride out short-run price moves.


Route 66
To the Editor: Robert Boyd's article about Route 66 ("Route 66, Unmarked but Not Unsung," Aug. 23) reminded me of my 20,000-odd mile trip around the country in a small van in 1988..
Since my van was 30 years old and not designed for high-speed travel, I stayed off the interstate highway system except where it was unavoidable.
I traveled exclusively on the United States routes like 66, 2, 20, and so on, and many state, country and local roads.


Ring Around the Birdbath and Other Chores
WHAT a busy time of year.
Perennials are divided.
Harvests are coming in.
Overgrown shrubs are moved.
Bare patches in the lawn are seeded.
On top of all this, the soil was moist from all the rain this summer.
The agenda of things to be done was long.


McCall on Violence in the Schools
Last week, a 15-year-old student at South Shore High School in Brooklyn was fatally stabbed by a fellow student, again raising questions about safety in New York City schools.
Since then there has been an outcry for better security, including metal detectors, at all schools, not just the 40 previously considered at high risk for violence.
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez conceded to the wishes of students, parents and school officials at South Shore to set up metal detectors there, but he and others, including the school board president, H. Carl McCall, argued that school violence must be addressed in ways that go beyond providing more security measures.
Mr.
McCall talked with Felicia R. Lee, a New York Times reporter, about students, safety and the schools.
Q South Shore High School was considered one of the safer schools in the city.
What does an incident like this say about the overall safety of New York City and its public schools?


Yanks Beat Jays to Keep It Interesting
The lights at Yankee Stadium were shining brightly before one pitch was thrown yesterday on a miserable afternoon in the Bronx.
It was dark and dreary, fitting for the way the Yankees have often performed this season.
The conditions were not ideal for a pennant-pursuing team like the Toronto Blue Jays.
Players slogged through the outfield, pitchers tried to grip a ball that felt like a shot-put and the soaked fans had umbrellas ready.


Networking; Managing Systems With Thousands of Users
IF personal computers had counterparts among network operating systems, the Apple Macintosh's counterpart might be Vines from Banyan Systems Inc., and the I.B.M.
PC's might be Netware from Novell.
Like the Mac, Vines is the more interesting, even innovative, product.
It is easier for most people to use and has some nice design features and a fanatical following among users.
Like the PC, Netware is functional if less flashy, and it dominates the market by sheer numbers.
In the local area network market, Novell had 59 percent as of last year; Banyan had 3 percent.


On Men and Women of Culture
The catalogue for Valentino's 30-year retrospective exhibition includes prefaces by Elizabeth Taylor, Mikhail Baryshnikov, John Fairchild
and
Henry Kissinger.
Why was the former Secretary of State included?
Giancarlo Giammetti, the chairman of Valentino, said through a spokeswoman: "We chose him because he's an American statesman. He's a modern, clever -- an intelligent man of culture and strategy who at the same time is not afraid to talk about fashion."
Thierry Mugler's first fragrance, Angel, available next month in France, sounds like a mad concoction.
Sold in a large blue star-shaped bottle, it is scented with the synthesized smells of cotton candy, chocolate, caramel, coffee, vanilla, plums and moss.


Dying Former Sailor Battles Navy In Search for Afflicted Shipmates
Slowly, very slowly, Jerry Cochran is suffocating.
Mr.
Cochran, a 39-year-old former sailor, has a fatal lung disease that doctors say he contracted from tiny silica shards inhaled while he was grinding nonskid adhesive material off the decks of an aircraft carrier to prepare it for resurfacing.


Miss Betteridge, Simon R. Hirst
Caroline Weeks Betteridge, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Betteridge of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Simon Richard Hirst, a son of Sir David and Lady Hirst of Hampton, Middlesex, England.
The Rev.
Leonard Freeman performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Hirst was until recently an administrative assistant in investment banking at Lehman Brothers, the securities brokerage, in New York.


Making 'Refugee Experience' Less Daunting
With less than 24 hours' notice, Lang Ngan, a 29-year-old clerk at the United States Embassy in Saigon, boarded an evacuation plane with her parents and six young siblings and left Vietnam forever on April 26, 1974.
Just minutes after take-off, pale and panicked, she told her littlest brothers and sisters that life might be too tough in America for the family to stick together.
"I told them we might have to put them up for adoption," Mrs.
Ngan said.
"They were sad. They said to make sure I sent them my address."


Bahamas
ONLY hours before Hurricane Andrew smashed into the United States mainland late last month the storm barreled into the Bahamas, the string of islands stretching 600 miles southeastward into the Atlantic Ocean from just off the coast of Florida.
While the destruction in the Bahamas does not compare with the devastation in south Florida, the hurricane -- the worst to hit the islands in more than 60 years -- killed four people and left some 1,700 of the 250,000 residents of the Bahamas homeless.
It also wiped out roads, bridges and resort hotels.
But almost all major damage was confined to the northern part of Eleuthera, Harbour Island, Spanish Wells, Cat Cay, Bimini and part of the Berry Islands -- that is, to several of the sparsely populated Family Islands.
Nassau and Freeport were untouched, except for minor damage from high winds and rain, as were the Abacos, Cat Island, Andros Island, the Exumas, San Salvador and various other of the Bahamas's 40 inhabited islands.


Lendl-Connors Lesson of Contrast
To the Sports Editor:
The United States Open tennis match between Ivan Lendl and Jimmy Connors was both interesting and instructive.
Connors, supported by what seemed to be the entire crowd, won the opening set, then was crushed in three straight sets and eliminated.


Rap With a Graffiti Beat
Mike McLeer is determined to keep New York's signature art form from vanishing.
"We want to keep graffiti alive through our lyrics," said Mr.
McLeer, a 22-year-old graffiti artist and the leader of a rap group called Lords of Brooklyn.
Mr.
McLeer, who paints under the name "Kaves," has been doing graffiti for more than a decade.
In the early 1980's, when subway artists were in their heyday, he was underground almost all the time.
"That was my summer camp," he said.
Next month, T-shirts and other work by Lords of Brooklyn -- Mr.
McLeer, his brother, Adam, and their friend ScottWestermen -- are expected to be seen on MTV, when the Irish-American rap group House of Pain releases the video for its second single, "Shamrocks and Shenanigans."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FOR BANNED BOOK WEEK
"Mark Twain, Salman Rushdie and Your Freedom to Read" is the title of a talk being presented on Thursday at the Yonkers Library to observe Banned Book Week, which ends on Saturday.
The speakers are Richard and Bernard Stein, brothers and co-publishers of the Riverdale Press, a weekly newspaper founded by their parents in 1950.


Lydia Rhodes, Robert Dean Petty
Lydia Black Rhodes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Rhodes of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Dean Petty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Petty of Chevy Chase, Md.
Bishop William E. Swing of California performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Siasconset Union Chapel in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Petty, 31 years old, is a partner in Schwalbe &amp; Partners, a management agency for classical musicians, in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice chairman of Booz Allen &amp; Hamilton, a management-consulting company, and was chairman of its international division, in New York.


Gypsies Faced Nazi Wrath
There is no mention of the fate of the gypsies of Central and Eastern Europe in the article "The Hidden Minority: New Jersey's Thousands of Gypsies" (Sept. 6), nor is much said in any of the history books.
The gypsies criss-crossed the borders of European countries in their caravans for centuries.
In no country were they ever welcome.
Perhaps it was their alien ways, but more likely the chauvinism of the others.


On Sunday; Some People Taking Back Their Power
IN 1940, Saul Alinsky, the great, nasty community organizer, formed the Industrial Areas Foundation.
Today three dozen Alinsky groups nationwide help poor and working-class people fight for basic services like police protection, sanitation and housing.
The one here calls itself Interfaith Community Organization.
It started five years ago with a paid organizer and a few church leaders.
They held 100 meetings in residents' living rooms.
In black and Hispanic homes in particular, the key complaint was: The police do not protect us from the drug dealers.


Ms. McConnell, Mark Hontz
Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald C. McConnell of Chester, N.J., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Stephanie Carolyn McConnell, and Mark Joseph Hontz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Hontz of Newton, N.J.
Ms.
McConnell is an instrument engineer for the Exxon Research and Engineering Company in Florham Park, N.J.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a senior engineer with Bell Communications Research in Morristown, N.J..
Her mother, Martha McConnell, is an associate scientist for Ciba Geigy in Summit, N.J.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate 1.
Cable TV: Vote on passage of a compromise bill that would regulate cable television prices.
Approved 74 to 25, Sept. 22. 2.
"Motor Voter": Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill that would enable citizens to register to vote as they renew their driver's licenses and apply for social services at government agencies.
Failed, with 62 in favor and 38 opposed (five votes short of the two-thirds needed), Sept. 22. 3.
Family Leave: Vote to override President Bush's veto of the family leave bill.
Approved 68 to 31, Sept. 24. 4.
Tax Checkoff: Vote on an amendment to a catchall tax bill that would allow consideration of a proposal that would allow taxpayers to check a box on their tax returns and earmark up to 10 percent of their taxes to cut the deficit.
Rejected 58 to 26, Sept. 25.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .Y . .
Y . .
Y . .
N  Lieberman (D) . . .Y . .
Y . .
Y . .
N New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .Y . .
Y . .
Y . .
N  Lautenberg (D) . . .Y . .
Y . .
Y . .
N New York  D'Amato (R) . . .Y . .
N . .
Y . .
Y  Moynihan (D) . . .Y . .
Y . .
Y . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House 1.
Death Penalty: Vote on an amendment to a 1993 appropriation bill for the District of Columbia that would require a citywide referendum on the death penalty.
Approved 264 to 173, Sept. 24. 2.
Domestic Partners: Vote on an amendment to a 1993 appropriation bill for the District ofColumbia that would denyfunds to implement a district law that would enable unmarried city workers, including homosexual couples, to obtain healthinsurance.
Approved 235 to 173, Sept. 24 Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .N . . Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .N . . N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .N . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . .N . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . .Y . . Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .N . . Y  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .N . . N
2. Hughes (D) . . .Y . . N
3. Pallone (D) . . .N . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . .Y . . N
5. Roukema (R) . . .Y . . Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .N . . Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .Y . . Y
8. Roe (D) . . .N . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .N . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .N . .
N  11.
Gallo (R) . . .Y . .
Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .Y . .
Y  13.
Saxton (R) . . .Y . .
Y  14.
Guarini (D) . . .A . .
Y New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . N . . N
2. Downey (D) . . .A . . A
3. Mrazek (D) . . .N . . N
4. Lent (R) . . .Y . . A
5. McGrath (R) . . .Y . . A
6. Flake (D) . . .N . . N
7. Ackerman (D) . . .A . . A
8. Scheuer (D) . . .N . . N
9.
Manton (D) . . .N . .
A  10.
Schumer (D) . . .N . .
A  11.
Towns (D) . . .N . .
N  12.
Owens (D) . . .N . .
N  13.
Solarz (D) . . .N . .
N  14.
Molinari (R) . . .Y . .
Y  15.
Green (R) . . .N . .
N  16.
Rangel (D) . . .N . .
N  17.
Vacant . . .. .  18.
Serrano (D) . . .N . .
N  19.
Engel (D) . . .N . .
N  20.
Lowey (D) . . .N . .
N  21.
Fish (R) . . .N . .
N  22.
Gilman (R) . . .N . .
Y  23.
McNulty (D) . . .N . .
N  24.
Solomon (R) . . .Y . .
A  25.
Boehlert (R) . . .N . .
Y  26.
Martin (R) . . .Y . .
Y  27.
Walsh (R) . . .Y . .
Y  28.
McHugh (D) . . .N . .
N  29.
Horton (R) . . .N . .
A  30.
Slaughter (D) . . .N . .
N  31.
Paxon (R) . . .Y . .
Y  32.
LaFalce (D) . . .N . .
N  33.
Nowak (D) . . .N . .
N  34.
Houghton (R) . . .N . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Mental Health Forum To Address New Trends
FOR the 12th consecutive year, the County Department of Community Mental Health in White Plains will sponsor a mental health forum.
The theme of this year's program will be "New Trends in Treatment" of mental illness, alcohol and drug abuse and developmental disabilities.
As in previous years, experts have been invited to the county to address this topic.
The forum will be divided into three separate sessions on Oct. 2, Oct. 23 and Nov. 6.
"The lack of understanding is one of the major issues in this field," said Commissioner Steven J. Friedman of the County Department of Mental Health.
"It is still one of the few areas with a strong public stigma and discrimination. This becomes a problem in setting up group homes and residences in the community for those being treated for disabilities."


'Odd Couple' Was Entertaining
With reference to Leah D. Frank's review of "The Odd Couple"  [ "It's Bicker, Bicker in New Odd Couple," Aug. 30 ]  at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, I saw that show and cannot believe that Ms.
Frank saw the same show that I did.
I found the show to be very entertaining and the cast to be very capable, especially Kathy Coletti.
If the constant laughter from the audience was any barometer, this show was definitely a big hit.
As a longtime subscriber to several Broadhollow Theaters, I can report that this is not the first time Ms.
Frank has given a Broadhollow production a review that was less than satisfactory.
After all, we attend the theater to be entertained, and entertained we are.
My advice is to sit back, relax and enjoy the show.
BURT LEVINE Brentwood


Angola to Vote, Unsure About West's Democracy
After nearly three decades of war, economic hardship and political strife, Angolans will go to the polls next week to elect a government freely for the first time.
While the election could be viewed as a triumph of democracy, cynicism is widespread.
Many Angolans are not convinced that Western-style democracy can work here.
Their doubts have not been lessened by sporadic incidents of violence, much of it stemming from a mix of ethnic differences and old vendettas.


Ring Around the Birdbath and Other Chores
WHAT a busy time of year.
Perennials are divided.
Harvests are coming in.
Overgrown shrubs are moved.
Bare patches in the lawn are seeded.
On top of all this, the soil was moist from all the rain this summer.
The agenda of things to be done was long.


Tech Notes; Helping Police See in the Dark
POLICE officers in New York City, who may stalk criminals and retrieve homeless people in subways, tunnels and pitch-black alleyways, are making use of a device that allows them to see images in the dark.
Richard Urich, manager of law enforcement marketing for the Nightvision Equipment Company, based in Emmaus, Pa., said that "a cat walking 100 yards away would be clearly identifiable" to a person wearing Starlight Nightvision goggles.


Critics of Israel's New Policy Have Changed Rules of the Game
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal informs us that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel's advice to Jews that they focus more on their friends than on their enemies is "condescending," and it is "insulting" to Holocaust survivors ("Dances With Wolves," column, Sept. 15).


So . . . Understated
Considering the extravagance of the surroundings, the clothes offered by the Carlisle Collection are fairly modest.
Not dumb, but not the kind of things you'd wear to a ball at Versailles.
Rather, they are what you'd wear to lunch at Le Cirque or dinner at the country club.
And though your friends wouldn't be able to pin a specific designer's label on the clothes, they wouldn't think you were dressing down.
Carlisle is not about blazers.
Jackets are in the spirit of Chanel and Ungaro, in pretty colors and pretty fabrics, with interesting trimming.
Silk print blouses are inspired by Hermes and Versace.
Oversize button and hoop earrings and masses of necklaces dripping pearls and colored stones could be from Escada.
Shoulder bags hang from chains, and belts are adorned with fancy hardware.
All of the current bases are touched.
About the only designers ignored are minimalists like Armani and Calvin Klein.


Campaign Lift


Bank Robbers' Latest Weapon: Social Security Numbers
WILLIE SUTTON robbed banks, the story goes, because "that's where the money is." But a new breed of thieves is finding that the easiest access to a bank's money is not through the vault but through the customer.
As thievery progresses from the stick-up to more subtle ploys, one increasingly common tactic is as simple as using a depositor's Social Security number to pilfer a bank account.
For example, the thief might call the bank to change the address of a victim's account and order new checks, which are then used for cash withdrawals.


In Action


TAKE A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
Thank you for educating people on this sophisticated, individualized and efficient medicine.
Homeopathy departs from the Newtonian, mechanistic approach of allopathic medicine and brings us to the threshold of quantum medicine -- we are not matter but energy -- and much has still to be discovered in this science.


Litter Is the Problem In Garth Woods
I would like to comment on the article "The View From: Garth Woods -- Saving and Restoring a Natural Wonder Along a Parkway" (Aug. 30).
Robert Borg's proposed efforts to improve Garth Woods are commendable.
I was chagrined, however, that no mention was made of the litter problem that is a blight on this whole area and has plagued it for many years and will continue to plague it unless steps are taken to remedy the situation.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
SOLO PLUS ONE.
By Ragnhild Scamell.
Illustrated by Elizabeth Martland.
Little, Brown. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 8) Solo, a solitary, often mean black cat, is cured of his habit of breaking and eating raw eggs after a brief and surprising friendship with a duckling.
The story is refreshingly tart.
The thickly painted illustrations are appealing.


Germany
Germany is now bigger than at any time in half a century, and offers more to see than ever.
With the poorer, more traditional east now joined to the highly developed west, the country is caught up in a building boom that has produced, among other things, many new tourist destinations.
In Bonn, still the functioning national capital, two elegant art museums opened in June after years of planning and construction.
One, the Bonn Art Museum, has a collection centering on contemporary German works, including many by Joseph Beuys, Georg Baselitz and Anselm Kiefer.
Next door is the larger and even more imposing Federal Art and Exhibition Center, which is expected to develop into one of Germany's principal museums, showcasing not only art but also architecture, cultural history, science and technology.
Its roof garden is a modernistic sculpture gallery, capping a complex that is Bonn's newest architectural prize.


State Dept. Puts Security Data On Line Free
Travelers with a personal computer can now reach a new electronic bulletin board run by the State Department to get information about security or crime problems abroad.
Users of the board, known as the Consular Affairs Bulletin Board, or CABB, have free access to information from a system established in 1987 to keep the international business community informed about security.
The system, maintained by the department's Bureau of Diplomatic Security, became available to the public last month.


Bush Tries to Win Back Middle-Class Voters


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
Tuesday
Aug. economic indicators, percent change
0.1
0
Sept. consumer confidence, percent
58
57.7
Wednesday
Aug. new home sales, percent change
-2.6
1.4
Sept. Chicago purchasing index, percent
58.4
58
Thursday
Sept. purchasing managers index, percent
53.7
51.5
Mid-Sept. jobless claims, thousands
414
425
Aug. construction spending, percent change
-0.6
-0.2
Friday
Mid-Sept. non-farm payrolls, thousands
-83
-70
Sept. unemployment rate, in percent
7.6
7.8
Sept. factory orders
-1.1
1.2
Monday
European Community finance ministers meet
Tuesday
Johnson-Redbook survey of American retail sales


Fiona Eisenberg, Harry Lipman
Fiona Ivy Eisenberg, a daughter of Ethel Eisenberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Barney Eisenberg, was married yesterday evening in New York to Harry William Lipman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin M. Lipman, also of Scarsdale.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.


Anne E. Mengden, S. M. Giliberto
Anne Elise Mengden, a daughter of Joseph M. Mengden of Grosse Pointe, Mich., and the late Suzanne Mengden, was married yesterday to Dr.
S.
Michael Giliberto Jr., a son of Salvatore M. Giliberto of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Wanda Giliberto.
Msgr.
Walter Kenny performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
Ms.
Mengden, who is 39 years old and is keeping her name, is a managing director and a portfolio manager at Chancellor Capital Management, an investment-advisory company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.


Joanne E. Kelley, Roger O. Fillion
Joanne Elizabeth Kelley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Kelley of Goshen, Conn., was married yesterday to Roger O. Fillion, a son of John A. Fillion of Linglestown, Pa., and the late Eva Fillion.
Donald Warner, a justice of the peace in Sharon, Conn., officiated at the White Hart Inn in Salisbury, Conn.
Mrs.
Fillion, 31 years old, and her husband, 33, both work for the Reuters news agency in Washington; she reports on energy and the environment, and he on economics.
She graduated from Wells College and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Says Clinton's Plan to Tax the Rich Will Be Costly for the Middle Class
Striving to win back disgruntled middle-class voters, President Bush said today that Gov.
Bill Clinton's economic proposals would hurt the middle-class taxpayers that the Democratic challenger has pledged to help.
White House officials produced new economic estimates that they said demonstrate that Mr.
Clinton's plan to raise the taxes of the top 2 percent of the nation's earners would actually cost a couple with a gross income of $85,000 about $2,800 a year in higher taxes.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bellport 124,000
7 Susan Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 18-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
Brookhaven 144,000
16 Beach Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 26-year-old farm ranch; fireplace, basement, pool, 2-car garage, 0.75 acre; taxes $4,500.
Centerport 315,000
7 Harbor Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 44-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, library, basement, fireplace, deck; taxes $6,800.
East Patchogue 149,000
1 Louis Court  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,300.
Fort Salonga 270,000
1 Maridod Court  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1.3 acres, pond; taxes $5,300.
Northport 217,000
18 Center Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 75- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sunroom, 1-car garage; taxes $1,800.
OTHER AREAS Bridgeport, Conn. 125,000
381 Cleveland Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; kitchen skylight, oversized family room, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,698.
Armonk, N.Y. 365,000
22 Windmill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, skylights, stone patio, 2-car garage; taxes $5,249.
Warren, N.J. 695,000
2 Quail Run  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old ranch; skylights, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $10,753.


Master of Caro-Kann Shows How It's Done
IN his new book, "New Ideas in the Caro-Kann Defense" (Collier, $14.95), Jonathan Speelman writes: "Why then should you want to play the Caro-Kann -- a rather solid defense in which some lines have a very slightly tarnished reputation? Well for one thing, there is that reputation itself. If your opponent doesn't rate your opening very highly then, given that it is intrinsically sound, this is already a head start."
The English grandmaster displayed his virtuosity with this defense against the American international master Ilya Gurevich in the 16th LLoyds Bank Masters Tournament in London, Aug. 22-31.
This victory counted toward Speelman's tie for first place with the grandmaster Gennadi Timoshchenko of Russia.
Each scored 8-2 in the 236-player Swiss-system event, but Speelman was awarded the trophy on tie-break.


Pre-Columbian Art in Chicago
Artworks from 17 cultures will be displayed at an exhibition opening at the Art Institute of Chicago on Oct. 10 to commemorate the 500th anniversary of the first meeting of European and native people of America.
Titled "The Ancient Americas: Art From Sacred Landscapes," the exhibition will include 300 pre-Columbian works including gold objects, monumental stone sculptures, brilliant textiles and ceramic vessels.
The objects, borrowed from 65 institutions in 11 countries, will remain on show in Chicago to Jan. 3, 1993, before traveling to the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston (Feb. 14 to April 18) and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (June 6 to Aug. 15).
The Art Institute says that the show is the first collaborative exhibition formed with national museums and private collections in Mexico, Guatemala, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Chile, as well as the United States and Europe.
The cultural and artistic traditions of chieftainships, city states and empires represented include native American, Maya, Inca and Aztec, among others.


Burmese Military Further Relaxes Martial Law
The Government of Myanmar, formerly Burma, announced today that it would lift the last of the martial law decrees it imposed in 1989 to crush a nascent democracy movement.
Diplomats described the action as primarily cosmetic and unlikely to satisfy critics of the Government, although they acknowledged that it could result in a small improvement in the human rights situation in Myanmar.


SOUTH AFRICA FOES WILL RESUME TALKS ON NATION'S FUTURE
Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk emerged tonight from a daylong meeting to announce that they were prepared to resume formal talks with the goal of rapidly dismantling white rule and installing a unity government.
The two leaders said they had agreed on a number of measures to help contain the political violence that has bedeviled efforts to complete a transfer of power.


POSTINGS: Stamford Renovation; New Life for Old Bloomie's
The long-vacant Bloomingdale's store in downtown Stamford has been sold to two Connecticut developers, who plan to renovate the 23,000-square-foot structure into a multitenant retail center called Stamford Place.
Plans also include refurbishing the 1,000-car garage and constructing an enclosed pedestrian bridge connecting the garage and the building.


SEPT. 20-27: Junk Bonds Redux; With Interest Rates Low, Market Heads for a Record
By 1990, junk bonds were nearly extinct.
Only $1.4 billion of these high-yield, high-risk securities were issued, while $28 billion tumbled into default.
Drexel Burnham Lambert failed, and corporate raiders raided no more.
Now junk bonds have regained their stature.
With $29.5 billion in new issues sold so far this year, the 1986 record of $31.9 billion will soon fall.


She Put the v in Roe v. Wade
A QUESTION OF CHOICE
By Sarah Weddington. Illustrated. 306 pp. New York: Grosset/Putnam. $21.95.


SURFACING
PARTY FAVOR --
Disposable cameras:
replacing the Polaroid. Guests take one another's picture.  EDUCATION --
Homework by phone:
available on recordings at middle and high schools in Sag Harbor, L.I.  ATHLETICS --
Calvin Klein sports bras:
to wear to the gym. Or in a music video.  SYMBOL --
The pink ribbon:
to wear on your lapel in October in recognition of Breast Cancer Awareness Month.
FOOD --
Pasta and pate:
Bow ties with foie gras in a mushroom-truffle sauce, at Montrachet in TriBeCa.


Three Nights To Remember
For the Rockefellers, a dedication; for victims of violent crime, protection; for fashion, images come alive.


Losing Touch
To the Editor:
Right on, Keith Jarrett  [ "Categories Aplenty, but Where's the Music?," Aug. 16 ] .
While he focuses on jazz, what he writes can just as well be said about classical music, where (with only a few admirable exceptions), to satisfy the corporate moneymen, classical has become crossover.


A Timely Retreat for Exabyte's Insiders
SMACK on top of the most active list last Tuesday were shares of the Exabyte Corporation, a Boulder, Colo., computer company that announced that third-quarter earnings would not come close to analysts' expectations.
And right on top of a most-active list of their own months before were Exabyte insiders, who engaged in a flurry of sales of Exabyte stock.


Italy
So much of Italy is old and unchanging, and so much of what people come here to see is old to the point of decay, that "what's new?" usually translates as "what's been restored recently?"
Italy's own, real novelties, moreover, are hardly likely to draw throngs of foreign visitors, even though they provide some odd counterpoints.
As of last May, for instance, it was possible to combine the viewing of Ravenna's sixth-century mosaics with a visit to Italy's latest theme park, Mirabilandia, six miles out of the city and boasting attractions including mechanical dinosaurs, an underwater city and what is said to be Europe's highest wooden roller-coaster (120 feet high, maximum speed: 60 m.p.h.).


Romania Looks to Vote to Erase Communist Ties
Two and a half years after the violent uprising in December 1989 that felled the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu, this country, unlike others in Eastern Europe, has still not made a clean break with its Communist past.
But in elections beginning Sunday, Romanians could change that.
Recent opinion polls show a tight race between the two top contenders for the presidency -- the incumbent, Ion Iliescu, the onetime aide to Mr.
Ceausescu who rose to power in the chaotic revolution, and Emil Constantinescu, rector of Bucharest University and the candidate of the Democratic Convention, a centrist alliance of 17 political groups.


College Town in Uproar Over 'Black List' Search
It is called "the black list" in headlines here.
The list was drawn from a roster of all black and Hispanic males registered at the State University of New York College at Oneonta, following an attack on a 77-year-old woman in the early morning hours of Sept. 4.
The only clue she gave the state police: she believed her attacker was a black man wielding a "stiletto-style" knife whose arms and hands she cut fending them off.


Q and A
Gas Pumps Too Close


Lead Paint Removed From Queens School
Several weeks after a Greenwich Village elementary school was closed because high levels of lead were found in dust on the floors, school workers took emergency measures this weekend to remove peeling lead paint from classrooms and corridors of a Queens elementary school.
A special hazardous-materials team from the Division of School Facilities sealed off the third floor and other parts of Public School 2 at 75-10 21st Avenue in Jackson Heights to replaster or remove sections of paint peeling from water damage.
The work is scheduled to be completed when schools reopen Wednesday after the long holiday weekend.


A Tough Knot for the Nets: Mills Says he Won't See Reed
Re-emphasizing his desire to play for the Detroit Pistons, Terry Mills said yesterday that he would refuse to meet with Willis Reed tomorrow.
Reed, the Nets' senior vice president of basketball operations, wanted to meet with Mills face to face in Detroit to discuss the five-year, $9.5 million offer sheet that Mills signed earlier this month with the Pistons.
The Nets have until Wednesday at 5 P.M. to match the offer, or they will lose the power forward to Detroit.


An Extra-Tricky Set of Rules
WHEN the 1986 law on excess distributions was passed, people who had at least $562,500 in their retirement plans as of Aug. 1, 1986, were given the opportunity to protect that money from excise taxes.
But those who took this "grandfather" option faced a maddening set of rules that were intended to prevent too much of a tax break.
To begin with, when the protected money is distributed, it can exceed the general annual limit on retirement benefits that are exempt from excise taxes.
But it is counted against that limit, restricting the amount of other pension money that can be received tax-free.
And even if a retiree takes only other pension money in a given year -- leaving the grandfathered nest egg alone -- part of the distribution is deemed to be from the nest egg.


Sports of The Times; Will Cone Ask Winfield For Advice?
DAVID CONE sounds as if he has already sent the Yankees the measurements for his pinstriped uniform next season.
When asked about the possibility of talking as a free agent to George Steinbrenner if the principal owner is paroled from exile before March 1, the ex-Met smiled.
"It's something I'm looking forward to," he said.


Talking Speed Limits While on the Fairway
Just as a daily commuter stalled in traffic has desperate moments when he must either lean on the horn or go crazy, players on the PGA Tour must periodically rage against slow play.
Over the course of a season, enough tooth enamel to fill a small bunker is grinded down and swallowed by players fighting to keep their concentration while waiting for another competitor to finish tossing grass in the air.
For the unfortunate player whose natural pace is brisk and whose natural disposition is restless, playing the PGA Tour is a test of will Gordon Liddy would have flinched at.
One of the fastest -- and most annoyed -- players is Lanny Wadkins.
The winner of 21 events in 22 seasons on the PGA Tour, Wadkins is extremely talented but constitutionally impatient.
He feels so shackled by what he considers rampant slow play that he recently wrote a column in the weekly magazine Golf World asserting that 4 1/2-hour rounds are making tournament golf worse for competitors, spectators and television viewers.
He named names, including top players like Chip Beck and David Frost, and implored them to speed up.


Japan's Menu: American Sushi?
This is no fish story.
The next American product attempting to crack the formidable Japanese market could be mass-produced sushi.
Sushi Boy, an Osaka-based restaurant chain, wants to import frozen sushi from its factory in Escondido, Calif.
The chain says that it can cut prices by automating sushi production and by using California rice, which is far cheaper than Japanese rice.


An Old Fishing Village Hums With the Blues
OF all the communities along Connecticut's shoreline, Stonington Village has probably changed the least over the last two centuries.
Tucked close to the sidewalks on narrow streets are 18th- and 19th-century homes, many of which were there when five British ships shelled the village for three days in the War of 1812 but could not make the residents surrender.
There are also the smaller homes of fishermen who follow a tradition that goes back generations in some families.
When they are home, members of the last sizeable fishing fleet in the state congregate at the Portuguese Holy Ghost Society on Main Street and go to Mass at St.
Mary's Church to pray that they will get home safely from the next trip.


Man in the News; Bulldog Inspector for the Pentagon: Derek James Vander Schaaf
Sex crime complaints don't usually fall onto Derek J. Vander Schaaf's desk.
He's normally a waste-and-fraud kind of guy.


Mutual Funds; A New Landscape for Global Bonds
THE crisis in European currency markets has taken a harsh toll on mutual fund investors whose funds own foreign bonds and notes.
These funds lost more than 2 percent of their value on average in two weeks that ended last Thursday, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.
This devaluation of mutual fund shares caught many investors by surprise, especially those in short-term global income funds.
But obstacles in creating monetary union in Europe may actually be good news for holders of long-term global bonds who are able to ride out short-run price moves.


Kara Leverte, Daniel Farley
Kara Jean Leverte, a senior editor at Simon &amp; Schuster, and Daniel Hugh Farley, the publisher and a vice president of Little, Brown &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
John S. Hunt performed the ceremony at St.
Hilary's Roman Catholic Church in Tiburon, Calif.


In Death, a Link To Birthdays
When gravely ill and approaching their birthday, men tend to give up the ghost whereas women hang on, celebrate the birthday and die the following week, a study has found.
Based on nearly three million deaths from natural causes, the study, reported in the current issue of Psychosomatic Medicine magazine, is the first to show sex differences in so-called anniversary effects -- behavioral changes triggered by birthdays or other personally meaningful occasions.


Karen Labrecque, Richard Shea Jr.
Karen Elizabeth Labrecque, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Labrecque of Fair Haven, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Wyman Shea Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Shea of Attleboro, Mass.
The Rev.
John J. Paris performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
Shea, 26 years old, is an account executive with Wells Rich Greene BDDP, the advertising agency, in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Chase Manhattan Corporation in New York.


Perspectives: Water and Sewer Charges; The Orange Light on Meter-Based Billing
RICHARD MEYERS is a prudent man.
When New York City installed a new water meter at the 37-unit building he manages at 1780 Eastburn Avenue near the Grand Concourse in the Bronx, he called in a consultant.
How could the building conserve on water use, he asked.
The consultant told him to put aerators on the bathroom faucets.
Change the kitchen faucets.
Replace the valves in the toilets.
Buy new shower heads.
If the correct products are chosen, low-flow devices can save 10 to 30 percent in water use, the consultant said, at a cost of only $40 to $60 an apartment.


Frankfurt Fair: Finding a Room
The Frankfurt Book Fair (Sept. 30 to Oct. 5) is a major event for publishers from more than 100 countries and a great attraction for book lovers.
Hotels in Frankfurt are virtually sold out for the whole period, but an information desk at the fairgrounds guarantees a room for a night, although possibly in a private home and not necessarily in Frankfurt.
Visitors may telephone ahead: for hotels, (69) 7575-6222 or 6351 or 6289; for private rooms: 7575-6296.
The fax number for either category is 7575-6352.
Some savvy publishing people stay in Wiesbaden, a modern town 30 minutes by train from Frankfurt that has retained much of the charm of the 19th-century spa that it once was. (There are frequent buses between the fairgrounds and the Frankfurt station.) Wiesbaden, with its smart boutiques along the Wilhelmstrasse, provides a break from fast-moving, crowded Frankfurt.
Die Ente vom Lehel, telephone, (611) 133 666, an excellent restaurant with one Michelin star is in the town's best hotel, the Nassauer Hof.
A set meal costs from about $90 a person, without wine.
A double room at the Nassauer Hof is about $330 a night.
Good bistros and small restaurants abound in Wiesbaden's pedestrian zone and around the shops within walking distance of the Casino.


New &amp; Noteworthy
FREEDOM.
Volume One: Freedom in the Making of Western Culture, by Orlando Patterson. (Basic Books, $15.) This analysis of freedom as a peculiarly Western ideal won the 1991 National Book Award for nonfiction.
It is an irony of history, Orlando Patterson contends, that the institution of slavery in ancient societies was a prerequisite for the growing valuation of personal liberty.
"It is a tribute to Mr. Patterson that as one reads his interesting book one wants to ask and try to answer . . . difficult and even painful questions," Mary Lefkowitz said here last year.
THE RISE OF LIFE ON EARTH, by Joyce Carol Oates. (New Directions, $8.95.) In this brief novel, Joyce Carol Oates explores the mind of Kathleen Hennessy, a severely abused child who becomes, seemingly ineluctably, an adult capable of murder.
"Like Bach with his musical sense, Joyce Carol Oates is practiced with her narrative tools; she writes scenes of unrivaled vigor and conviction that precisely express her vision," our reviewer, Jane Smiley, said last year.
Also available in paperback is HEAT: And Other Stories (William Abrahams/Plume, $12), which focuses on typical Oates themes of familial and social violence.
The most successful stories are those in which the menace is understated, the injury purely emotional, Wendy Lesser said here last year: "We get normality in all its terrifying nakedness." And Ontario Review Press has brought back into print Ms.
Oates's 1971 novel, WONDERLAND ($12.95), the story of a man whose entire family was killed during his childhood in a murder-suicide.
It includes the revised ending the author wrote for the book's first paperback edition, as well as a new afterword.
It is "in effect, if not intention, an old-fashioned horror story," said our reviewer, Geoffrey Wolff.


U.S. Reaches Finals With Doubles Feature
Ahead by a comfortable 2-0 margin in this semifinal Davis Cup clash against Sweden, the United States team stuck to its original plan and sent a brand-new doubles duo out to clinch the competition.
They didn't debut with the greatest of ease, but they hugged like old friends after they advanced the United States to its third consecutive Davis Cup final.
"And that's the beauty of Davis Cup," said the only half of this particular partnership to have experienced the complicity of Davis Cup doubles.


Corrections
A report in Styles of The Times last Sunday about the engagement of Angela S. Moore and Philip W. Block Jr. referred incorrectly to the bride's grandfather Roy W. Moore Jr.
He is not "the late." He retired as president of the Canada Dry Corporation in New York and lives in Fairfield, Conn.


For Sale


Crusading Clergy Shape the Course of Dance
THE GRANDMOTHER OF THE Rev.
Al Carmines once warned him, "A praying knee and a dancing foot never grew on the same leg." Fortunately, he didn't believe her.
In fact, as a minister of the Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village during the 1960's, Mr.
Carmines helped shape the course of American modern dance.
He is not the only clergyman to have done so.
Thanks to their efforts, dance performances are flourishing at Judson, as well as at St.
Mark's Church and other New York houses of worship.
Earlier this month, in recognition of three decades of support, the Rev.
Howard Moody, Judson's senior pastor, received a Bessie, an award established by Dance Theater Workshop to honor achievements in dance and performance art.


Talking: Sponsors; Loosening A Grip on The Board
THE pivotal moment when the sponsor must relinquish control of a New York City co-op's board of directors is usually anticipated by the resident shareholders with glee because, even if the sponsor is exemplary, they are eager to be masters of their own destiny.
Normally, the moment arrives as soon as the sponsor sells at least 50 percent of the outstanding shares or after a predetermined period after conversion, usually five years, whichever comes sooner.
Either way, shareholders should not rush to put champagne on ice.
Recent court decisions, along with a weak market, suggest the sponsor will retain de facto control long after he is supposed to have galloped off into the sunset.


Winnifred Ellis, David Mahoney
Winnifred Canning Ellis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony T. Ellis of Hillsborough, Calif., was married yesterday to David Leonard Mahoney, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. D. Mahoney of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Terrance Ryan performed the ceremony in Old St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in San Francisco.
Ms.
Ellis, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, is the public relations manager for the San Francisco Examiner.
She graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father is a partner in Pacific Venture Partners, a venture capital firm in Menlo Park, Calif.


Commercial Property: Shopping Malls; Luring Crowds -- and Buyers -- With Fun and Games
LAST April, Newport Center, the 1.2 million-square-foot, two-story mall developed by Melvin Simon &amp; Associates in Jersey City, leased space to a carousel.
Since then, sales at the street-level stores nearest to the ride are up almost 27 percent over the same period last year and sales at second-floor stores are up 10.4 percent.
"I can't prove it, but I'm pretty certain the carousel made the difference," said Kenneth L. Volk, the center's marketing director.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen120.90
124.60
133.12
per Dollar
German Mark1.4835
1.5025
1.6695
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3395
1.2173
1.1333
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.7145
1.7345
1.7435
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$349.30
$351.00
$349.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Middle East Lets Itself Consider Peace
NEARLY a year after Arabs and Israelis sat down at the peace table in Madrid, Arabs in a number of countries and Israelis seem to agree they have a real opportunity to firmly establish a habit of negotiation that might, step by step, lead to peace.
It is a mood that contrasts vividly with that of the spring and early summer of 1990, just before Iraq invaded Kuwait, when many people in Israel and the Arab world clearly saw the region sliding toward war.
It also contrasts with the mood 11 months ago, when both sides seemed content to come to the bargaining table primarily to please the United States, with little real hope of making progress.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
Bebe Moore Campbell's examination of the agitation felt by some black women when they are confronted with romances between black men and white women overlooks an important consideration: commonly underlying their anguish is a fear of losing control over increasingly independent black men (Hers: "Brothers and Sisters," Aug. 23).
African-American men who have been brutalized by white racists for courting white women must now face the additional burden of black women's jealousy and ostracism for exercising their rights in choosing a mate.
Both groups, though on opposite sides, are telling black men to stay in their place.


Merely Mortal; Bunch That Lunched On Democrats Is Missing Its Edge
NOT long ago, giants roamed the earth here.
They were Republicans, meat-eaters in yellow ties, and the ground shook when they walked.
They made dinner of George McGovern, lunch of Walter Mondale and a toothsome snack of Michael Dukakis.
They ran Presidential campaigns that were models of brutal efficiency, offering voters simple, attractive promises -- read my lips, kill the bureaucrats, morning in America -- while so skillfully exploiting even the smallest weaknesses of their opponents that paper cuts became chest wounds.


Prospects Looking Up For 7 Southern Senators
In the Republican high tide after the Persian Gulf war, all roads to a Republican takeover of the Senate seemed to run through Dixie, where seven Democrats were up for re-election in what looked like a strong Republican year.
Now, the Democrats have a shot at winning them all.


Two Old Foes Battle for Unity And to Support the Franc
It was a heroic fight.
Against the forces of profiteers in the $1 trillion-a-day foreign exchange market, Germany and France battled to preserve the value of the French franc.
They did it by digging deep into their currency reserves to buy francs on the open market.
But success is not guaranteed since government resources are small compared with those of the world's currency traders.
Yet defending the franc was more important than money; it was a show of unity after France's lukewarm endorsement of the Maastricht treaty.
Europe "is facing tests of strength that will be decisive for its common future," Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said.
President Francois Mitterrand of France echoed the sentiments.
The joint actions put "all Franco-German irritations to bed," said Stephan-Gotz Richter, president of Trans Atlantic Futures, a consultant in Washington.
Fleshing Out Health Care
Appearing before a group of employees at Merck &amp; Company, the big pharmaceutical manufacturer in Rahway, N.J., Gov.
Bill Clinton put a little flesh and blood on his health care plan.
He told the group that if elected he would require private employers with more than 50 workers to provide health- care insurance for employees and would have the Federal Government supplement health care coverage for the unemployed.
Mr.
Clinton also said he would call for price controls on drugs.
His plan would "drastically simplify the administrative costs of the American health care system" and save about $700 billion by the end of the decade, Mr.
Clinton said.
The plan would also provide incentives for small companies to band together to pool coverage and reduce costs, something President Bush has also proposed.
The Bush campaign criticized Mr.
Clinton's proposals, saying price controls on drugs would reduce private funding for research.
Time was when most of mahogany row went Republican.
But last week Governor Clinton garnered endorsements from 400 of America's corporate titans.
Among the endorsers were Paul Allaire, chairman of Xerox; Robert Haas, chairman of Levi Strauss; Reuben Mark, chairman of Colgate Palmolive; Sumner Redstone, chairman of Viacom, and the taste maker Martha Stewart.
Paid to Do the Right Thing
While Mr.
Clinton talked health care, President Bush was homing in on the nation's small business owners.
He began by vetoing a family-leave bill that would require companies to grant at least 12 weeks of unpaid leave to any employee with a family emergency.
The bill was opposed by many small-business owners who said it was too costly.
"I have always supported employer policies to give time off for a child's birth, adoption or for family illness," Mr.
Bush said in his veto message.
Instead of the bill, he proposed tax credits for employers who give workers time off.
Later, in Greensboro N.C., Mr.
Bush proposed $20 billion in tax cuts for small businesses.
Durable Goods Decline
Orders for durable goods, those big-ticket items that are supposed to last three years , fell 0.1 percent in August, the third monthly decline in four months.
The report was "Weak, weak, weak," said Samuel D. Kahan, chief economist at Fuji Securities in Chicago.
In Need of an Economic Miracle
Dogging the Presidential race is the sluggish economy.
It grew by 1.5 percent in the second quarter, the Commerce Department said.
"The calendar is running out for George Bush,"said Robert G. Dederick, an economist at the Northern Trust Company in Chicago.
Daring to Offend China
Time was when President Bush couldn't do enough for China.
He supported its most-favored-nation trade status against and fought Congressional pressure to put sanctions on it after the crackdown in Tiananmen Square.
But with the election looming, old loyalties have been called into question.
Last month, Mr.
Bush authorized the sale of 150 F-16's to Taiwan, China's longtime foe.
Last week, he agreed to sell 12 SH-2F "Lamp" helicopters to Taiwan for $161 million.
The helicopters, which can detect and attack submerged submarines, are made by the Kaman Corporation in Bloomfield, Conn.
Connecticut -- whose eight electoral votes are considered up for grabs -- has been severely hurt by cutbacks in Pentagon spending.
Japan's Bank Won't Budge
In Japan, they are calling it a recession even though growth has so far not turned negative.
Japan's gross domestic product expanded by a meek 0.2 percent in the second quarter, the Ministry of Finance said last week.
Pleading for Fewer Rubles
Russia is learning about democracy the hard way.
Yegor T. Gaidar, the acting Prime Minister , is dedicated to establishing a market system, but he must contend with a Parliament still dominated by proponents of central planning.
And while Mr.
Gaidar has been trying to keep money growth slow, Parliament appointed Viktor Gerashenko as head of Russia's central bank.
Mr.
Gerashenko likes to keep those printing presses running.
As a result, since last month, the value of the ruble has lost 49 percent of its value.
Last week Mr.
Gaidar pleaded with Parliament, saying that unless the money supply was tightened, the Russian monetary system would collapse.
Agency Hopping at Olds?
Leo Burnett U.S.A., the advertising agency, has been selling Oldsmobiles since 1967.
A few years ago it came up with the "This is not your father's Oldsmobile" theme.
But the campaign alienated the car company's older customers without bringing in new ones.
Oldsmobile's sales are sluggish, to say the least.
Last week, the General Motors Corporation put the Oldsmobile account up for review.
Although it did not announce which agencies would be allowed to compete for the account, which is worth $100 million to $110 million, it said Leo Burnett would be in the running.
"We are confident we can retain the Oldsmobile business," said Jim Oates, Burnett's chairman.
Perhaps it will.
The last time G.M. dismissed an agency was in 1958.
G.M. has been working hard to keep the labor peace.
But last month, after announcing plans to close plants, lay off workers and buy parts from outside suppliers, workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, struck.
And last week, 4,200 members of the United Automobile Workers union went on strike at a body stamping plant in Lansing, Mich., for the same reasons.
Cracks in the Rock of Gibraltar
The Prudential Insurance Company may like to portray itself as solid as the rock of Gibraltar, but according to an independent nonprofit research agency, its losses from Hurricane Andrew so far total $1.2 billion -- four times what executives predicted.
Those losses could use up 10 percent of Prudential's capital.
The estimates caused alarm among analysts at Standard &amp; Poor's, the credit-rating agency, placed it on credit watch with the possibility of downgrading Prudential from AAA, the highest rating.
"We have always felt that Prudential was stretched on capital relative to the rating," said Mark Puccia, a senior vice president at Standard &amp; Poor's.
Earlier this year, Moody's Investors Service downgraded the nation's No. 1 insurer from Aaa, for exceptional , to Aa1, for excellent.
The Pseudo-Sodas
With the fizz going out of the Coca-Cola Company's sales, its third-quarter financial forecasts were, well, flat.
One of Coke's answers is to go New Age.
Following a host of competitors, Coca-Cola will bring out a new drink in the fast-growing "clear" category, to be called Nordic Mist.
The new drink, a flavored sparkling water, will follow Pepsi Cola's H2oH! and Pepsi Crystal and the Seagrams entry, Quest.
But while Nordic Mist will be clear, it won't be a health food.
It will derive its sweet taste (not to mention 112 calories) from high-fructose corn syrup.
"It's soft drinks in disguise," said Jack Trout of Trout &amp; Ries, a marketing firm in Greenwich, Conn.
Shoring Up Travelers
The Primerica Corporation, the big financial services and insurance company, said last week that it would invest $722.5 million in the struggling Travelers Corporation in return for a 27 percent stake in the company.
Primerica's chairman, Sanford I. Weill, said he would work with Travelers to direct its operations.
More than a third of its $13 billion in outstanding mortgages are in trouble.
Behind the Scenes at 'Tonight'
The way Ken Kragen tells it -- he's a Hollywood artists' manager -- Helen Kushnick plays too rough.
Ms.
Kushnick was Jay Leno's manager, and when he became host of the "The Tonight Show" earlier this year, became executive producer.
Mr.
Kragen said Ms.
Kushnick kept one of his clients, the country singer Travis Tritt, off "The Tonight Show" after learning that Mr.
Tritt was also appearing on the rival "Arsenio" show.
What was even worse, Mr.
Kragen said, was that for no reason other than vindictiveness, Ms.
Kushnick canceled a scheduled appearance on "The Tonight Show" by Trisha Yearwood, another country singer whom Mr.
Kragen represents.
Ms.
Kushnick denied Mr.
Kragen's assertions about her motivations.
That denial was not enough for NBC.
Last week the network dismissed Ms.
Kushnick.


A Hearing for the Missing
IN three days of Senate committee hearings last week on American servicemen who failed to return from the war in Indochina, an array of Nixon Administration officials all acknowledged that there was a good chance some men had been left behind when Hanoi returned 591 prisoners of war in early 1973.
Henry A. Kissinger, National Security Adviser and chief negotiator with the Vietnamese at the time, angrily denied that the Administration had knowingly abandoned anyone, but he admitted that the issue was of major concern to him by early February 1973, two weeks after the signing of the Paris peace agreement.
Mr.
Kissinger presented Hanoi with a "discrepancy list" on Feb. 11; others followed in the succeeding months.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 2 about Dartmoor, England, referred incorrectly to dye on the buttocks of sheep, and misstated the color.
The dye is applied to the ewes by a chest harness worn by the ram in a flock in mating season.
The dye indicates to the farmer that ewes have mated.
The color is changed weekly, enabling farmers to know when a ewe is expected to give birth.


Q and A
Guides for Paris Museums
Q.
A group of us are going to Paris to visit the major museums -- the Louvre, d'Orsay, Pompidou, Picasso and Orangerie.
Are there English-speaking guides that could go with us to visit them? -- Edgar Holton, San Francisco


The Pains, Joys and Perplexities of Learning American Culture
VIBRANT reds, cheery yellows, bright blues.
The laundry-detergent aisle in the Pathmark in Greenvale seems a floral garden in soap containers.
For a foreign student it seems a wall of confusion.
"Oh, too many," said Man-Li Yang of Taiwan, experiencing her first trip to an American supermarket.
"I am very confused," she said picking up Tide and putting down Cheer.
"So many brands. I do not know which is better."


Julie Garrett, Armins Rusis
Julie Lynn Garrett, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles C. Garrett of La Jolla, Calif., was married yesterday to Armins K. Rusis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Rusis of Pittstown, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Clair Berry, a minister of the Disciples of Christ, performed the ceremony at Torrey Pines Christian Church in La Jolla.
Mrs.
Rusis, 27 years old, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
She graduated from University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, and received her law degree from Villanova University.
Her father is the manager of facilities at the University of California San Diego Medical Center.
Her mother, Margaret Garrett, is the regional manager of British Foods Inc., an importer of British products in Solana Beach, Calif.


A Surge Expected in Homeless Population
JIMMY McLAWRIN pushed a shopping cart filled with cardboard across the plaza of the Journal Square PATH station in Jersey City.
In the night shadows near the shops that line the plaza, men and women lay sleeping on the concrete.
A chill breeze was blowing as Mr.
McLawrin approached one after another of the sleepers, extracting a length of cardboard from his cart, gently covering each person in turn.
Then he found a vacant space nearby, unloaded the rest of the cardboard and built a shelter for himself.


For Shopping Centers, Less Is Becoming More
This year, Melvin Simon &amp; Associates, the nation's second-largest developer of shopping centers, plans to open only 10 new ones, compared with 80 just five years ago.
Simon is not alone.
"We in the industry have overbuilt everywhere," Matthew Bucksbaum, president of the General Growth Corporation, a Des Moines mall builder, told a trade meeting last month.
"New construction as far as large regional malls are concerned will be limited, and the owners of existing ones will have to depend on getting more results from their present centers. It's a whole new ball game."


Ann Chahbandour, Jay Robert Stiefel
Ann Chahbandour, a daughter of John Chahbandour Jr. of Aptos, Calif., and the late Elizabeth A. Chahbandour, was married yesterday in Philadelphia to Jay Robert Stiefel, the son of the late Israel and Beverly R. Stiefel.
Judge Charles R. Weiner of United States District Court in Philadelphia officiated at the home of the bride and bridegroom.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS (Residential in millions of dollars)
July 92
July 91
Change
New York
371.8
446.6
-17%
New Jersey
155.9
148.0
+ 5%
Connecticut
110.6
85.7
+29%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.07
8.00
9.18
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.29
5.33
6.89
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.95
7.90
9.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.16
5.17
6.77
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.98
7.90
9.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.00
5.04
6.85
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.16
8.05
9.31
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.85
5.79
7.42
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.15
3.17
5.56
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.78
7.78
9.10
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Making a Difference; Kiwi International Air Lines Takes Flight
"IT'S so hectic, it's been unbelievable," said Robert Iverson, a former Eastern Airlines pilot who is president of Kiwi International Air Lines, which started flying last Monday.
"The phones are so backed up it's incredible."
Backed up phone lines or not, the two-plane airline will not be challenging the likes of American and United any time soon.
The first flight had only 33 passengers on the 150-seat plane.


Georgians Illustrate Why What Worked for Bush in '88 Doesn't Work in '92
Frank Ellis is the kind of voter who could short out a political consultant's computer programs: a conservative, anti-abortion, 53-year-old white Southerner who has voted for the Republican candidates Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan and the Democrats Jimmy Carter and Michael S. Dukakis.
This year, though he likes what the Republicans say about family values and is uneasy with Bill Clinton's draft record, he is firmly in the Clinton camp.


BENEFITS
Fashion Benefit for AIDS
Tuesday -- Pauline Trigere's 50th year in fashion will be marked with a black-tie dinner at the Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue at 27th Street.
Kitty Carlisle Hart and Liz Smith will be the mistresses of ceremonies.
The evening, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M., will benefit six AIDS organizations.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 838-5944.


Kendra I. Theis, Carsten Wiese
Franklyn and Eileen Theis of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kendra I. Theis to Carsten Wiese, a son of Helmut and Elizabeth Wiese of Bielefeld, Germany.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Theis, 31 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Miami University in Ohio and in June received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a partner and an institutional securities trader at Cowen &amp; Company, an investment banking firm, in New York.


Her Muse Delivers a Camera
Judy Collins, the folksy pop singer whose autobiography, "Trust Your Heart," was published in 1987, just turned in the manuscript for her first novel two weeks ago.
The book, entitled "Shameless," will be published by HarperCollins next year.
"It's so exciting writing fiction," she said.
"I was tired of being tied to the facts."


The Man Who Couldn't Stuff Himself
TWICE UPON A TIME
Stories. By Daniel Stern. 239 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


The World Meets at the Crossroads of Indonesian Textiles
At the turn of the century, the Javanese recorded their many festivities in finely detailed textiles.
On one vividly colored batik, a bride in her buffalo-drawn carriage watches the wedding procession of masked and costumed dancers waving flags and doing handstands.
The scene is repeated several times, alternating with images of airborne creatures and pagodas sprouting rooftop trees.
The ceremonial hanging is one of 79 woven, printed, painted and embroidered cloths on view in "Cultures at Crossroads: Southeast Asian Textiles From the Australian National Gallery," at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue at 70th Street, through Jan. 17.


5 New Acts and the Coaches Who Direct Them
They were five wounded teams and they needed an infusion of energy.
So five men who had never coached National Football League teams before were named this season to take over clubs: Bill Cowher at Pittsburgh, Dave Shula at Cincinnati, Dennis Green at Minnesota, Mike Holmgren at Green Bay and Bobby Ross at San Diego.


Sarajevo Siege Deepens, Defying Efforts at Peace
In the week ending last Sunday, according to Government figures, 925 civilians were struck by fire from snipers and heavy guns.
Of them, 129 died.
The numbers are grisly enough in themselves.
But what is even more shocking is the fact that the weekly toll of 925 is the highest figure of the entire 25-week-old siege of Sarajevo -- and the implications such brutality holds for the hopes of peace in this once-proud city.


Carlisle Calling
THE ceiling is handpainted with fluffy white clouds; there are enough paintings with provenance to furnish a small museum, and Perrier with lime is at the ready.
The new Carlisle Collection showroom looks like an Upper East Side town house, with its silk-covered walls, tufted banquettes and Aubusson carpets stretching from wall to wall.
Arnold Scaasi or Christian Lacroix, tape measures slung over their shoulders, would complete the decor.
But there is no designer-in-waiting at this dress salon, which opened earlier this week at 16 East 52d Street.


The Royal Family Shows the Strain Of Trying to Have It Both Ways
Once upon a time, in the days before television or tabloid newspapers or telephoto lenses, nobody ever thought of the Queen of England as a working mother, or worried whether the monarchy was a model for what Dan Quayle might call royal family values.
That King Edward VII kept mistresses, or William IV fathered bastard children, or the sons and daughters of King George V and Queen Mary suffered painfully unhappy childhoods were matters beyond either public reproach or scrutiny.
"Its mystery is its life," said Walter Bagehot, the 19th century editor and royal counselor, whose advice helped define the palace's longtime public relations posture.
"We must not let in daylight upon the magic."
How times have changed.
These days, the royal family suffers, in more ways than one, from a bad case of overexposure.
The Duchess of York is pictured bare-breasted in London tabloids, cavorting at poolside with a man who is not the Duke of York, and a book is atop the best seller list here, purporting to describe the loveless marriage between the Prince and Princesses of Wales.
More recently, there were advertisements for a hotline on which callers listened in on what was said to be a tape recording of a telephone conversation between the Princess of Wales and an unidentified man who calls her Squidgy and says he loves her.


Alfred Sisley, The Invisible Man Of Impressionism
As emblems of felicity, Alfred Sisley's landscapes of 1873-76 have had few rivals in European art.
Even if the suburban landscapes were deep in snow, or if the little French town of Port-Marly was under flood water, as happened in 1876, we remain spellbound by Sisley's tonal control, his mastery of design and his way of letting the light run free.
It is there, and not necessarily in the subject matter, that happiness resides.
To have seen even one of these paintings is to want to know more about the man who painted them.
But until recently, there was nothing of real substance, in any language, to read about Sisley.
Nor had there ever been a major retrospective of his work, either in Europe or the United States.
Even the most elementary facts of his life were obscure.
Though not quite the forgotten man of Impressionism, he was not far from being the invisible man.


Carol W. Kelley, W. T. Murphy Jr.
Carol Williams Kelley, deputy to the director at the National Gallery of Art, and Dr.
William Thomas Murphy Jr., the president of Murphy &amp; Associates, a Government-relations consulting firm, both in Washington, were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
Caroline Pyle performed the ceremony at St.
Albans Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Murphy is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Williams of Green Valley, Ariz.
Her father, now retired, was the chief financial officer of Conchemco, a maker of paint and coatings in Kansas City, Mo.


La Russa Has Juggled His Way to the Top
Sparky Anderson has been known to speak with hyperbole, touting players as the next Mickey Mantle or a sure Hall of Famer, but in his latest instance, he could not be accused of exaggerating.
"I've managed 23 years," Anderson said, "and we have seen in 1992 the greatest managing job ever done. There's no question about it. Phil Garner and Johnny Oates deserve to be manager of the year, but they can't be. No manager in this game today could have done the job Tony did. I don't think I'll ever see this again in my time."


'Voltaire's Bastards'
To the Editor:
Ideology is a form of illiteracy.
Those addicted to it are unable to understand anything other than what fits their pattern.
Thus your reviewer, Terry Teachout, inverted the sense of my book "Voltaire's Bastards: The Dictatorship of Reason in the West" (Aug. 30), which, despite his assertions, is a statement neither of alienation nor of antimodernity, nor of pessimism.
And it is certainly not conservative in any sense that he would understand the word.


Foreign Affairs; Kissinger vs. Kerry
Vietnam hawks and doves found a new battleground last week -- Senate hearings on prisoners of war and missing in action.
Once again, they left each other and their country bloodied.
One more time, they blinded the nation to fundamental truths about its long nightmare.
Hawks like Henry Kissinger kept pushing the deception that South Vietnam alone could have held off the Communists at war's end had not doves denied U.S. military help.
The Kissingers continued to run from the central truth that can still liberate them and the nation from Vietnam's shadow: South Vietnam lost the war, not America and not American doves.
It was always Saigon's war to win or lose, though the U.S. lost its wealth, its soul and hundreds of thousands killed and wounded in giving Saigon a chance.


Patricia Bradley, Paul Hochman
Patricia Lynn Bradley, a daughter of Patricia Bradley-Ellis of Charleston, S.C., was married yesterday in New York to Paul Aaron Hochman, a son of Mark N. Hochman of Lincoln, Mass., and Linda C. Wilkinson of Hanover, N.H.
The Rev.
Philip Zaeder, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Century Club.
Mrs.
Hochman, 32 years old, is a senior art director at Young &amp; Rubicam, the advertising agency, in New York, and a teacher of television-commercial design at the Parson's School of Design.
She graduated from Pratt Institute.
Her mother is an independent manufacturers' representative to the United States military.


Correction
Season calendar of events misstated the opening date for the "Greek Miracle" exhibition at the National Gallery in Washington.
It will open on Nov. 22, not Nov. 11.


Taking the Economy by Storm
To the Editor:
It is wonderful news in "Business Diary" (Aug. 30) that a Gotham economist says Hurricane Andrew will help the economy.
By the same logic, each of us could give a boost to the gross domestic product by going out and smashing up the family car.
But will someone assure us that what is good for the G.D.P. is good for America?
GERARD RATCLIFFE Pembroke, Mass., Sept. 3


Making a Difference; Flexing Sculpted Muscles Against Nuclear Power
IF you want something done right, Marilyn and Jerry Wilson say you have to do it yourself.
They want their local nuclear plant closed as soon as possible, so they established the Do-It-Yourself Committee.
The committee is backing a proposition on the Oregon ballot this November to close the Trojan reactor within 30 days after the election.
A former jet charter pilot, Mr.
Wilson is the founder of Soloflex.
The company name prompted one nuclear industry official in Washington to accuse him of ulterior motives in fighting the plant.
After all, Soloflex, the official said, obviously stood to gain if a big market developed for solar power.


Ms. Birdsall, Karl Pfefferkorn
Katharine Blake Birdsall, a daughter of John and Mary Birdsall of Charlottesville, Va., was married yesterday to Karl Joachim Pfefferkorn, a son of William and Jane Pfefferkorn of Winston-Salem, N.C.
The Rev.
George Wyer performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Church in Ivy, Va.
Ms.
Birdsall, who is 23 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a freelance dancer and choreographer in Charlottesville.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is a director of NICOR, an energy and shipping concern in Naperville, Ill.


Amy Thornton, Kevin Charlton
Amy McNiece Thornton, a daughter of John and Edna Thornton of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kevin Michael Charlton, a son of James Charlton of New York and Patricia Charlton of Ballston Spa, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Davis performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Ms.
Thornton, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at the Cooperative Funding Corporation in Washington, a financial- service company for cooperatives.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father, a former vice chairman of the Consolidated Edison Company in New York, is of counsel to the New York law firm of Whitman &amp; Ransom.
Her mother is a lawyer in Bronxville.


Scuba Diving For the Disabled
Two of Hyatt's Caribbean resorts now offer scuba diving for the disabled.
Instructors at the Red Sail Sports facilities at Hyatt Regency Aruba and Hyatt Regency Grand Cayman were certified last spring by the Handicapped Scuba Association, which means that blind, paraplegic or quadriplegic people may dive at the two hotels.
Blind swimmers enjoy diving for "the floating sensation, having no gravity," according to Kate Copley, training director for Red Sail Sports at the Hyatt Regency Grand Cayman.
Those who are paralyzed enjoy "being out of the wheelchair, having the water hold you up,' she said. The deaf are taught in sign language, a helpful means of communicating underwater, while for the blind instructors use hand pressure as signals.


Ms. Janeczek, Tony Watt
Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore C. Janeczek of Passaic, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Maryann Janeczek and James Anthony Watt, the son of Carol King of Essex Fells, N.J., and the late James H. Watt.
Ms.
Janeczek, 33 years old, is a vice president in the foreign-exchange department of Merrill Lynch in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Fairfield University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Midlantic Bank in West Paterson, N.J.


Revisionist History?
To the Editor:
About "A Trilogy for Clytemnestra, the Feminist"  [ Aug. 9 ] : A mother who is devastated, then furious, because her husband kills their daughter is a feminist?


Bright Nights At the Opera
OPERA tends to dominate any list of musical highlights.
That has something to do with opera companies' eagerness to publicize their entire seasons far in advance, and something with the sheer magnitude of any operatic premiere, a grandeur that commands attention.
In Europe this fall, the Bastille Opera season in Paris was to have opened on Sept. 23 with a new production of Honegger's scenic oratorio "Jeanne d'Arc au Bucher," or "Joan of Arc at the Stake," with the company's music director Myung-Whun Chung conducting and the film actress Isabelle Huppert in the spoken role of Joan.


Deep in the Heart of Montana, a Black Woman Finds Home
Not long after Gwen Kircher, a black woman, moved to a small town in Montana, she stopped in a rural bar.
The white people all seemed to be looking at her.
Some customers huddled and whispered.
The bartender picked up the telephone.
She became nervous.


TAKE A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
If, as the proponents of homeopathic medicine have claimed, "the smaller the dose, the stronger the remedy," then perhaps the best homeopathic remedy would be to take nothing at all ("Take a Little Deadly Nightshade and You'll Feel Better," by James Gorman, Aug. 30).
This certainly seems to be the case with Boericke &amp; Tafel's Natrum muriaticum 30X (salt water).
Assuming that the initial solution used was a standard laboratory stock, with a concentration of 5 moles per liter, or 3 times 10 to the 24th power salt molecules per liter, Natrum muriaticum 30X actually contains less than one hundred-thousandth of one salt molecule per liter of water, which is impossible.


Jane Kolb, Edward Quinn
Mr. and Mrs.
Philip A. Kolb of Oceanside, L.I., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Jane Gamble Kolb, and Edward Stephen Quinn, the son of Mary Quinn of Baldwin, L.I., and the late Edward R. Quinn.
Ms.
Kolb, 28 years old, manages three Swiss Colony specialty food shops in Chicago.
She graduated from the University of Denver and is an M.B.A. degree candidate at Rosary College.
Her father, who retired as the owner of Midtown Oil Inc., a fuel-oil distributor in Woodmere, L.I., is an investor there.
Her mother, Barbara A. Kolb, is the principal of the Woodmere Middle School.


Senate's Tax Bill Is Completed
The Senate completed work today on dozens of amendments to a $31 billion tax and urban-aid package, but put off a vote on the bill itself until early next week.
The Senate appeared willing to grant President Bush many of the market-based remedies he seeks to reverse the deterioration of the inner cities, but it defied him by permanently extending two tax increases for the wealthiest taxpayers.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said he could guarantee that the President would veto the bill in its current form.


The Disturbing Photography of Sally Mann
At the opening last spring of "Immediate Family," Sally Mann's show at the Houk Friedman Gallery in New York, the winsome young subjects of the photographs aroused as much curiosity as the artist herself.
Motoring among the spectators like honorees at a testimonial dinner, Mann's three children -- Emmett, 12, Jessie, 10, and Virginia, 7 -- looked completely at ease with the crowd's prying adoration.
While her mother and father conversed with friends and admirers, Jessie orbited the four rooms in her red dress, fielding questions from strangers eager to know more about her parents.
Beneath a portrait of himself in the water, Emmett shrugged off the stares and expressed a typical teen-age frame of mind.
"These shoes cost $70," he boasted about his opening night footwear.
All three seemed unconcerned by the fact that on the surrounding white walls they could be examined, up close, totally nude.
The Mann children have endured scrutiny for some time now.
Eight years ago, their mother began to chronicle their growing up -- the wet beds, insect bites, nap times, their aspirations toward adulthood and their innocent savagery.
And the work that resulted has changed the lives of all involved.


Miss Zequeira Medina and Mr. Burke
Angie Medina-Carlo of Madrid has announced the engagement of her daughter Marisol Zequeira Medina to Nathaniel Bundy Burke, a son of Gilman and Sarah Burke of New York.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Zequeira Medina, 27 years old, is an immigration lawyer at the Miami law firm of Magda Montiel Davis.
She graduated from St.
Louis University and received a law degree from Duquesne University.


Conversations/Lawrence E. Walsh; Proud, Unbowed and Unpopular: Special Prosecutor Makes His Case
IT took more than five years and cost $32.5 million, but Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra independent prosecutor, is nearly at the end of his long-running inquiry into the tangled scandal that haunted Ronald Reagan's final years in office and continues to dog President Bush.
Although he has seen his biggest legal victories collapse under adverse appellate court rulings, Mr.
Walsh said, "I feel a certain sense of accomplishment, a sense of relief." He recently announced that he has no plans for further indictments.
"It looks like I am finally on the way home," he said, during a telephone interview last week from Oklahoma City.


Nice Homecoming for Majors
Except for overcast skies over Neyland Stadium, this was a near-perfect homecoming day for the University of Tennessee.
Colorful banners dotted the campus.
Alumni planned after-game reunions, and the opponent was a Cincinnati team that was willing but hardly able to match the Volunteers' firepower.
The day was made even more special because it was a homecoming in a deeper sense, as Coach Johnny Majors, a member of the Class of 1957 and the Volunteers' coach for the last 16 seasons, returned from heart surgery.


Heroes Were Made
BLUED-EYED CHILD OF FORTUNE
The Civil War Letters of Colonel Robert Gould Shaw.
Edited by Russell Duncan.
Illustrated. 421 pp.
Athens: University of Georgia Press. $29.95
IN THE HANDS OF PROVIDENCE
Joshua L. Chamberlain and the American Civil War.
By Alice Rains Trulock.
Illustrated. 569 pp.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. $34.95.


POSTINGS: Coming Next Month; Arts Guide for the Disabled
People in wheelchairs who want to know whether they can maneuver around the Guggenheim or hearing-impaired people looking for theaters that offer listening devices will soon have a carry-along guide to such information.
Next month, WCBS Newsradio 88 and Hospital Audiences Inc., a New York nonprofit corporation that promotes access to the arts for people with disabilities, will publish "Access for All," a soft-cover booklet that describes accessiblity to nearly 190 theaters, museums, sports arenas and even zoos.


Today's Game Offers Easier Preparation
EVEN though game is available year round, fall is still the traditional time for serving it.
Not long ago, picking out the buckshot was as much a part of the ritual as hanging the birds in a larder for as long as two weeks before eating them.
And when you roasted a game bird, you made sure that it was larded with plenty of bacon so that it didn't dry out in the oven.
Now game birds of all kinds, hares and rabbits are being raised on farms where they are allowed to range freely.
This means that they are not as dark or lean as wild game, but they have more tender meat and a distinctive flavor.
They don't need to be gussied up with rich sauces either but can even be cooked on the grill without becoming tough.


Making a Difference; Sports Illustrated's 'Franchise'
MAYBE it was inevitable that executives of the nation's leading sports magazine would refer to it much the way that owners of sports teams talk about their clubs.
Thus, Donald M. Elliman Jr., the recently named president and publisher of Sports Illustrated, speaks of "the franchise" when he says he isn't afraid of change.
"I believe that some degree of risk is required in this business," Mr.
Elliman said.
"The problem a lot of people have in any franchise business that has been successful is the tendency to protect what you've got. But you've got to try to make changes."


Living Above the Store in Santa Monica
Few of the people who crowd into the Broadway Deli and an adjoining multiplex cinema in Janss Court, a recently completed building in this oceanfront city, are aware that they are in an apartment building.
Yet on the sixth floor -- above two restaurants, five movie theaters and three floors with 80,000 square feet of office space -- Charles S. Smith, a self-employed aircraft salesman, makes his home.
He said he does not mind the crowds on the Third Street Promenade, a popular shopping street restricted to pedestrians, and is happy to live within walking distance of most of the banks, restaurants and messenger services he uses.


Support Groups At Cancer Care
I was pleased to see "As Population Ages, Prostate Cancer Takes a High Toll on L.I."  [ Sept. 13 ] .
Cancer Care presently offers nine professionally led groups, free of charge, for cancer patients, caregivers and the bereaved.
I am encouraged by the recognition of this growing need for service to the male population.
There are groups in these areas Relative's Support Group; Patient/Relative Support Group; Patients With Breast Cancer Support Group; Patients With Prostate Cancer Support Group; Partner's Bereavement Support Group; Patient's With Breast Cancer Support Group; Relative's Bereavement Support Group, Patient's Support Group and Bereavement Support Group.
Information is at 364-8130.
MARGARET M. BURKE Cancer Care Inc.
Woodbury


On Upsetting A Garden's Serenity
When I read the Aug. 30 article, Montclair Journal, "Wrangle Over a Job Upsets a Garden's Serenity," a voice within me keeps re-echoing the words of a wise philosopher: "If it ain't broke, don't fix it."


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Charlestown, R.I.; Narragansetts Plan Housing
IN an effort to address a need for housing and bring tribal members together, the Narragansett Indians plans to build 50 one-family houses on 31 acres in this rural community of 7,000 people in southern Rhode Island.
The housing is one of several developments planned by the Narragansetts, a tribe with about 2,000 members now spread around the state.
Others include a health center and a casino.


Kane E. Deglin and Jeffrey R. Peterson
Kane Elizabeth Deglin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore L. Deglin of New York, was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Robert Peterson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Robert Peterson of Tenafly, N.J.
Norman Goodman, the New York County Clerk and clerk of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, performed the ceremony at the New York Yacht Club.


Storm Toll: One Dead and One Missing at Sea
For property owners along the coast, Tropical Storm Danielle turned out to be, in the words of one Coney Islander, "a nice lady."
From Montauk to Cape May, a storm that some believed would batter the coast through the night left little damage yesterday and only scattered flooding.


CUSTODY DECISION DIVIDING EXPERTS
The ruling on Friday by a Florida judge approving a 12-year-old boy's request to end the parental rights of his natural mother has failed to quiet the debate among lawyers and children's advocates over whether the case has strengthened or weakened the status of the family in America.
Some believe that permitting minors to sue their parents to improve their lives extends to children the rights guaranteed them by the Constitution.
Often in child custody cases, minors are forced to accept what parents, legal guardians or other adults see as in their best interests.
The boy himself, 12-year-old Gregory Kingsley, has said that he hoped his case would encourage other young people to take action to gain their happiness.


Time for Hockey to Get Its Back Up?
As he sat between his wife and his employer last week and talked about the back injury that will sideline him for at least part, and perhaps all, of the coming National Hockey League season, Wayne Gretzky occasionally leaned into a microphone to answer questions.
But he couldn't do it without wincing from the pain.
The back still hurts, the result of more than 14 seasons of nightly pounding and pushing from behind.
It has led to this: a herniated disk in his upper back that has threatened to end Gretzky's career unless medication and exercise allow him to come back.


Teaching About Gays and Tolerance
With a note of sadness, a middle-aged New York man recalls the clumsy insensitivity of his seventh-grade teachers.
Even after his father died, they kept on talking about families as though all normal ones had two parents.
He was left feeling not only bereaved but somehow abnormal.
Children of divorce often felt even more estranged, marked not only by their truncated households but by stigma.
Those attitudes have since been mitigated in many school districts.
But today's children, more than ever, find themselves living in a variety of family arrangements -- unmarried single parents, foster parents, fathers in jail, to name a few.
That's why New York City's Board of Education has adopted a curriculum guide for first graders called "Children of the Rainbow."


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
SAY Newark, and Eddiemae Livingston doesn't automatically rewind to 1967 even though she saw firsthand the devastation left by four days of rage.
Say Newark, and Margaret Scarola doesn't go back 25 years either, despite having glimpsed Newark's darkest moment.


A la Carte; If Truck Drivers Stop There . . .
EVERY morning at 5 o'clock huge tractor-trailers pull into the parking lot at the rear of the Kitchen Kabaret in Roslyn Heights.
The rigs, many of which go out of their way to make the stop at 409 Glen Cove Road, are there not to deliver, but to pick up.
The drivers not only order freshly baked muffins and specialty coffees for breakfast, but also lunches and dinners that they eat later on their long-haul trips.


SEPT. 20-27: Tailhook Snafu; Pentagon Accuses Admirals of Sabotaging Investigation
The first of two Pentagon reports on sexual assaults at a naval aviators' convention said last week that senior Navy admirals had deliberately sabotaged their own investigation to protect fellow admirals.
And this is expected to be the tamer of the two Pentagon reports.


A Palette Of Exhibitions
IT used to be that in high summer, with the thoughtful tourist in mind, the key cities in the European art world would get their act together and put on exhibitions that we hated to miss.
But there is now no off-season for art in Europe.
Activity is year-round.
Furthermore, it is virtually ubiquitous.
There is hardly a town, no matter how small or remote, that can be discounted once and for all in the context of art.
This fall, there are exhibitions that are self-evidently very grand.
At the Altes Museum in Berlin -- one of the most beautiful buildings in Europe -- is the 22d in a long series of shows organized by the Council of Europe.
Since the 1950's these historical surveys have set new standards of international cooperation.


Jane M. Mayer, William Hamilton
Jane Meredith Mayer, a senior correspondent for The Wall Street Journal, and William Beaufort Hamilton, the deputy national editor of political coverage for The Washington Post, were married yesterday.
The bridegroom's brother-in-law, Judge John P. Maloney of Connecticut Superior Court in Hartford, performed the ceremony at the Ashby Inn in Paris, Va.
Ms.
Mayer, who is keeping her name, graduated from Yale University.
She is a daughter of William and Meredith Mayer of New York.
Her father is a composer in New York.
Her mother, a painter and printmaker, is the president of the Manhattan Graphics Center in New York.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late Allan Nevins, the historian who won two Pulitzer Prizes and was a founder of American Heritage magazine.
She is a great-great-granddaughter of Emanuel Lehman, a founder of Lehman Brothers.


SEPT. 20-27: Anti-Cholesterol Vitamins?; Your Mother Is Still Right About Vegetables and Fruit
Basic research that began with a puzzle is gradually leading scientists toward a conviction that vitamins can thwart cholesterol's role in causing heart disease.
Beginning by asking what made cholesterol so dangerous, investigators mixed it and human cells in the laboratory and found that the cells ignored the cholesterol.
Several years ago, they found that cholesterol must be made rancid -- or oxidized -- before it is toxic, initiating a cascade of reactions culminating in an artery-clogging plaque.


Fuzzy Suits, And a Ghost
TO enter Anna Sui Downtown in SoHo is to walk into a time warp, where the decor is 1890's, the clothes 1960's and the benign ghost is Diana Vreeland.
The shop, which is the designer's first store, opened yesterday at 113 Greene Street (near Prince Street).
Designed by Ms.
Sui, it looks like a cheerful Victorian bordello as depicted by Walt Disney.
The armoire, bureau and dressing-room doors, all Victorian, are painted glossy black.
Each piece of furniture is curvy, voluptuous and lavish in carved garlands, curlicues and rosettes.
The tufted sofa and chair are upholstered in the appropriate fabric: velvet.
The walls are lavender, and the maple floor is stained raspberry.
On a brilliant autumn morning, the store is lighted for sunset.
But the clothes are vivid.


The Success of Lean Auto Manufacturing
To the Editor:
Andrew Pollack's article "A Lower Gear For Japan's Auto Makers" (Aug. 30) contains many insights into the current gloomy state of affairs in the Japanese automobile industry.
Yet, although Mr.
Pollack does not say so explicitly, the article leaves the impression that a key reason for the recent decline is the failure of the Toyota production system.
I believe the opposite is the case.
In fact the Toyota production system has done exactly what it is supposed to do -- namely, give companies competitive advantage in markets where success depends on high quality, low cost and rapid introduction of new products.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Seles-Sabatini Matchup for the Final Top-seeded Monica Seles struggled yesterday in the Nichirei International Championship in Tokyo, but outlasted third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-0, 3-6, 6-4, in a semifinal match.
Seles, ranked No. 1 in the world, will meet second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina in the final today.
Sabatini beat fourth-seeded Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria, 6-3, 6-3, in the other semifinal.
Seles lost only 5 points in the first set. (AP) GOLF Daly Ahead by Two Shots John Daly made a 12-foot birdie putt on the final hole for a four-under-par 67 and a two-stroke lead after the third round of the B.C.
Open in Endicott, N.Y.
Daly, who has a 13-under 200 total, entered No. 18 tied for the lead with 1990 B.C.
Open champion Nolan Henke, but his birdie and Henke's bogey produced a two-shot swing.
Henke, who shot a 68, dropped into a second-place tie with rookie Phil Mickelson at 202.(AP) Aoki Shoots 6-Under in Seniors: Isao Aoki of Japan birdied four of his last five holes for a six-under-par 66 and a two-round total of 136 for a one-stroke lead in the $800,000 Senior Tour's Nationwide Championship in Alpharetta, Ga.
Aoki, who turned 50 on Aug. 31 and is in only his fourth senior tournament, needed his fast finish to fend off Raymond Floyd, with a course-record 64 for a 137 over the par-72, 6,781-yard Country Club of the South course.(AP) Stephenson Has 2-Stroke Lead: Jan Stephenson, without a victory since 1987, shot a five-under-par 67 to take a two-stroke lead over Donna Andrews after the third round of the L.P.G.A.
Classic in Buena Park, Calif.
The 40-year-old Stephenson, a 16-time winner in 19 seasons on the L.P.G.A.
Tour, has a 9-under 207 total on the 6,352-yard Los Coyotes Country Club Course.
Andrews shot a 68.
Meg Mallon's 69 tied her with second-round co-leader Betsy King for third at 210.
King shot a 72. (AP) BOXING McMillan Surrenders Title to Colombian Ruben Palacio of Colombia won a world title in his fourth attempt when Colin McMillan of Britain surrendered his World Boxing Organization featherweight championship because of a dislocated shoulder.
Midway through the eighth round at the Olympia in London, McMillan emerged from a clinch with his left arm drooping.
Referee Jess Andreasen halted the fight and doctors confirmed the champion (23-2-0) could not continue.(AP) HORSE RACING Noble Damsel Stakes to Miss Otis Miss Otis beat Big Big Affair by four lengths in the $89,100 Noble Damsel stakes for fillies and mares 3-year-old and up yesterday at Belmont Park.
The 5-year-old daughter of One for All-Puzzlement covered the mile and a sixteenth in 1:433/5 to earn $53,460 for Mrs.
H.
T.
Rathbun with her third victory in five starts this year.
Miss Otis returned $5 and $2.80.(AP) HOCKEY Islanders Beat Sabres, 6-4 After twice trailing by two goals, the Islanders rallied to score four consecutive times last night and took a 6-4 victory over the Buffalo Sabres in an exhibition game at Nassau Coliseum.
It was the Islanders' first victory after four defeats.
Steve Thomas scored the winner with a slap shot past Tom Draper after a pass from Derek King on the rush at 12:48 of the third period.
"We're a better team than we've shown," said Thomas.
Pat LaFontaine and Aleksandr Mogilny, two of Buffalo's stars, missed the game because of groin injuries.
Philippe Boucher scored three goals for the Sabres.
Marty McInnis, Jeff Norton, Ray Ferraro, Patrick Flatley and Pierre Turgeon scored for the Islanders.


OLD FOES SKIRMISH AT M.I.A. HEARINGS
Congress and the Nixon Administration, bitter adversaries in 1973 when American troops withdrew from Vietnam, confronted each other again this week in Senate hearings that went to the heart of almost every contentious aspect of the issue of missing American servicemen.
The hearings may have changed the substance of the emotional debate over the boys who didn't come home.
"We're not here to refight the Vietnam War," Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs told Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser and later Secretary of State.
But exchanges were sharp, especially on questions of how hard Mr.
Kissinger had pushed Hanoi to account for missing Americans.


Tom Waits Finds A Purity in Debris
As seedy as it was, Tom Waits's world always had a particular glamour.
Albums like "Swordfishtrombones" (1983), "Rain Dogs" (1985) and "Frank's Wild Years" (1987) were peopled with drunks, madames, two-bit grifters, sailors on shore leave and saloon-bound nobodies with delusions of hitting the big time.
But even though most of the action took place in the gutter, everybody down there seemed to know their place and somehow revel in it.
The dominant image over those three albums, both in the lyrics and in the organ-grinder tilt of the music, was the carnival.
And in Waits's view, the lights were on full blast, the sideshow was in full swing, and money was rolling in at the gates.


Another Step Forward for Yale's Sharkey
CATHERINE SHARKEY had one of those ho-hum Yale careers, grinding out a 3.9 grade-point average while majoring in economics, serving four years as starting lacrosse goalkeeper, tutoring high school students and doing volunteer work at the New Haven Juvenile Detention Center before graduating summa cum laude and becoming a Rhodes Scholar.
Now she has a new distraction.
She is one of 10 finalists for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's second annual Woman of the Year Award.
Sponsored by Champion, the award, which will be announced in November, gives equal weight to academic achievement, athletic accomplishment, community service and leadership.


U.S. Uncommonly Inactive In World Economic Arena
President Bush's new world order, which assigns leadership to the United States as the surviving superpower, clearly did not apply this week to the European currency turmoil.
While the United States Government stood by, Germany marched Europe to the German agenda.
Similarly, Mr.
Bush's call last spring for rapid approval of foreign loans for Russia was not repeated by the Administration this week at the semiannual gathering of the world's finance ministers and central bank presidents -- a meeting that is frequently a platform from which to push America's foreign economic goals.
The White House was silent on Russia.


Rally Puts Police Under New Scrutiny
On Wednesday, Sept. 16, after months of growing tension between Mayor David N. Dinkins and New York City's police, more than 10,000 off-duty officers and their supporters gathered outside City Hall to protest the Dinkins administration's handling of a list of police issues.
The demonstration began calmly enough, with a series of predictable chants, songs and demands.
Then something went badly awry.
A handful of people, then hundreds, then thousands, broke through police barricades and surged onto City Hall's steps.
From there, the protest degenerated into a beer-swilling, traffic-snarling, epithet-hurling melee that stretched from the Brooklyn Bridge to Murray Street, where several politicians helped stoke the emotional fires.


El Morocco: Famous Sup 'n' Sip Is a Strip
THE zebra banquettes are still there, but some of the women sitting on them wore little more than G-strings when El Morocco reopened a week ago Friday as a topless bar.
A glamorous symbol of the 1930's and 1940's, the club originally opened as a speak-easy in 1931 and continued its ascendancy well into the 1970's.
It was a true supper club, where Vanderbilts and Astors once dined near royalty, where Cary Grant and Marlene Dietrich graced the tables and where Jackie could be found as both Mrs.
Kennedy and Mrs.
Onassis.


New Campaign Against PCB's in the Hudson
DESPITE regular warnings from the state, most Hudson River fishermen continue to eat PCB-contaminated fish, because they are either unaware of the risks or they do not care about them, a Poughkeepsie-based environmental organization reported last week.
"The bottom line, of course, is that we have to clean up the PCB's, but short of that, we somehow have to get the word out about the dangers of ingesting the chemicals," said Bridget Barclay, environmental director of Hudson River Sloop Clearwater, a 13,000-member nonprofit group that is compiling results from a yearlong study of fishermen's habits.


Playing It Safe by Installing a Deadbolt
A DEADBOLT not only increases the security of any door, but also is among the least expensive and easiest kinds of locks to install.
It consists of a sliding metal bar mounted horizontally in a door's edge and is operated by a key and a small knob called a thumbturn.
Most homes have deadbolts on their main entry doors, but it is wise to add them to doors leading to the garage or basement and to doors on outdoor storage sheds.


Puck's Pluck
Wolfgang Puck was born at the right time, in Southern Austria during the postwar baby boom in the United States.
He got himself to the right place -- Sunset Boulevard, circa 1980 -- just when that baby boom had the time, money and inclination to train its collective palate.
He had the sense to live by his own good taste, and his taste just keeps being better and better business.
"I didn't know anything else," says the 43-year-old chef.
"Good thing, right? I wanted to be an architect, but I was so small that everybody thought I would be a midget. My family was poor. My father was a coal miner, my mother was a cook in a resort hotel. They sent me off to apprentice in a hotel when I was 14. The chef took one look at me, decided I was useless and ordered me out of the kitchen. It was a tragical beginning."


Stamford's New Stage for Performers
EARLIER this weekend the Stamford Center for the Arts celebrated the opening of the Rich Forum, its new $14 million-plus arts, theater and communications complex with visits from an array of guest stars and performances by several of its constituent organizations, including the Stamford Symphony, Connecticut Ballet Theater, New England Lyric Operetta and Connecticut Grand Opera.
All those groups will be back in due course to begin their own seasons at the Palace Theater, and the center has also announced seven separate subscription series, variously featuring such internationally celebrated artists and ensembles as Andre Watts, Victor Borge, Itzhak Perlman, the Royal New Zealand Ballet, the Hanover Band and the Moscow Virtuosi.
Most of the cycles begin in late October or November, but you can get an early start with the "Jazz Etc." series, since the innovative Chick Corea is bringing his piano, his original compositions and his Akoustic Band to the Palace this coming Friday evening at 8.
For reservations or subscription details, call 323-2131.


Germany Cracks Down; Gypsies Come First
AMONG all Europe's races, tribes and peoples, none stand out from the rest more vividly than Gypsies.
Indomitable and fiercely independent, heirs to a wandering life style, often resistant to education and assimilation, they may also be the continent's most unloved group.
Governments find them undisciplined and disruptive, and many repress them with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
Since the collapse of Communist rule in eastern Europe, Gypsies have been on the move in great numbers.
Many suffer harassment or worse at the hands of governments and nationalist groups in Romania, Bulgaria and Serbia.
Others are simply seeking better lives, like the many non-Gypsies who are streaming into western Europe.
Germany is their favored destination, with more than 25,000 having arrived here so far this year.


Don't Blame Former Pan Am Employees
To the Editor:
Agis Salpukas's article "Delta's Bumpy International Ride" (Sept. 6) puts former Pan Am employees in an unfavorable light.


BEST SELLERS: September 27, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
29
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
1
5
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on a wild chase through the Caribbean on the trail of a deceased rock star who has been sighted there.
3
3
11
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
4
4
18
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
5
6
5
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $20.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
6
10
2
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Knopf, $23.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime they committed.
7
5
5
THE VOLCANO LOVER, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) The story of Lord Nelson, his lover Emma Hamilton and her spouse.
8
7
7
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
9
1
THE LEGACY, by R. A. Salvatore. (TSR, $15.95.) A fantasy tale about a spider queen's war to stop a band of elves in their quest for peace and security.
10
13
3
TANGLED VINES, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Visiting her native Napa Valley, a television star encounters shades of her unhappy childhood and romance with the heir to a winery.
11
8
5
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $22.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
12
15
15
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
13
11
11
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $20.) A 90-year-old woman recalls what she saw as the doyenne of a Maine summer retreat.
14
1
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $18.95.) Jim Qwilleran has to contend with a series of crimes that occur during a bus tour of Scotland.
15
9
5
NIGHT OF THE HAWK, by Dale Brown. (Fine/ Putnam, $22.95.) American airmen and marines undertake to rescue a serviceman in Lithuania.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
6
2
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the radio talk show host.
2
1
4
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
3
2
18
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
4
3
15
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
5
16
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The Vice-Presidential candidate discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save it.
6 *
9
4
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
7
7
7
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
8
4
8
THE LAST TSAR, by Edvard Radzinsky. (Doubleday, $25.) The life of Nicholas II and his family, and their assassination in 1918; based in part on newly available material.
9
8
13
DIANA: HER TRUE STORY, by Andrew Morton. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
10
1
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of A. A. Milne's character Piglet.
11
14
14
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
12
20
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) An economist considers the upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
13 *
11
2
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
14
15
11
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The address delivered on Nov. 19, 1863, and how it has affected American life.
15
1
KISSINGER, by Walter Isaacson. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the former national security adviser and Secretary of State.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
42
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
2
2
32
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
7
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
4 *
4
43
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
5 *
5
11
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
HANNAH ARENDT -- KARL JASPERS: CORRESPONDENCE, 1926-1969, edited by Lotte Kohler and Hans Saner. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $49.95.) Forty-three years of discussion between two world-class intellectuals whose lives were defined by the great ideas and events of the 20th century.
FACES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE WELL: The Permanence of Racism, by Derrick Bell. (Basic Books, $20.) A prominent scholar of race and the law argues, with allegory, fables and dialogues, that our progress against racism so far has been illusory.
YOUR BLUES AIN'T LIKE MINE, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) An eloquent first novel that shows the lives and hearts of poor black and white people, with malice toward none.
"IT'S YOUR MISFORTUNE AND NONE OF MY OWN": A New History of the American West, by Richard White. (University of Oklahoma, $39.95.) A lively synthesis incorporating the work of the revisionist scholars who have renewed the study of the region.
THE SPANISH FRONTIER IN NORTH AMERICA, by David J. Weber. (Yale University, $35.) A comprehensive account of the encounters, and their consequences, between Spanish and native culture, and between both and English-speaking Americans.
IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA: The Psychology of a Saint, by W. W. Meissner. (Yale University, $35.) A wise exploration of the twice-born, nearly omnicompetent Ignatius by a Jesuit who is a psychoanalytically trained psychiatrist as well.
THE OXFORD COMPANION TO THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, edited by Tom McArthur; managing editor, Feri McArthur. (Oxford University, $45.) This perfect browser's manual contains an abundance of neat things to know about what we say and why.


Cecilia Bohan, Richard Harbus
Cecilia Anne Bohan, the daughter of Thomas L. Bohan of Peaks Island, Me., and Linda A. Bohan of Brunswick, Me., was married yesterday to Richard Lloyd Harbus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Harbus of Levittown, L.I.
The bride's father, a lawyer, officiated at the Grey Havens Inn in Georgetown, Me.
Ms.
Bohan, who is 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a picture editor at The New York Times in New York.
She graduated from Washington University.


Advocate for the Homeless Leaving the Country
AFTER seven years as the head of Grace Episcopal Church here in White Plains, where he was a leading advocate for the homeless, the Rev.
Richard Unsworth Larom Jr. is leaving Westchester today.
The county, he said, has done little to solve the long-term needs of its growing poor, the group he calls "the shadow image of our opulence."
The need is for permanent, affordable housing, said Father Larom, the peripatetic preacher who is known to all simply as Peter because like the disciple, he is also a fisherman and a boater.


Remaking Spaces for Public Use
MEASURED in square footage alone, the public will lose some room when Sony USA reshapes the base of the former A.T. &amp; T. headquarters on Madison Avenue, into which it is moving this year.
But the New York City Planning Commission has approved the transformation, in the belief that the result will be an amenity that is far more engaging and welcoming than the existing arcade and covered pedestrian space.
The case illustrates the broader problem faced by owners, planners and the public when privately built amenities -- no matter how well intended -- do not function as planned or do not materialize at all.
There is the dance rehearsal studio next to the City Center of Music and Drama that never got built.
There is the isolated little East River esplanade to which some neighbors feel uncomfortable going.
There is the mid-Manhattan hotel that has taken away the chairs and tables in its atrium.


Marilyn Quayle Isn't 'Most Women'
To the Editor:
Marilyn Quayle says in "Workers, Wives and Mothers" (Op-Ed, Sept. 11) that her words at the Republican National Convention were willfully distorted; she seeks this additional opportunity to make herself perfectly clear.
So what does she say?
"I sometimes think liberals are angry, because it turns out that most women do not wish to be liberated from their essential natures as women."


Data Bank/September 27, 1992
New Orders for Durable Goods
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
-0.1
-2.7
2.8
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
-0.5
0.2
0.1
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.6
0.6
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,237
1,120
1,147
Gross Domestic Product
II Q'92
I Q'92
IV Q'91
Annual rate, 1987 dollar in percent
1.5
2.9
0.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
Sept. 11
Sept. 4
Aug. 28
In thousands
414
400
394
Auto Production
Sept. 25
Sept. 18
Sept. 11
In units
124,414
109,137
89,178
Truck Production
In units
88,408
80,039
65,566


WASTING AWAY
Disposal of nuclear waste is a monumental technological challenge.
In discussing this issue in his article "Wasting Away" (Aug. 30), Keith Schneider refers to geological burial of nuclear waste as a disposal option.
However, this scheme is one of long-term storage in a repository.
There are only two possibilities for true disposal.
One -- hauling the waste into space for disposal in the sun -- is untenable.
The other involves nuclear transmutation and is, arguably, feasible.


Protesters Shout Abrams Down in Buffalo
Robert Abrams, the Democratic candidate for the United States Senate, was shouted down as he took the podium on the last stop of the Clinton-Gore bus tour in Buffalo this afternoon.
About 20 protesters carrying Italian flags interrupted state and local Democratic leaders campaigning for the Democratic Presidential ticket and demanded that Mr.
Abrams apologize to primary opponent Geraldine A. Ferraro for what they called anti-Italian "sleaze tactics."


No Headline
The refugee experience is the same thing no matter where you come from -- frustration, culture shock, sadness, upset stomach. -- LANG NGAN, of the International Rescue Committee.  [ 1:4. ]


Wall Street; When Time to Complain Runs Out
RALPH and Genevieve Woodruff of Palm Harbor, Fla., ate a $100,000 lunch back in 1984.
After spotting a newspaper ad for an investment seminar sponsored by the brokerage firm A. G. Edwards, they signed up for a free meal at the nearby Eastwood Lake Country Club, where a broker, Robert Hicks, presided.
The just-retired couple "kind of liked this fellow," Mr.
Woodruff said, so they visited Mr.
Hicks in his office and let him take over their portfolio.
Today, two of the three limited partnerships they purchased are bankrupt.
The third "isn't worth much at all," said Mr.
Woodruff, who says he has lost between $100,000 and $120,000 on the three investments as a result of misleading advice.
Usually, a newly retired couple would modify a portfolio in a more conservative direction.
The Woodruffs' broker advised the opposite way, selling their conservative utility stocks and municipal bonds and buying some of the diciest stuff on the risk continuum.
Both Mr.
Hicks and A. G. Edwards declined to comment.


On the Side Of the Angels (And Bach)
There were times, during Ferruccio Busoni's remarkable "Doktor Faust" at the New York City Opera (the last performance is on Tuesday), when I found myself thinking not of the learned scholar who sells his soul to the devil in exchange for experience and power, but of Johann Sebastian Bach.
This was partly because Busoni quotes Lutheran chorales ("Ein' feste Burg" and "Christ lag in Todesbanden"), recalling Bach's cantatas; fragments of chorale tunes even become recurrent motifs.
And when Busoni wishes to suggest something beyond the desires of Faust or the magic of Mephistopheles -- something once called the divine -- he often uses Baroque-sounding polyphony.
These invocations of Bach are not casual.
Busoni, who lived until 1924 and was one of the great piano virtuosos of his time, had an almost religious reverence for Bach.
He transcribed organ works for piano (creating a new composer, Bach-Busoni) and prepared performing editions of such works as "The Well-Tempered Clavier." Busoni filled the scores with his commentary, with suggested phrasing and dynamics, with pianistic exercises and textual alterations.
Contemporary tastes for undoctored texts and self-effacing interpretations have consigned these editions to oblivion.


An Energy Prophet Who Guessed Right
In a way, S. David Freeman is a prophet coming into his own.
As head of the Ford Foundation's energy project in the early 1970's, he correctly predicted that improved energy efficiency would be cheaper than continued expansion of power plants, and he predicted that American energy use, then galloping ahead, would reach a plateau by the late 1980's.
At the time, oil companies and utilities said his idea was radical and wrong, but in fact it was not radical enough.
When the plateau was reached, it was 15 percent lower than what Mr.
Freeman had predicted.
For the last two years Mr.
Freeman has been general manager of the Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD), which is scrambling to replace the power from the Rancho Seco nuclear plant, which the voters closed three years ago.
But Mr.
Freeman is still a radical prophet.
And in an interview earlier this month, he backs new technologies for electricity production to replace nuclear power.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
I take strong exception to Bebe Moore Campbell's forgiveness of black men for hurting her.
I am a 40-year-old African-American male, successful and considered attractive, whatever that means.
I will not assume responsibility for the author's pain.
I am growing weary of the current black male-bashing craze.


At the Movies, Sort Of
A BEACH.
A loft.
A foreign-sounding man with a penchant for giving orders.
And a mysterious beauty who is in very, very good shape.
These are the elements of "Shape Your Body Workout," which centers on a riveting performance by Cindy Crawford in what could otherwise have been a very ordinary role.
Fortunately, Ms.
Crawford is not ordinary, and she sees well beyond the situps and stretches that frame her character's world.
She also creates an interesting ambiguity, one that is chiefly expressed through setting and costume.
Will she be seen by the sea in that tiny black swimsuit, or within the confines of a New York studio?
Will she be in color, or in black and white?
We are meant to care desperately, but we can never know what to expect.


Czech Cubism's Seismic Design
The search for a "usable past," one of post-modernism's abiding preoccupations, has lured many architects back to the historical styles rejected by the modern movement.
But it has also brought to light chapters in the rich history of modernism itself.
German Expressionism, Italian Futurism, Russian Constructivism: the paths to modern architecture were exceedingly various.
Reappraisals of these movements have unearthed the stunning diversity that preceded the International Style.
"Czech Cubism," an exhibition now on view at the University of the Arts in Philadelphia (through Dec. 4), adds another movement to this roster of reconsidered modernisms.
And it goes far toward correcting the view that modernism was an assault on history.
The show vividly suggests that, on the contrary, modern architecture was a response to history's assault on civilization.


The Citadel Beats Army On Late Kick to Go 4-0
C.
J.
Haynes, a 20-year-old sophomore, came off the bench and completed all of his passes to help the Bulldogs of The Citadel rally and beat Army, 15-14, in Michie Stadium this afternoon.
Then he rubbed it in just a little.
"This is a big victory," the quarterback said of the fourth victory for the undefeated Bulldogs, a I-AA school that also beat Arkansas this month.
"I'm glad I got the opportunity to play. My college choice came down to Army and The Citadel."


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Sept. 13, about newsletters, misstated the phone number for The Discerning Traveler.
It is (800) 673-7834.


Upstairs, Downstairs at the Modern
With the Mammoth Matisse show that opened last week, the Museum of Modern Art is looking a bit like the museological equivalent of the boa that swallowed the water buffalo.
To make room for the 400 works in its blockbuster exhibition, the Modern has had to clear out the second- and third-floor galleries that usually house its permanent collection.
More than a few of these works have been sent on tour for the duration.
But Kirk Varnedoe, head of the museum's painting and sculpture department, has assembled a lively selection of what's left and put it on display on the first floor.


The Soup-Kitchen Classroom
Last Spring, the students in Patricia Ann Bender's "Advanced Exposition" class at the Newark campus of Rutgers University read John Dewey's "Democracy and Education" and taught writing skills to people from the community.
The writing class included a second-grade teacher, a longshoreman, a homeless man, 14 recovering addicts, a nun and a convicted murderer.
In Bryan Barnett's Political Science 220 ("The Civic Community: Theory and Practice") at the Rutgers New Brunswick campus, the students made sandwiches at a soup kitchen and read Shelby Steele's essay "I'm Black, You're White, Who's Innocent?" for class, chafing over the question of what obligations the haves owe the have-nots.
This unusual mix of volunteer work and pedagogy, service and syllabus, is at the heart of the Rutgers Civic Education and Community Service Program, an imaginative and wholly experimental answer to a suggestion made in 1988 by Edward J. Bloustein, then the university's president.
Bloustein proposed community service as a response to the national epidemic of racism, sexism, homophobia and religious intolerance on campuses, as well as an antidote to the virus of materialism that the young had caught from society.
After Bloustein suggested making service a requirement for the undergraduate degree, the university undertook the most extensive experiment in America on the integration of volunteerism into the curriculum and its effectiveness as an education in citizenship.


Reflecting On Prospect Park's Timeless Vistas


A Little Help From a Friend
To the Editor:
As your article "Phoenix or Ashes for La Mama?"  [ Sept. 6 ]  indicates, Ellen Stewart's experimental theater is an invaluable part of the city's cultural life.
While the article chronicled the financial difficulties La Mama has been facing, it neglected to mention that last year, for example, my office provided $1.8 million to help La Mama renovate its theater complex -- the largest grant from my capital budget to a cultural organization.
These funds will enable La Mama to have a more comfortable space in which to continue its extensive theater programs.
RUTH W. MESSINGER Borough President, City of New York


Carlisle Calling
THE ceiling is handpainted with fluffy white clouds; there are enough paintings with provenance to furnish a small museum, and Perrier with lime is at the ready.
The new Carlisle Collection showroom looks like an Upper East Side town house, with its silk-covered walls, tufted banquettes and Aubusson carpets stretching from wall to wall.
Arnold Scaasi or Christian Lacroix, tape measures slung over their shoulders, would complete the decor.
But there is no designer-in-waiting at this dress salon, which opened earlier this week at 16 East 52d Street.


For a Sophisticated Audience
IT takes a lot to make a Left Bank old, lived-in buildings, cafes, artists, galleries and, if no night life, at least a promise of the day's not ending at 5 o'clock.
The downtown area here has yet to acquire all these assets, but it has artists enough to warrant a studio tour that has become an annual event.
As far as galleries go, the Jersey City Museum has until recently been the only game in town.
Now, on First Street, there is Progressive Culture Works, an alternative space in the old Lorillard Building, itself a warren of studios.


Colleen F. Coonelly, John P. Lavelle Jr.
Eleanor M. Coonelly of Haverford, Pa., has announced October wedding plans for her daughter Colleen Francis Coonelly and John Patrick Lavelle Jr., a son of Judge Lavelle and Marianne S. Lavelle of Lehighton, Pa.
Ms.
Coonelly, 29 years old, is an associate at the Philadelphia law firm of Pepper, Hamilton &amp; Scheetz.
She graduated from Duke University and received a law degree from Vanderbilt University.
She is also a daughter of the late Francis X. Coonelly.


It's Coming Up Oranges for 4-0 Eagles
Local ordinances being what they are, the Boston College Eagles will soon develop some serious problems if their undefeated football season continues much longer.
The concept of oranges as litter, symbolizing bowl-game hopes, does not go over well in this neighborhood.
And then there's this rapidly expanding bandwagon.
Ever try to parallel park a 32-wheeler on Commonwealth Avenue?


Japan's New Troop Role in Cambodia
The return of Japanese soldiers to the soil of Southeast Asia for the first time since World War II may be big news back home in Tokyo, but it is barely news at all in the nation to which the Japanese have come as part of a United Nations peacekeeping force.
The arrival of the first of nearly 2,000 Japanese soldiers assigned to the United Nations force in Cambodia is being described by Japanese diplomats as a turning point in their nation's history, the moment when Japan reasserts itself in Asia as something other than an economic power.


Mets Block 2 Extra Points
The overheated scoreboard at Three Rivers Stadium displayed the destruction in all its particulars.
Pirates 19, Mets 2.
An official coronation for the Pirates?
No, not quite, not yet.
A complete and final humiliation for the Mets.
Yes, and more, much more than that.
The Pirates, savaging the pitching for the Mets and exhausting the club's outfielders, conducted a dress rehearsal for their National League East title celebration today by undressing the Mets.
Baseballs were hit over the fence, off the fence, in the gaps and through the infield.


POSTINGS: On Riverside Dr.; 49 Condos Taken Over
As it began to rise on the corner of 94th Street in 1988, the 21-story building known as 222 Riverside Drive had the distinction of being the first new apartment house on the drive in 35 years.
Today, it has another distinction: almost half of the 104 condominium units have been taken over by 222 Properties Inc., a subsidiary of Chemical Bank, as part of a settlement in bankruptcy court with the former sponsor, the Royco Property Corporation.
Anyone expecting a fire sale will be disappointed, however.
"It's a real premium building," said Kenneth B. Herz, a spokesman for Chemical, indicating that the bank intends to market the 49 units accordingly.
"They're apparently great apartments. Lots of them have river views."


Helping High-Level Workers Find Jobs
"I.B.M. is the best company I have ever worked for," said Julio Gutierrez of Mamaroneck, who spent 23 years as a systems programmer for the International Business Machines Corporation.
"It is also the best company to get fired from," he added.
Technically, Mr.
Gutierrez was not dismissed from I.B.M., but along with 30,000 other of its employees he was asked to take early retirement, which, he said, leaves him better off than most unemployed people because as part of his early-retirement package I.B.M. provides him health coverage for five years.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 27, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
35
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell,$5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
24
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
3
1
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.50.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
4
5
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $6.99.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
5
11
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
6
1
THE CAT WHO MOVED A MOUNTAIN, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran tracks down the murderer of a millionaire developer in rustic mountain country.
7
1
SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Ivy, $5.99.) The struggles of a young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his brother.
8
4
SEE JANE RUN, by Joy Fielding. (Avon, $5.50.) A woman awakens not knowing who she is.
9
1
FAMILY MAN, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The plight of a woman who falls in love with her employer, known as the toughest of bosses.
10
35
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
11 *
1
WAR DRUMS, by John Vornholt. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" adventure.
12
1
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
13
15
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town.
14 *
13
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares.
15
5
THE NOVEL, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Life as lived by writers, critics and editors.
16 *
12
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
23
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
6
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Several hundred examples of waste authorized by the White House and Congress, with suggestions for curbing it.
4
5
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
5
10
ME: STORIES OF MY LIFE, by Katharine Hepburn. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The actress's memoirs.
6 *
71
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
63
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
8
464
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
9
14
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
10
19
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
59
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
88
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
107
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
1
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
5 *
23
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MACHINES FROM THE PAST
Faithful fans and the merely curious will gather in Kent today for the Connecticut Antique Machinery Association's eighth annual Fall Festival.
From 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. old steam and gas engines, corn shellers, pumping contraptions, rock crushers and other venerable gadgetry will perform the tasks for which they were devised.


Ashley Garrett, Alan Jones
Ashley Garrett, a daughter of Barbara D. Garrett of Ringoes, N.J., and Dr.
Philip C. Garrett 2d of Mount Washington, Mass., was married yesterday to Alan Jones, a son of Horatio G. Jones of Columbus, N.J., and the late Audrey M. Jones.
The Rev.
John Hay, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Universalist Church in New York.
Ms.
Garrett, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is a director at Mastercard International in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is a veterinarian in Mount Washington.


Today's Game Offers Easier Preparation
EVEN though game is available year round, fall is still the traditional time for serving it.
Not long ago, picking out the buckshot was as much a part of the ritual as hanging the birds in a larder for as long as two weeks before eating them.
And when you roasted a game bird, you made sure that it was larded with plenty of bacon so that it didn't dry out in the oven.
Now game birds of all kinds, hares and rabbits are being raised on farms where they are allowed to range freely.
This means that they are not as dark or lean as wild game, but they have more tender meat and a distinctive flavor.
They don't need to be gussied up with rich sauces either but can even be cooked on the grill without becoming tough.


Testimony Blocked on Bomb Factory, Agent Says
An F.B.I. agent who spent nearly five years investigating environmental crimes at a bomb factory near Denver has told a House subcommittee that he knows why no individuals were prosecuted, but that he has been blocked by the Bush Administration from explaining.
The subcommittee is investigating why more charges were not brought against Rockwell International, which ran the Rocky Flats plant, and why no one at the Department of Energy, which owns the plant and was supposedly supervising its contractor, was charged.


Clinton Waffles on Health
With great fanfare last week, Gov.
Bill Clinton announced his heath care plan.
Yet it turned out not to be a real plan at all -- just a skimpy statement of principles.
And those sounded as if they had been written by a warring committee, with incompatible ideas jousting for supremacy and crucial details left out.
Some words raise the nightmarish prospect that Mr.
Clinton will try to run health care by dictating prices in ways doomed to fail.
Other words suggest he would rely on competition to keep prices down.
The confusion is in sorry contrast to the rational if gutless reform plan issued by President Bush.
Mr.
Clinton owes voters a cleaner accounting.


Envoys Offer New Report of Serbian 'Ethnic Cleansing' in Bosnia
The co-chairmen of the international peace conference on Yugoslavia said that they had been told today of new forcible expulsions by Serbs of thousands of Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations special envoy, and Lord Owen of Britain, the European Community's chief mediator for Yugoslavia, said they were given an account this morning by a witness of a march by 3,000 to 4,000 Muslim civilians across a battlefront above the Bosnian town of Travnik on Thursday.


Hail Columbia, the Gem of the Bronx
On Sept. 27, 1980, Columbia defeated Lafayette, 6-0, to even its record at 1-1.
The Lions lost the next week to Pennsylvania and they had not seen .500 since.
Now they have.
Against Fordham at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx yesterday, Columbia won by 18-9, to even its 1992 record at 1-1.
Fordham fell to 0-3.


Ring Around the Birdbath and Other Chores
WHAT a busy time of year.
Perennials are divided.
Harvests are coming in.
Overgrown shrubs are moved.
Bare patches in the lawn are seeded.
On top of all this, the soil was moist from all the rain this summer.
The agenda of things to be done was long.


Vienna
After several decades of seeing its population shrink, Austria's capital is growing again.
Vienna, which in 1910 counted more than 2 million residents, had fewer than 1.6 million in the mid-1980's.
Since then immigration from Eastern Europe, the Balkans and Turkey has increased the population to an estimated 1.7 million.
In addition, many thousands of Bosnian and Croatian refugees have arrived during the last few months, and many are expected to stay on.
The old city, traditionally a central European melting pot, looks more cosmopolitan today than it has for a long time.
The newcomers are not only immigrants from Eastern Europe but also employees of multinational corporations that have established their headquarters in tidy, comfortable Vienna, while their executives commute to Budapest, Prague, Warsaw and other former Communist centers.
A building boom with a forest of cranes on the skyline speaks of the need for more office and living space, and Vienna Schwechat Airport, too, is being enlarged.


Abbey Restoration
To the Editor: A recent article on the 20-year restoration of Westminster Abbey ("Westminster Abbey, 7 Centuries New," Aug. 23) highlights the complexities of the task and the accomplishments of a succession of surveyors.
There is a significant omission, however, in your tribute to these architects.
Much of the success of the 20th-century restoration is attributable directly to Peter Foster, predecessor to the current surveyor, whose care for the abbey and the conservation of many other landmarks should be publicly noted.
Students in historic preservation and architecture from Roger Williams College in Rhode Island, guided by Mr.
Foster and subsequently Donald R. Buttress, have watched the restoration work for over 10 years in our study programs in England.


SEPT. 20-27: Japan's Latest Scandal; Not-So-Strange Bedfellows: Gangsters and Politicians
Shin Kanemaru, who at age 78 is the undisputed kingmaker of Japanese politics, has spent most of the past decade keeping his fellow members of Japan's ruling party in mortal fear that he might cut them off from money or access to power.
But for weeks now, Mr.
Kanemaru himself has looked scared.


High School Football Report
Stevenson 32, Manhattan Center 6
Jamaine Crawford scored three second-half touchdowns and converted a two-point conversion to lead Stevenson (2-0) past Manhattan Center (1-1) yesterday.
The Ambassadors trailed, 6-0, after two quarters but were a new team in the second half, scoring 32 unanswered points.
Crawford paved the way with touchdown runs of 55 yards and 40 yards.
Hempstead 22, Massapequa 18
Hempstead quarterback Larry Watts raced 32 yards for the winning touchdown on the fourth play of the second half to give Hempstead a 22-14 victory over Massapequa.
Watts, who plays quarterback and defensive back, set up the score when he intercepted a pass on Massapequa's 32-yard line on the preceding play.
Vincent Williams (1-yard run) and Anthony Henderson (61-yard run) also scored for the Tigers.
Massapequa quarterback Kevin Gillespie (16 of 26 for 190 yards, 1 touchdown, 1 interception) played with a broken toe.
Alvin Virgo (9 tackles) and Courtney Watson (3 sacks) led the Chiefs' defense.
Offensive Firepower
KENNY GREEN scored three touchdowns and DWAYNE SCHULTERS carried 12 times for 109 yards as Canarsie blanked Lehman, 18-0.
SAM SHEDAEH (10 tackles) and EARNEST COAKLEY (10 tackles) led the way defensively for the Chiefs. . . .
DENNIS KRAMER and ANDREW RODRIGUEZ each rushed for more than 100 yards as Sachem knocked off William Floyd, 26-12.
Kramer (20 carries for 112 yards) scored twice, and Rodriguez (15 carries for 153 yards) sprinted 85 yards for a score to pace the Flaming Arrows. . . .
TOM KEARNEY (8 tackles) and PETE FRIEDMAN (7 tackles, 1 interception) were the defensive stars for Sachem. . . .
ISLAND TREES had 389 yards of total offense as the Bulldogs pumeled Valley Stream North, 31-6. . . .
CARMINE APUZZO scored two touchdowns and carried 13 times for 147 yards to boost Island Trees. . . .
BOBBY MOLLENHAUER scored two touchdowns and rushed 9 times for 146 yards as Half Hollow Hills West shut out Deer Park, 35-0. . . .
DARRIN FINKELSTEIN (11 tackles), MARC GURMAN (9 tackles), and ERIK FAUSKI (three interceptions) put the hurt into Deer Park's offense. . . .
GREG BRIGLIO and PAT DONAGHY each scored two touchdowns as Chaminade (2-0-1) routed St.
John the Baptist, 38-0. . . .
TOM CASO scored four times and rushed 22 times for 202 yards as Byram Hills (1-1) overwhelmed Gould (0-2), 36-6. . . .
STEVE NIERODA rushed for two touchdowns and CHIP JANKOW threw for another as West Islip rolled over Huntington, 22-0. . . .
JOE DeFRANCO rushed for two touchdowns in the first half and MARK DeROSA threw for another as Bergen Catholic destroyed Montclair, 47-6.
All the Crusader starters played only the first half as Bergen Catholic led, 41-0, at the end of two quarters.
Secretaries of Defense
LAJUANE NURSE and ROB FUNKENBERG combined for 16 solo tackles and 4 sacks as Lawrence stymied Syosset, 10-0. . . .
LEWIS DRAKE recorded 15 tackles and snagged 1 interception as Long Beach edged East Meadow, 14-6. . . .
GARDEN CITY'S defense continued its stingy ways, shutting out Sewanhaka, 24-0.
The Trojans have a 21-game winning streak that extends over three seasons.
MIKE PELLEGRINO made 12 tackles to help Carmel (0-1-1) tie Scarsdale (0-0-1), 7-7.
One-Man Show
BRYAN BARLITZ set a school record with 315 all-purpose yards as Islip punished Riverhead, 28-6.
Barlitz rushed 16 times for 265 yards and caught 3 passes for 50 yards. . . .
MIKE JOHNSTON scored three touchdowns and rushed 26 times for 170 yards as Pope John destroyed Hopatcong, 27-0. . . .
TOM REALI, who left last week's game with a bruised shoulder, made his return in grand fashion by scoring three touchdowns and rushing 12 times for 86 yards as Susan Wagner cruised past August Martin, 36-6. . . .
ELROY NOEL of Tilden had scoring dashes of 75 yards, 40 yards and 80 yards, but his team was defeated by New Utrecht, 32-20. . . .
SCOTT COCCARO scampered for 220 yards on 28 carries as Sayville rolled over Amityville, 18-7. . . .
KIM DeGROATE returned a punt 50 yards for a score and caught a 50-yard touchdown pass as Port Richmond (1-1) prevailed over Clinton (1-1), 21-18.
SHAWN PARKS had two touchdown receptions and KEITH THOMAS ran 36 yards for a touchdown to account for Clinton's scoring. . . .
VIC BORGES scored three touchdowns and rushed 14 times for 128 yards as Suffield Academy blanked Gunnery, 26-0. . . .
TODD POLLACK scored twice, including a 55-yard kick return, as Brunswick trounced Dwight-Englewood, 32-0. . . .
SEAN TREMBLAY, one of the most sought-after backs on Long Island, rushed 17 times for 185 yards and a touchdown as Comsewogue routed Miller Place, 33-0.
Tremblay, who broke his leg in the first game against Connetquot last season, has all the major college recruiters watching.
He is a 6-foot-3-inch, 245-pound fullback with excellent speed. . . .
ED GARRY picked off two passes and JACOB RUBIO had 7 tackles, 2 sacks and a blocked punt that resulted in a Comsewogue score as the Warriors held Miller Place to two first downs the entire game. . . .
ADAM PASCAL scored four times as Hotchkiss breezed past Trinity Pawling, 34-6.
Fantastic Finishes
SEAN GOODWIN threw a 6-yard scoring strike to CHRIS AGNEW with 33 seconds to play as Lynbrook stunned Conference rival Bethpage, 20-15.
The winning pass capped a nine-play, 77-yard drive that took little more than two minutes.
ANTHONY PICONE (20 carries for 113 yards, 2 touchdowns) and BOBBY JOE JORDAN (87 all-purpose yards) were the other offensive stars. . . .
CLARK LAMELLE's two-point conversion with 19 seconds to play was stuffed by Kellenberg as Holy Cross was upset by the Firebirds, 14-13.
PETER BUSCEMI set up the potential game-winning conversion when he connected with JASON BUSH on a 37-yard scoring strike.
Holy Cross Coach TOM PUGH elected to go for the victory.
"In 22 years, I've gone for a win every time," he said.
Bush, who had two interceptions on the day, leads the Catholic High School Football League with five pickoffs.


Eyes of the Beholders
At two art previews in SoHo, on Sept. 19


Q and A
Gas Pumps Too Close  Question: I own a house next to a service station.
I have heard that the lessee plans to move the gas pumps closer to my property and put a canopy over them.
I am worried about the impact of such a relocation.


Wolford Stockings
WHAT: Some of the most expensive and cleverly engineered pantyhose and tights in world history, made by Wolford in Austria.
They range from spangle-studded party stockings to sensible wool ribs, and they come in all the usual vaguely titled colors of the 90's like Flash (orange), Prado (forest green) or Marmor (off-white).
By far the most popular model is Opaque de Luxe, which Ellin Saltzman, the fashion director at Bergdorf Goodman, loftily calls "the only one that's worn." Knit from what the label describes as "trilobal yarn," the tights are almost as stretchy, thick and shiny as exercise leggings and bear back seams as thick as a telephone cord.
THE SCIENCE: A mixture of elastane, polyamide, spandex and cotton.
Inexplicably, the percentages listed on the label often do not add up to 100.
The cotton content is often just 1 percent (perhaps as a bone tossed to nature lovers).
Labels translated from German into English include phrases like "world unique."


Hooray for Bollywood
SHOW BUSINESS
By Shashi Tharoor. 304 pp. New York: Arcade Publishing. $19.95.


An Antebellum 'Much Ado'
MORE gladly than most Shakespeare, "Much Ado About Nothing" gives itself to relocation, time bending and many manners of speaking.
Its light and dark view of the game of love has proved as marvelous in pre-World War I middle Americana, with ragtime steps, Model T's and Keystone Kops -- a popular 1972 Broadway version, later televised -- as in stagings set in the play's indigenous Messina in Sicily, no matter the century.
No quibbling then with the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's current transposition to a Southern composure right before the Civil War.
While the dialects, decor and decolletage are all figured out, Jimmy Bohr's direction is rather overly composed and undercast for what ought to be, by all rights, a merrier occasion.


Jameela Maloof David Blumberg
Jameela Maloof and David Samuel Blumberg were married yesterday at the bridegroom's home in Bedford Hills, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stan Aronson performed the Unitarian Universalist ceremony.


Donna Karan's Renaissance Husband
NAME: Stephan Weiss.
IDENTITY, OCCUPATION: Husband and business partner of Donna Karan.
Sculptor.
Designed bottle for the new Donna Karan New York perfume.
AGE: 54.
Q.
Your wife has said that the perfume smells a little bit like the back of your neck.
Could you describe that smell?


Wendy Lawless, David Kidd
Wendy Ann Lawless, a daughter of James J. Lawless of Arlington, Va., was married yesterday to David Elliott Kidd, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Kidd Jr. of Tiffin, Ohio.
The Rev.
Joseph Tyrell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Notre Dame in New York.
Ms.
Lawless, who is keeping her name, is a stage actress in New York.
She graduated from the National Theatre Conservatory in Denver.
Her father is an actor.
Her stepmother, Sarah Lawless, is the executive director of the Institute of the Arts at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va.


First Buyer of Photo CD Gets 15 Minutes of Fame
LEO DEE of San Diego is the first person to buy a Kodak Photo CD player.
Mr.
Dee learned about the Photo CD system from a newspaper advertisement in The San Diego Union-Tribune that announced the introduction of the Photo CD system at local Dow Stereo/Video stores.


In the West End, the Stage Is a Whirl
ENGLAND may be in recession.
London and the southeast may be particularly hard hit.
Tourists from America, put off by the weakness of the dollar against the pound, may be fewer than hoped.
Nevertheless, two of London's more important theaters are reopening this fall, each with its innards expensively retooled.
For the last four years, the most central of all West End theaters, the Criterion, has been just a hole beneath Piccadilly Circus.
Theatergoers have been deprived of not only the stage that gave the English-speaking world "Waiting for Godot" and many other major plays, but also a Louis XVI-style auditorium that had, sadly, become tacky and decayed.
But by Oct. 21, after the expenditure of a million dollars, the theater is to be restored sufficiently to present a new play by James Saunders, "Making It Better," which was well received during a tryout at the Hempstead Theater in February.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Times Magazine last Sunday with an article about the physicist Richard Feynman misidentified the child inside a baby carriage in the California desert in 1969.
It was Feynman's daughter, Michelle, not his son, Carl.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Elkton, Md.; R &amp; D Center Sets Up Shop
A $29 MILLION research and development center that sprouted from a former farmstead is an out-of-the-way example of the emerging world market that is breaking down boundary lines.
Himont Inc., the world's leading producer of polypropylene resins, with headquarters in Wilmington, Del., considered 17 sites in Delaware and Pennsylvania for its North American research and development operation, looking for the best deal.


Focus: Santa Monica; So What's New? Living Above the Store
FEW of the people who crowd into the Broadway Deli and an adjoining multiplex cinema in Janss Court, a recently completed building in this oceanfront city, are aware that they are in an apartment building.
Yet on the sixth floor -- above two restaurants, five movie theaters and three floors with 80,000 square feet of office space -- Charles S. Smith, a self-employed aircraft salesman, makes his home.
He said he does not mind the crowds on the Third Street Promenade, a popular shopping street restricted to pedestrians, and is happy to live within walking distance of most of the banks, restaurants and messenger services he uses.


Alice Reilly Toole, Sherman Baldwin
Alice Reilly Toole, a daughter of Edward and Norine Toole of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Sherman Baldwin of the Navy, a son of Henry and Martha Baldwin of New York.
The Rev.
Douglass Ray, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Luke's Parish Church in Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
John Flanagan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Baldwin, 27 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Fordham University in May.
Her father is a lawyer at Echlin Inc., a Branford, Conn., owner of several auto-parts manufacturing concerns.
Her mother is a partner in the Painted Ladder, a gift importer and retailer in Scarsdale, N.Y.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Basking Ridge 230,000
44 East Oak Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 130-year-old colonial farmhouse; 3 outbuildings, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,010.
Demarest 260,000
75 Stelfox Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; deck, updated kitchen, full basement; $5,300.
Millburn 163,000
36 Ocean Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, h/w floors, dining room; taxes $2,698.
Oakland 165,000
120 Hiawatha Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; fireplace, porch, deep property; taxes $3,574.
Warren 695,000
2 Quail Run  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old ranch; skylights, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $10,753.
West Milford 95,000
369 Lakeshore Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; recently replaced septic system and furnace, deck, full basement; taxes $1,991.
OTHER AREAS Bridgeport, Conn. 125,000
381 Cleveland Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; kitchen skylight, oversized family room, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,698.
Armonk, N.Y. 365,000
22 Windmill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, skylights, stone patio, 2-car garage; taxes $5,249.
Northport, L.I. 217,000
18 Center Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 75- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sunroom, 1-car garage; taxes $1,800.


CUBAN'S EXIT HINTS AT TROUBLE AT TOP
When the Cuban Government leaked word to journalists in Havana this week that the Government's third most powerful figure had been removed, most Cuba-watchers said that the move suggested grave problems among the leadership despite disclaimers of ideological rifts or corruption.
For several years, the ousted official, Carlos Aldana, has been known as the only person besides President Fidel Castro's brother Raul whose powerful status in the Communist Party allowed him to speak his mind relatively freely.
As such, he was also the only senior leader even loosely associated with calls for greater reform.


Too Free for Texas
THE FREEDMEN'S BUREAU AND BLACK TEXANS
By Barry A. Crouch. Illustrated. 187 pp. Austin:  University of Texas Press.


France
Ever the mistress of the grand gesture, Paris this year is not even giving a public hint of the economic downturn that is affecting France.
The city has come up once again with a generous menu of ways to update, reinvent and beautify itself.
The city government has opened the fall cultural season with the surprise that 31 large sculptures by Fernando Botero will be displayed alongside the Champs-Elysees, a most unusual privilege.
They will amuse pedestrians and befuddle traffic between the Place de la Concorde and the Rond Point from Oct. 22 to Jan. 30.


Carol Ann Lovell, C. G. Carmody
Ann S. Lovell of Rochester has announced the engagement of her daughter, Carol Ann Lovell, a vice president at the First National Bank of Boston in Boston, to Christopher Guerin Carmody, a financial consultant in Wellesley, Mass., for Merrill Lynch.
Mr.
Carmody is the son of the late Guerin and Sally Carmody.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Lovell, 37 years old, graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
She is also a daughter of the late Dr.
George R. Lovell, who was an internist in Rochester.


Decisions, Decisions. Free Agency Is His Domain.
Football was passion for a young David Doty.
After playing guard and tackle and earning three letters at Minneapolis High in 1947, Doty decided to try out for the University of Minnesota football team.
"In those days, you played both ways, and basically you had two plays, eveybody left and everbody right," Doty, now 63 years old, said with a chuckle.
"I had good speed and I wanted to play a position where I could get my hands on the ball. So, I lied and said I had ball-handling skills and went out for fullback, which meant you had to play linebacker on defense. The fullback part was O.K. The linebacker part got me.


A Big Fish Tale For the Doubters
When Tim Chavez promised "rainbow trout as fat as footballs," he seemed just another outfitter adept at separating a fisherman from his money.
But the San Juan River delivered: rainbows not just fat but ferocious, too.
Two nymph-fishing novices, we managed about 30 hookups a day between us and landed just under half of them.
The biggest fish of the two-day adventure was 21.5 inches, and it was hard to find one smaller than 16 inches.


Small Airports: Convenience and Limits
Joseph and Molly Malak were tired of driving from Cleveland to visit their son in Hyde Park.
But they hate to fly into La Guardia or Newark International, which they say are "too hectic and too congested." So on a recent trip they flew here to Stewart International Airport, the New York metropolitan region's newest commercial airport and one of a half-dozen suburban and exurban airports attracting passengers from Kennedy International, La Guardia and Newark International Airports.
While the New York region's three major airports have reached the saturation point, with a combined total of nearly 70 million passengers and a million flights a year, midsized "reliever airports," like Stewart, Long Island-MacArthur in Islip, L.I., and Westchester County in White Plains, continue to grow.
And smaller airports like Atlantic City's and Bridgeport's are expanding also.


Katharine Driver, Edwin Bassler
Katharine Elliott Driver, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Driver of New Woodstock, N.Y., was married yesterday to Edwin Fitzpatrick Bassler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Bassler of Cazenovia, N.Y.
The Rev.
Henry Pedzich, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in St.
James Church in Cazenovia.
Mrs.
Bassler, 22 years old, graduated from Indiana University.
Her father is the general director of the Opera Company of Philadelphia.
Her mother, Monica M. Driver, raises thoroughbred horses in New Woodstock.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Elliott B. Macrae, was the president of E. P. Dutton &amp; Company, the former New York publishing house.


Technology; Keeping Buildings Cool With Greater Efficiency
IT may not seem obvious to anyone who has slipped on a patch during the winter, but ice is sticky.
So sticky, in fact, that it accumulates on the refrigerant tubes used in cooling systems for buildings, reducing energy efficiency.
Now engineers at the Electric Power Research Institute are testing a substance that prevents solid ice from building up while at the same time producing a slush that cools a building more effectively than the chilled water that is currently used.
The innovation could prove valuable in new kinds of "cool-storage systems" that are being designed to improve the energy efficiency of cooling systems of buildings and to shift power consumption away from times of day when electricity is most expensive.
Cool storage involves operating a refrigeration system at night to make and store ice.
Water is chilled as it passes over the stored ice.
Then it is pumped through the building, entering radiators on each floor, where fans blow air over it and into working spaces.
This cooling process augments the work of the mechanical air-conditioner, so the unit does not have to be as big or operate as frequently.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the Chess column last Sunday misidentified Irina Levitina, the United States women's champion.
She is a women's grandmaster, not a grandmaster.


Draft Evasion Means Others Pay the Price; Clinton to Explain
To the Editor:
William Broyles Jr. deserves respect and admiration for the difficult choice he made in going to Vietnam ("Clinton Wouldn't Enlist. He Was Right," Op-Ed, Sept. 22), but he fails to answer the major questions surrounding Gov.
Bill Clinton's various deferments from the Vietnam War.


Sarah Keisling, Henry Gould
Sarah Mina Keisling, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Keisling of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Henry Hale Gould, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Gould of Minneapolis.
The Rev.
Cynthia Jarvis, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Miller Chapel on the campus of Princeton Theological Seminary.
Ms.
Keisling, who is keeping her name, is a librarian at the Schomberg Center for Research in Black Culture, a division of the New York Public Library.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
She and her husband received master's degrees in library science from Simmons College.
Her father is the president of Reinsurance Consultants of Princeton Inc.
Her mother, Patsy Ann Keisling, now retired, was an elementary-school teacher at Public School 16 in St.
George, S.I.


Departing College Head Receives Mixed Reviews
STANDING in the late afternoon shade of the Erlanger Gardens, Monmouth College's president, Samuel H. Magill, last month greeted the incoming freshman class with smiles and words of welcome.
In contrast, on a sunny day last June, Dr.
Magill broke down in tears during his remarks to the graduating class, as he announced that he would retire at the end of the 1992-93 academic year when he will be 65 years old.


BROTHERS AND SISTERS
For a black woman to feel rejected when she sees any black man with any white woman strikes me as indicative of personal insecurity rather than as "a nightmare of integration." As Campbell seems to indicate in her closing lines, "sisters" fail to "measure up" only if they have placed responsibility for their self-esteem in the hands of someone else.
JOYCE EVANS
Hackensack, N.J.


Bruins Bring Faulk Down to Earth
By the time Marshall Faulk had his moment in the afternoon sun today, the game was already in the fourth quarter and San Diego State was trailing badly.
But Faulk saw an opening, danced through the hole, cut to his right, sprinted past a defender and crossed the goal line.
Nice run, but much too late to help the Aztecs.


Elias Earns His Stripes In Princeton Victory
It was a shame so few people were in Palmer Stadium today to watch Keith Elias run for Princeton.
The junior halfback ran farther, 299 yards, than anyone ever has in this 78-year-old stadium and the performance deserved an audience larger than the crowd of 6,820.
Elias scored four touchdowns along the way as the Tigers beat Lafayette, 38-35, in a game that was up for grabs to the very end.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Aug. 30 misstated the admission policy at the Chapelle du Rosaire in Vence, France.
It is open on Tuesday and Thursday from 10 to 11:30 A.M. and 2:30 to 5:30 P.M.
Groups may arrange visits on other days except Monday by appointment.
During the Matisse exhibition, which continues at the nearby Chateau de Villeneuve until Oct. 30, the chapel's hours are longer: Tuesday through Saturday from 10 to noon and 2:30 to 5:30.


Crusading Clergy Shape the Course of Dance
THE GRANDMOTHER OF THE Rev.
Al Carmines once warned him, "A praying knee and a dancing foot never grew on the same leg." Fortunately, he didn't believe her.
In fact, as a minister of the Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village during the 1960's, Mr.
Carmines helped shape the course of American modern dance.
He is not the only clergyman to have done so.
Thanks to their efforts, dance performances are flourishing at Judson, as well as at St.
Mark's Church and other New York houses of worship.
Earlier this month, in recognition of three decades of support, the Rev.
Howard Moody, Judson's senior pastor, received a Bessie, an award established by Dance Theater Workshop to honor achievements in dance and performance art.


Man Behind the Scenes Tries to Step Into Spotlight
Having fought last week to pick a nominee to fill the Congressional seat left vacant by the death of Ted Weiss, Manhattan Democrats will gather again this week to wrangle over replacing the man they chose to take Mr.
Weiss's spot, Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler of Manhattan.
At the moment, party leaders say, the apparent front-runner is Scott Stringer, who helped manage Mr.
Nadler's campaign in the Democratic County Committee last week.
He is a local district leader, a member of Mr.
Nadler's political club, Community Free Democrats, and a distant cousin of one of the candidates whom Mr.
Nadler defeated last week, former Representative Bella S. Abzug.


Ratso Rizzo Redux? Not if He Can Help It
Dustin Hoffman is, characteristically, beset by angst.
"People say to me, 'Why don't you work more? Nicholson works more. De Niro works more,' " he says earnestly.
"I say, 'Right, I should.' I'm getting older. Three years between 'Kramer' and 'Tootsie.' 'Rain Man' was almost two years of work. And, yeah, I'm getting older, and I'd better change. I know that Nicholson is philosophical. He raises that eyebrow. So cool. He says, in that Nicholson way, 'Some films work. Some films don't work.' He's got those gentile genes. Can't I be like that? Why do I die inside with each movie?"
At 55, after nearly two dozen films, the two-time Academy Award winner should be more secure.
His very first film, "The Graduate" in 1967, made him a star.
Last year, Steven Spielberg's "Hook" made him rich.
On finishing that film, Mr.
Hoffman plunged into a risky comedy-drama called "Hero," to open on Friday with favorable advance word of mouth.


Currency Wars: Central Banks May Yet Prevail
CALL it the great bank bailout, 1990's style.
That is one way to look at the currency follies of the past several weeks, in which European central banks lost billions of dollars, or marks, or pounds, in defending absurd exchange rates.


A Sensory Tour Of Wood and Metal
IMAN H. wears a gentle smile and trustingly allows himself to be led.
One of a group of visitors to the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts here, Iman, whose family does not wish his full name to be used, spent a recent morning listening to music and touring the museum collections of Walter and Lucie Rosen, the estate's former owners.
Because he is blind and has other disabilities, Iman, who lives at Hawthorne House, a group home in Hawthorne run by the Westchester Developmental Disabilities Service Office, experienced the museum with his hands under the personal guidance of Georgette Turley, a long-time Caramoor docent.


O'Brien Goes Home to Help Students
DAN O'BRIEN, the world decathlon record-holder, is back this weekend in his hometown, Klamath Falls, Ore., where he plans to help raise money to help kids stay in school and off alcohol and drugs.
About 300 people, including busloads of elementary school children and the Henley High School Band, greeted O'Brien on Friday at the Klamath Falls airport.
"This was definitely a hero's welcome," O'Brien said. "It's every kid's dream."


Leon J. Davis Memorial
A memorial service for Leon J. Davis, the founder and leader of Local 1199, the New York Health Care Workers Union, will be held at 2:30 P.M. on Monday, Oct. 5, at Avery Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center in Manhattan.
Mr.
Davis died on Sept. 14.
Admission is by ticket only.
Information is available at (212) 582-1890, extension 2463.


In Stamford, Stages Of a Baseball Star's Life
IN part, "Cobb" is one playwright's way of sorting out the detritus of a life, as if a celebrated, troubled baseball player were attempting to make posthumous peace with himself and to claim his rightful place in history -- or mythology.
And, in part, the play is an interesting experiment in biographical form for the theater.
For it is the way of the playwright, Lee Blessing, to confront us with three stages of the man who was the Detroit Tigers centerfielder: the rookie (Peach), the star (Ty) and the ghost (Mr. Cobb).
Each is played by a different actor: the young player is Matthew Mabe, tough and boiling over; Bob Adrian is a smug and simmering Ty, and John Braden looks back at being turned off and is resigned to bitter aloneness.


Should There Be Sex After 50?
To the Editor:
Hidden in the reports of Woody Allen's life and art is another social issue of some substance.
Caryn James  [ "And Here We Thought We Knew Him," Sept. 6 ]  characterizes Mr.
Allen's relationship with Soon-Yi Farrow Previn as quasi incest, and subsequently juxtaposes that relationship with the on-screen appearance of Juliette Lewis holding the hand of an older man at a basketball game, from which we are presumably to wonder, at least, whether this latter relationship, too, may be morally suspect.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Again Faces Draft Issue As He Returns to New Hampshire
Seven months after a second-place showing in this state's Democratic primary saved him from political destruction, Gov.
Bill Clinton returned today, triumphant but still dogged by the same questions that nearly destroyed him in February.
As Mr.
Clinton hopscotched through campaign appearances in three New England states today, reporters peppered the Democratic Presidential nominee with questions about how he managed to avoid being inducted by the military during the Vietnam War.


Boo Morris, Christopher Wells
Janet Cook Morris, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis Morris of Southport, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Brown Wells, the son of Robert Alan Wells and Marcia Shriver Wells, both of Watertown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport.
Mrs.
Wells, who is known as Boo, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the outreach director for St.
John the Baptist Episcopal Church in Breckenridge, Colo., and the owner of Off the Beaten Path Dessert Company, a bakery there.
Her father, now retired, was the vice president of Dixon Sintaloy Inc., a manufacturer of machine parts in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Patricia Morris, lectures on herbs and 18th-century gardening.


TEACHERS REACH PACT IN DETROIT
Administrators and teachers reached agreement this afternoon on a two-year contract, signaling the end of a strike that has closed the nation's seventh-largest school system for 26 days.
But the contract carries bitter medicine: layoffs and budget cuts are necessary to offset a wage increase, and that is likely to fuel more anger among parents and students.
The contract, which appeared to settle the largest of several teacher strikes across the country this fall, will be voted on next week by the 10,500-member Detroit Federation of Teachers.
The teachers are expected to vote Sunday to go back to work, paving the way for them to return Monday and for the city's 168,000 students to start classes on Tuesday.


Authentic Taste of Thailand in Bay Shore
SIAM LOTUS proves once again that good things often come in small packages.
The tiny Bay Shore storefront startles bored palates with some of the best Thai food on Long Island.
The winning formula at this restaurant is a familiar one.
The owners are on the spot.
The husband is in the front and the wife in the kitchen.
He is a gracious host and waiter, and she is a talented chef.


Perot: What's Changed And What Hasn't
HE set out to rescue a weary America last winter: a bantamweight billionaire Texan with a get-it-done zeal, a puggishness for television talk shows, a populist's drawling scorn for Washington politics and, not least, the support of an army of devoted, mostly middle-class volunteers.
The early polls looked rosy for Ross Perot.
But by midsummer, the enterprise had soured.
The press had raised a host of questions about the Perot background and character.
His promises of programs to fix the ailing economy, the deficit, unemployment had largely gone unfulfilled.
His campaign was in disarray.
He was nosediving in the polls.


A New Arsenal of Weapons to Tag Graffiti Artists
THERE is honor -- of a kind -- among vandals, at least among the ones who tag every flat surface in a city with their nicknames.
It demands, for example, that they steal (or "rack") the spray paint they use.
It demands that they don't touch each other's work unless they want to pick a fight.
And it demands that they never, never, never give in, no matter how grownups stack the odds against them.


Eavesdroppers Troll for Salable Chat, but It's a Big Pond
WHY can't the English teach their royalty not to speak?
If the Princess of Wales was indiscreet over her cellular telephone, it was probably because she, like most people, misunderstood how easily such conversations can be intercepted.
In the 23-minute chat, the man tells a woman he calls both "Di" and "Squidgy" that he loves her.
She mentions "Fergie" and the Princess's children, servants and childhood home and says her husband makes her life "real torture." Assuming it was real, it was about as private as a harangue in Hyde Park.
Cellular conversations are broadcast much like a television or radio signal, and can be picked up nearly as easily.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  BREAKTHROUGH IN SOUTH AFRICA  After a daylong meeting, President de Klerk and Nelson Mandela said they were prepared to resume full political talks.  1  U.S.
FADING AS CURRENCY POWER  President Bush's new world order clearly did not apply this week to European currency turmoil.
Leadership rested with the Germans.  1


. . .And a Forecast for the Future
As fuel economy and recycling become increasingly important, more and more lightweight -- and different -- materials will find their way into the cars of the future, according to a recent survey by the University of Michigan's Transportation Research Institute.
The study, based on responses from domestic auto manufacturers and suppliers, as well as scholars and consultants, showed that to achieve a corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) of 35 miles per gallon by the year 2000, nearly 200 pounds would need to be shaved from today's cars.


V.A.T. Refunds
To the Editor: Regarding V.A.T. refunds in Europe, (Practical Traveler, Aug. 2), a caution and a commendation.
In August 1989, we purchased a number of items at Selfridge's in London.
At that time, upon receipt of customs exit verification at Gatwick Airport, credit was to be given to our Visa account against the charge purchases.
That worked fine for the items we carried.


Draft Evasion Means Others Pay the Price
To the Editor:
I have watched the increasingly strident debate over the draft avoidance of Bill Clinton and Dan Quayle with a great deal of sadness.


Bush Moves Veterans Secretary Into Campaign Job
Under mounting pressure from dissatisfied veterans groups, President Bush today removed Edward J. Derwinsky from his post as Secretary of Veterans Affairs, a cabinet position, and gave him a largely ceremonial role in his re-election campaign.
Because Mr.
Bush prizes loyalty above all and is slow to remove faithful supporters from political positions, dismissing a member of his cabinet under pressure this late in the campaign seemed a clear signal that anxiety is mounting in the Bush organization.


Furs in Disguise
Fur designers are now emphasizing clever styling over exotic skins.
This season, furs are snipped, sheared and stenciled to make them look more like fabric than fur.
A traditional interpretation is Calvin Klein's anorak lined with sheared nutria.
On the wild side, Fendi's muskrat-and-leather capelet designed by Karl Lagerfeld is stamped and fringed.
Arnold Scaasi's plaid mink coat with oversize pompon buttons is a whimsical play on a classic cloth coat.
All are a far cry from the fur coat as a cliched status symbol.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
TREES ON THE BLOCK
MARCIA COHEN of East Hampton bought a "weeping something" last weekend.
"I'm a joyful person," she said.
"I thought it would be interesting to have a sad tree."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the mental health of people in South Florida after Hurricane Andrew misidentified a clinical psychologist who was doing volunteer work with storm victims.
She is Diane P. Blank.


Fare Changes Reach Heights
Airlines frequently change their fares but the number of changes has taken off this year because of the summer's fare wars, reports Official Airline Guides, the company that maintains flight schedules and processes air fares of airlines worldwide.
O.A.G. says it processed nearly 7 million air fare changes in August, two and a half times as many as those during August 1991.
By early this month the company had processed 51.1 million air fare changes this year.
"There was frenetic activity throughout August as airlines increased and decreased fares, then changed their strategies in an effort to increase passenger traffic," said David M. Emery, executive vice president of the travel information company.
The flurry of changes did not, however, overtake the record number of changes made during the Persian Gulf war early last year.
During that period of hectic reshuffling of fares by airlines, 1.5 million changes were reported in one day.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot's Summer Followers Stir Again, Warily
If Ross Perot does as he has hinted and re-enters the Presidential race, the breadth of his influence will depend on whether he can win back the supporters who lost faith in him when he dropped out in July.
Some are undoubtedly lost forever.
Others, like 35-year-old Nancy Wilder of Chicago, say they will listen to him again, but with much more skepticism.


Corrections
A headline on Sept. 6 about an accident settlement involving the environmental artist Christo referred incorrectly to legal proceedings.
Mr.
Christo was not sued by the family of a woman who was killed last October when the wind blew down a giant umbrella in a Christo display near Los Angeles.
The matter was resolved before a formal case was instituted.


For Women, Fewer M.B.A.'s
MARILYN C. COOPER is the kind of woman who could someday put business schools out of business.
An idealistic honors student at Wellesley College, she is precisely the sort of young go-getter whom many business schools would love to go get -- but can't.
Trouble is, she has no interest in business school.
"There's just so much out there about glass ceilings in business and the limits that are there," said Ms.
Cooper, who hopes instead to pursue a career in higher education.


Jacqueline Reiss, James Bebon
Jacqueline Kendrick Reiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter G. Reiss of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday in Lake Placid, N.Y., to James Patrick Bebon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bebon of Fairfield, Conn.
Bishop John G. Nolan, the Vicar for Europe, Archdiocese for the Military Services, officiated at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Bebon, 26 years old, graduated from St.
Michael's College and received a master's degree in early childhood education from the University of Bridgeport.
She is a special-education teacher in Westport.


Her Muse Delivers a Camera
Judy Collins, the folksy pop singer whose autobiography, "Trust Your Heart," was published in 1987, just turned in the manuscript for her first novel two weeks ago.
The book, entitled "Shameless," will be published by HarperCollins next year.
"It's so exciting writing fiction," she said.
"I was tired of being tied to the facts."


World Markets; Where Does Britain Go From Here?
THE British equity market last week got what it has been praying for all year: a drop in interest rates and the promise of more to come.
Having abandoned its commitment to keeping the value of the pound stable against other European currencies, the British Government did a monetary policy about-face, cutting its benchmark lending rate by one point, to 9 percent, and leaving open the possibility that rates could fall by as much as another point by the end of the year.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHARES And Other Fictions. By Richard Stern. Delphinium/Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.


Public &amp; Private; It's Debatable
TO: James Baker
RE: the debates
Mr. Baker:
It's time.
There's speculation that George Bush is ducking the debates because he believes they can only benefit his opponent.
Bill Clinton might look dangerously Presidential on that podium.
And we all know that, without a script, Mr.
Bush can take five minutes to travel from noun to verb by way of unrelated gerunds.
This could be a problem in head-to-head combat, that thing thing of his.


From Puerto Rico to Congress, a Determined Path
In a small wooden house on the banks of the Rio Limon, flanked by verdant fields of sugar cane swaying in the warm breeze, Nydia M. Velazquez learned about politics.
The talk at the dinner table for the family of 10, Ms.
Velazquez recalled, was always about the status of their island commonwealth and who controlled it, or about the rights of workers and how to organize.
Her father, Don Benito Velazquez, a poor sugar-cane cutter with a third-grade education but a penchant for learning, was so passionate about the issues that he used to jump on the back of flatbed trucks to deliver speeches.
Eventually, he founded a political party in their hometown.


Like Father, Like Son
To the Editor:
Joel Engel's report on the filming of "The Last of the Mohicans"  [ "A Fort, a War and the Last Thousand or So Mohicans," Sept. 20 ]  identifies Natty Bumppo's companion Chingachgook as "the last of his tribe in both the book and movie."


Jacob A. Salzmann, 91, Advocate Of Early Dental Care for Children
Jacob A. Salzmann, an expert on dentistry, orthodontics and cleft palates, died on Friday at his home in in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.
He was recently hospitalized, but the cause of death was not disclosed.


Peru's Invisible Judges: a Faceless Tyranny?
It was hardly the typical courtroom setting.
In the maximum-security Castro Castro Prison the other day, three judges and two state attorneys sat behind one-way glass.
Their voices were distorted by electronic devices.
The accused Shining Path guerrilla on the other side saw only his reflection.
His lawyer could call no witnesses.
Within hours, the shielded judges had reached a guilty verdict and had handed down a sentence of 12 years.
With Peru's judges subject to threats and attacks as they deal with hundreds of terrorist cases, the Government of President Alberto K. Fujimori has introduced a swift new kind of justice here -- invisible judges.


Alicia H. Glekas, Robert S. Everett
Barbara Alafoginis of Washington and Dr.
Louis J. Glekas of Falls Church, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alicia Helen Glekas to Robert Sloane Everett, a son of Mary M. Everett of Wellesley, Mass., and Addison L. Everett Jr. of Manlius, N.Y.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Glekas, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is a third-year law student at Georgetown University.
Her father is a dentist in Falls Church.


At Work; A Corporate Collaboration for Care
FRAN SUSSNER RODGERS has been in the work-family business or more than 20 years, so she knows how to keep faith in a project over a long time.
So it is surprising to hear that she fretted a bit over what would eventually become the American Business Collaboration for Quality Dependent Care.
That landmark $25.4 million initiative, concluded earlier this month by 137 businesses and organizations, will provide their employees with a broad range of family services.
The announcement included a statement signed by the chief executives of 11 spearhead corporations.
Ms.
Rodgers, head of Work/Family Directions Inc., the Boston-based consulting firm that provided expertise, can now pass out tangible evidence of the fruits of collaboration: an 11-page list of infant, child, youth and elder-care projects in 25 states being created or enhanced by the corporations.
The list, she says, represents the taming of chaos.
"In retrospect, it seems systematic," she said.
"Personally, at the beginning, I had doubts."


Improving Business at the State's Airports
THE future of Connecticut's six airports is the topic of a series of hearings being conducted around the state by Richard H. Strauss, Deputy Commissioner of the State Department of Transportation.
The commissioner is meeting with pilots and passengers to gather comments on the Transportation Department's new five-year capital improvement program for the airports.
At Bradley International, for instance, more than $30 million in improvements are planned.
Currently, Mr.
Strauss is responsible for state ports and airports in Hartford, Windsor Locks, Oxford, Windham, Danielson and Groton, as well as 138 associated aviation businesses, including municipal airports like Tweed-New Haven and Sikorsky Airport in Stratford.


Development Never Sleeps, Even in Australia
VANISHING POINTS
By Thea Astley. 234 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


TAKE A LITTLE DEADLY NIGHTSHADE
The placebo effect is potent, and, perhaps literally, not to be sneezed at.
Its efficacy derives from the suggestion that one is cared for and that help is at hand.
Indeed, psychotherapy harnesses the placebo effect to its advantage.
The concerned attention and detailed history-taking that your article suggests homeopathic patients receive may be a form of supportive psychotherapy, and this, rather than pills containing wondrously "potentized" water, is the likely active ingedient in their improvement.
JOHN C. MARKOWITZ, M.D.
Assistant Professor of Psychiatry The New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center
New York, N.Y.


HUGGING LIFE
I know what happiness the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp and programs like it can bring to children who are seriously ill ("Hugging Life," by Calvin Trillin, Sept. 6).
My little sister, who is now a healthy 10-year-old, was born with kidney failure and underwent nine major operations by the time she was 5.
When she was 6, she received a kidney transplant from an anonymous donor.
What made her happy all of those years, however, was the "unconditional love" she received from her family, friends and community -- unconditional love that included daily activities in the hospital and a stuffed bear that walked from room to room handing out gifts and hugs.
When I read your article, I was reminded of those days.
I wish there were such a camp for children with serious illnesses of all kinds.
AMY WU
Thornwood, N.Y.


Cooking Up Some Ideas For Negative Campaigns
"EVER notice Bill Clinton when he runs?" asked Sean Fitzpatrick, an advertising executive who recently parted with the Bush campaign's ad team.
"He looks like a duck."
Mr.
Fitzpatrick turned that concept into a proposal for a television commercial: a waddling mechanical duck dissolves into images of the hefty Arkansas Governor jogging.
The announcer says Mr.
Clinton claims he is "not like those Democrats in Congress who like to tax and spend, tax and spend." Then, after the duck has quacked, he says: "We say, if it talks like a duck, walks like a duck, it must be a Democrat."


Nora O'Sullivan, Joseph Collins
Nora Elizabeth O'Sullivan, a daughter of Rosemary E. O'Sullivan of McLean, Va., and the late Daniel E. O'Sullivan, was married in McLean yesterday to Joseph Brennen Collins, a son of Dr.
Alfred P. Collins of Groton, Conn.
Gabriel R. Centenera, a Fairfax County (Va.) Circuit Court clerk, officiated at the home of the bride's mother.
Ms.
O'Sullivan, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is an architect at the Washington architectural firm of Karn Charuhas Chapman &amp; Twohey.
She graduated from Stanford University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University and a master's degree in architecture from the University of Virginia.
Her father was the president and chief executive of the Union Labor Life Insurance Company in Washington.


Clare Mooney, Philippe Aimar
Clare Macdonald Mooney, a daughter of Jean Mooney of Healdsburg, Calif., and the late Alan P. Mooney, was married yesterday to Philippe Raphael Aimar, a son of Pierre and Marina Aimar of Nice, France.
The Rev.
Audrey Ward, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Aimar, 32 years old, owns Quantum Designs, an interior design concern in Malibu, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Arizona and the Parsons School of Design.
Her father was the senior vice president and general manager of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the advertising agency, in San Francisco.
Her mother is a painter in Healdsburg.


Don't Think for Yourself Unless You Can
THE ETHICS OF AUTHENTICITY
By Charles Taylor. 142 pp. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.


Today's Game Offers Easier Preparation
EVEN though game is available year round, fall is still the traditional time for serving it.
Not long ago, picking out the buckshot was as much a part of the ritual as hanging the birds in a larder for as long as two weeks before eating them.
And when you roasted a game bird, you made sure that it was larded with plenty of bacon so that it didn't dry out in the oven.
Now game birds of all kinds, hares and rabbits are being raised on farms where they are allowed to range freely.
This means that they are not as dark or lean as wild game, but they have more tender meat and a distinctive flavor.
They don't need to be gussied up with rich sauces either but can even be cooked on the grill without becoming tough.


Hockey Giving In To Salary Excess?
To the Sports Editor:
Is hockey about to go the way of all the other major sports with its insane salary circus (paying $3 million per year to a player)?
It is indeed a sad day for all hockey fans to think that this, the last of all the individualistic sports, should cave in to object greed and stupidity.


Rosemary Peters, Joseph Costello
Rosemary Veronica Peters, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Peters of Bay Head, N.J., was married yesterday to Joseph Eugene Costello, a son of Alice Costello of Crestwood, N.Y., and the late Thomas F. Costello.
Msgr.
Francis Costello, the bridegroom's uncle, officiated at Sacred Heart Church in Bay Head.


Ali Curran and Peter Jennison
Alexandra John Curran, the daughter of Mary Anna Abberley of New Canaan, Conn., and D. Edward Curran of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to Peter Howard Jennison, a son of Elizabeth H. McLane of London and Philip D. Jennison of New York.
The Rev.
Elwood Stark performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Lutheran Church in New Canaan.
Mrs.
Jennison, who is 30 years old and is known as Ali, is the director of creative production at Jan Krukowski &amp; Company, fund-raising-promotion consultants in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the senior vice president of Marketing Communications Associates, an advertising agency in Philadelphia.
She is a stepdaughter of John T. Abberley of New Canaan and Ann Pew Curran of Villanova.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Sept. 12  MANHATTAN Chelsea 335,000
12 West 18th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, office space, 3 exposures; common charge $354, taxes $1,560 (Brokers: Bascom &amp; Sears-Corcoran Group)  Madison Sq.
Park Area 240,000
5 East 22d Street  (Madison Green)  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar condo in a 10-year-old building; dining room, terrace; common charge $405, taxes $4,200 (Broker: Newell &amp; Associates)  TriBeCa 299,000
168 Duane Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; elevator, 11-ft. ceilings, south exposures; common charge $225, taxes $3.960 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  Upper East Side 950,000
965 Fifth Avenue (78th St.)  2-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, marble baths, fireplace, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $3,314, 43% tax-deductible (Brokers: Edward Lee Cave-Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 205,000
12 West 96th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining foyer, south exposure; maintenence $830, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Eden Realty)  BRONX  Parkchester 28,500
1510 Unionport Road  (Parkchester Condominiums)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. condo in a prewar building; elevator, eat-in kitchen, parquet floors, 2 exposures; common charge $175, taxes $300 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale 300,000
676 West 231st Street  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, brick one-family attached town house; dining room, family room, rear deck, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $4,373 (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 130,000
119 Pacific Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; fireplace, private garden plot, 2 exposures; maintenance $398, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Kensington 183,000
421 East 8th Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,050 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  Park Slope 385,000
431A 5th Street  2-family, 3-story brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, study in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; rear garden, 17 1/2- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  College Point 170,000
15-22 126th Street  2-family detached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $950 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills Gardens 570,000
7 Summer Street  5-bedroom, 4-bath, one-family detached stucco Tudor; dining room, fireplace, sun porch, finished basement, 2-car garage, 60- by 77-ft. lot; taxes $3,500 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 178,000
191 Beach Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached Colonial; dining room, family room, full basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $985 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Sunset Hill 194,000
680 Pelton Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, brick one-family detached ranch; dining area, Florida Room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 45- by 99-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Real Estate)


20 Dye-Transfer Prints Known as 'Americans in Kodachrome'
INTRODUCED as the first "natural color film," in 1936, Kodachrome led inevitably to the slide replays of vacations and other family events that have tested many a friendship.
Guy Stricherz, however,
wants
to see slides.
To be specific, this printer, famed for his work in the dye-transfer process (another Kodak innovation) wants to see "engaging photographs" taken by amateurs from 1945 through 1965 "of people representing the many cultural groups from all parts of our country."


Kathryn Lloyd, Sterling Champ
Kathryn Roth Lloyd, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank V. D. Lloyd of Mahwah, N.J., was married yesterday to Sterling Graham Champ, a son of Joseph H. Champ 2d and Jane G. Champ, both of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Timothy J. Mulder performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


A Really Early Knockout: Illness Cancels Title Bout
Terry Norris's defense of his World Boxing Council super welterweight title was canceled tonight when his opponent, Simon Brown, was diagnosed as suffering from an inner-ear inflammation.
"Secondary to inner-ear inflammation is vertigo," said Edwin (Flip) Homanski, chairman of the medical advisory board to the Nevada Athletic Commission.
"That's a symptom of it."


Sports of The Times; Commish A Literary Heavy
These last days of September are often the most glorious of the year for baseball, but in New York they are a calamity, what with the Mets and the Yankees in horrendous shape and the commissioner's office in a state of dishonor from the owners.
Not wanting to touch baseball again until the championships, I went poking through the huge pile of unrequested sports books, and therein got lucky.
I found a novel that made me care about a baseball player, the way I want to care about the sport itself, if only its keepers would let me.


The Royal Family Shows the Strain Of Trying to Have It Both Ways
Once upon a time, in the days before television or tabloid newspapers or telephoto lenses, nobody ever thought of the Queen of England as a working mother, or worried whether the monarchy was a model for what Dan Quayle might call royal family values.
That King Edward VII kept mistresses, or William IV fathered bastard children, or the sons and daughters of King George V and Queen Mary suffered painfully unhappy childhoods were matters beyond either public reproach or scrutiny.
"Its mystery is its life," said Walter Bagehot, the 19th century editor and royal counselor, whose advice helped define the palace's longtime public relations posture.
"We must not let in daylight upon the magic."
How times have changed.
These days, the royal family suffers, in more ways than one, from a bad case of overexposure.
The Duchess of York is pictured bare-breasted in London tabloids, cavorting at poolside with a man who is not the Duke of York, and a book is atop the best seller list here, purporting to describe the loveless marriage between the Prince and Princesses of Wales.
More recently, there were advertisements for a hotline on which callers listened in on what was said to be a tape recording of a telephone conversation between the Princess of Wales and an unidentified man who calls her Squidgy and says he loves her.


Lisa M. Giuffra, Alejandro Diaz
Lisa Marie Giuffra, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Giuffra, was married yesterday to Alejandro Diaz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar E. Diaz of Buenos Aires.
The Rev.
Robert Valentine performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church in Stockbridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Diaz, 29 years old, is a senior vice president and a director at Baring Securities, a New York brokerage.
She graduated magna cum laude from Middlebury College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the senior partner at Dougherty, Ryan, Giuffra, Zambito &amp; Barra, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Dr.
Mary J. Giuffra, is a psychotherapist in Bronxville, N.Y.


Kimberly Berger and Edmund O'Toole
Kimberly Ann Berger, an associate at Shearman &amp; Sterling, was married yesterday to Edmund Michael O'Toole, an associate at White &amp; Case, both New York law firms.
The Rev.
Ronald T. Sordillo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Virgil's Church in Morris Plains, N.J.
Mrs.
O'Toole, 26 years old, is a daughter of Robert and Evelyn Berger of Morris Plains.
She graduated summa cum laude from Georgetown University, from which she and her husband received their law degrees.
Her father is a vice president of sales and marketing in the polymer products division of the American Cyanamid Company in Wayne, N.J.
Her mother, a registered nurse, is a nutrition specialist at a Nutri-System diet center in Rockaway, N.J.


Another Reason To Like Ike
SUPPOSE that one wished, by a great stretch of historical imagination, to take the four most famous people who ever played bridge and put them at the same card table.
To make it really difficult, let us specify the year, 1942.
One player is an obscure Chinese Communist who much later would be known to the world as Deng Xiaoping, the political head of China, and to his intimates as a man who liked to play bridge all night.


Cat in the Hat Comes Back
Last year's boyz in the hood have changed headgear.
The new headcovering, popular with the hip-hop crowd, is in the shape of a tube.
The topmost end is tied with a narrow length of the same stretch jersey fabric.


The Isles of Brooklyn
CARIBBEAN NEW YORK
Black Immigrants and the Politics of Race.
By Philip Kasinitz.
Illustrated. 280 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Cloth, $39.95.
Paper, $13.95.


Joan Rivers On 'Tonight'? Stay Tuned
Joan Rivers's exile from the "Tonight" show may soon be over.
Representatives for the comedienne, who has her own daytime talk show, have been talking with NBC about her appearing as a guest on "Tonight" with the host, Jay Leno.
This dialogue represents an unexpected thaw in Ms.
Rivers's relationship with the program now that Johnny Carson has left.
In 1986, Mr.
Carson stopped speaking to Ms.
Rivers, who had frequently been guest host of "Tonight," after she started a competing late-night show on the Fox Network.
This year, Ms.
Rivers complained that NBC refused to let her use clips from "Tonight" on her current show.


Q and A
Gas Pumps Too Close


The Art of Stained Glass
To the Editor:
Readers of Sarah Ferrell's enthusiastic review of "The Stained Glass Art of William Jay Bolton, 1816-1884" (In Short, Aug. 2) will be glad to know that only six of 40 sections in the 10 original Bolton windows were destroyed by the 1990 fire at the Church of the Holy Apostles in Manhattan, where I am the director of the restoration project.


Tony Bennett Carries the Torch for Classic Pop
Tony Bennett remembers a time in the summer of 1956 when NBC asked him to fill in for the vacationing Perry Como on his television show.
Despite the fact that Mr.
Bennett had already had three No. 1 hits -- "Because of You," "Cold, Cold Heart" and "Rags to Riches" -- he was petrified.
He decided to ask his idol, Frank Sinatra, whom he had never met, for advice.
"Everybody had warned me, 'Look out, he's a tough guy,' but I had intuition," Mr.
Bennett recalls.
"I felt it was gonna be all right." Backstage at the Paramount Theater, where Mr.
Sinatra was appearing, he gave the young singer a fatherly tip: "Don't worry about being nervous. People don't mind that. It's when you don't care that they walk away from you."
Mr.
Bennett always recalls that encounter when he talks about the importance of holding onto one's standards.
In the late 70's, he even stopped recording rather than sing what he considered inferior material.
At the age of 66, he is still the kind of celebrity whom cabdrivers call by his first name and who answers gushy praise by clasping his forehead and murmuring, "Ahh, geez, thanks." But he isn't afraid to boast when it comes to his material, which he regards as a legacy of timeless songs.
"What I try to do," he says, "is give a performance and have everybody say, 'God, I love that song.' That's my reward."


The Police as a Mayor's Political Nightmare
OF all the things that can go wrong in the political life of an American mayor, a clash with the police department can be among the most disastrous.
A prolonged conflict can try the patience of crime-weary voters, who, in times of increasing crime, may care less about City Hall politics than about the police getting tough with criminals.
But when the police go too far it is the mayors who often suffer political damage.
"It's almost impossible to run a big city in America today without at some time or another coming into conflict with the police," said David Axelrod, a Chicago-based political consultant.


Aristide Seeks More Than Moral Support
WHEN he confidently strode to the podium of the General Assembly one year ago bearing news of democracy's triumph after nearly two centuries of bloody failures, Haiti's first elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was the toast of the United Nations.
This week, as Haiti's deposed President, overthrown in a military coup no sooner than he had returned home, Father Aristide will stand before the same audience to plead that the world not forget his country's tragedy.
He will surely be greeted with hearty applause, but it is much less certain that he will get anything beyond moral support.
Diplomats say there is little chance that anything but the use or serious threat of force can now dislodge a Haitian army that has bloodily secured its hold on the nation while gorging itself on drug money and contraband since the coup last Sept. 30.
Such a rescue seems remote.
If anything, as time has passed, the world consensus against taking action on Father Aristide's behalf has hardened.
For different reasons, likely defenders seem not to want to get involved.


Daughter of a Blacklist That Killed a Father
I NEVER THOUGHT I'D SEE the ghost of my father at the Brooklyn Museum.
Let me explain.


Republicans May Be Losing Hold On Suburbs in New York Region
For more than 20 years and through five Presidential elections, national Republican candidates have cinched up New York City's suburbs in New Jersey and Connecticut as securely as any state in the South or the West -- a sort of miniature electoral lock in the heart of the supposedly liberal Northeast.
In places like this community in southern Fairfield County, Connecticut, and in the affluent commuter suburbs in Bergen and parts of other northern New Jersey counties, Republican voters provided the margin of victory, and the financial contributions that helped to cancel out large areas in the two states where Democrats still did well.


The Facts Are Elusive in the Jobs Debate
The goal of his economic policies, George Bush has said for years, is "jobs, jobs, jobs."
Yet fewer new jobs have been created in his Presidency than in any other Presidential term in the last half century.
Actually, fewer people are on private payrolls today than when Mr.
Bush took office.


Faces In the Crowds
WHEN Mia Farrow stepped up to the microphone at the Poetry Society of America's black-tie tribute to Stephen Sondheim on Monday night, all 412 guests went silent.
Not silent and struggling to keep up with the speaker, as they were during John Guare's loopy, arcane introductory remarks.
Not silent and amused, as they were for Dominick Dunne's pointed reminiscences of his Williams College days with the composer and lyricist.
Not respectfully silent and fighting the urge to reach across the table for the last petit four, as they were during the poet J. D. McClatchy's tribute.
Not even smugly silent as they were when Paul Newman recited Mr.
Sondheim's cynical "Invocation and Instructions to the Audience" from an early musical based on "The Frogs" by Aristophanes.
When Ms.
Farrow read the lyrics to the Cinderella song from "Into the Woods," the audience went silent as stars, as lambs, as words on a page, as Wallace Stevens's "palm at the end of the mind." They were in that state of silence that poets strive for when they write, in that sublime state of thinking-silence where every word takes on the loaded weight of meaning.


Robin Smith, Jamie Butchard
Robin Campbell Smith, a daughter of Mrs.
W.
T.
Sampson Smith Jr. of Cooperstown, N.Y., and Mr.
Smith of Sarasota, Fla., was married yesterday to William James Langrishe Butchard, the son of the late Maj.
Herrick C. Butchard and the late Glenda K. Ward.
The Rev.
Douglas Smith performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Cooperstown.
Mrs.
Butchard, 28 years old, is a show-horse trainer and the owner of Leatherstocking Farms Inc. in Camden, S. C. She graduated summa cum laude from Wells College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the owner of Air-Nav Publishing Corporation, a publisher of marine navigation books in Sarasota.
She is the granddaughter of Dorothy Bostwick Campbell of Cooperstown, an artist and author.


Behind the Masks of a Moralist
As the dawn lightens, the first entrance of the Greek chorus shocks an audience into realizing just how astonishing Ariane Mnouchkine's Theatre du Soleil really is.
The double door at the distant rear swings open and in they surge -- 15 red-clad women (though some are really men), stamping and swaying with a gleeful joy that is very close to barbaric fury.
There is little scenery in the modern sense, but the look is still riveting: faces covered with chalk-white makeup, like masks; headpieces, and costumes with full skirts, vests and glittering ornaments that are an ingenious hybrid of the ethnic cultures stretching from southern Italy through the Middle East to southern India.


Fair Haven Journal; A 'Wild' Front Yard Draws Smiles and Scowls
NO one passes by the property at the corner of Lexington Avenue and First Street in this mile-square Navesink River community without staring -- and then either smiling or scowling.
What attracts their attention is not the two-story house on a small lot in a quiet, residential neighborhood, but the front yard.
What once was a grassy lawn, like those of its neighbors, has been transformed into a wild and woolly patch of flowers and plants -- some of them reaching six feet in height and running off in various directions.


INSIDE
U.S. Armaments to Israel
The U.S. has agreed to send helicopters to Israel and to store other equipment there.
The moves are a balance to the Saudi F-15 sale.
Page 12.
Hope Dries Up in Sarajevo
In a statistic that sums up its despair, the Bosnian capital suffered more casualties last week than in any other in the six-month siege.
Page 12.
Co-ops for the Poor
New York City will sell 730 apartments it bought with Federal funds to public housing tenants.
Page 33.


So . . . Understated
Considering the extravagance of the surroundings, the clothes offered by the Carlisle Collection are fairly modest.
Not dumb, but not the kind of things you'd wear to a ball at Versailles.
Rather, they are what you'd wear to lunch at Le Cirque or dinner at the country club.
And though your friends wouldn't be able to pin a specific designer's label on the clothes, they wouldn't think you were dressing down.
Carlisle is not about blazers.
Jackets are in the spirit of Chanel and Ungaro, in pretty colors and pretty fabrics, with interesting trimming.
Silk print blouses are inspired by Hermes and Versace.
Oversize button and hoop earrings and masses of necklaces dripping pearls and colored stones could be from Escada.
Shoulder bags hang from chains, and belts are adorned with fancy hardware.
All of the current bases are touched.
About the only designers ignored are minimalists like Armani and Calvin Klein.


Laura L. Gillespie, C. L. Demarest
Laura Langdon Gillespie, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Gillespie of Hanover, N.H., was married yesterday to Christopher Lynn Demarest, a son of Shirley Demarest of Reston, Va., and the late Robert Demarest.
The Rev.
R.
Ward Wilson performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Thetford, Vt.
Ms.
Gillespie is 28 years old and is keeping her name.
She is a passenger representative, working aboard cruise ships, for the Raymond &amp; Whitcomb Company, a travel agency in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.


Hofstra Sinks to Another Loss
Tony Vinson set a single-game rushing record of 255 yards as Towson State handed Hofstra its third straight defeat, 37-18, last night in Towson, Md.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush  MONDAY: 7 A.M.
ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," taxes.
WEDNESDAY: 7 A.M.
ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," crime.
FRIDAY: 7 A.M.
ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," health care.
Governor Bill Clinton  MONDAY: 7:30 A.M.
NBC (Channel 4) "Today," taxes.
WEDNESDAY: 7:30 A.M.
NBC (Channel 4) "Today," crime.
FRIDAY: 7:30 A.M.
NBC (Channel 4) "Today," health care.


Amy Fisher in Stable Condition After Suspected Drug Overdose
Amy Fisher, the teen-ager who pleaded guilty on Wednesday to assault charges in a case that has rocked Long Island, was admitted to Huntington Hospital late this afternoon, apparently suffering from a drug overdose, hospital officials said.
Miss Fisher was taken to the hospital at 4:38 P.M. by her parents and her lawyer, Eric Naiburg, the hospital said.
WNBC-TV reported tonight that a lawyer for the Fisher family, Christine Edwards-Neumann, had said that Miss Fisher had tried to kill kill herself twice -- once Friday and once Saturday morning -- by taking an overdose of prescription drugs, WNBC-TV reported.
The lawyer said that "the bottom fell out" when the teen-ager saw the broadcast of parts of a secretly taped video in which she said she wanted conjugal visits in jail and deserved a Ferrari.
Marie Romney, a spokeswoman for the hospital, said Miss Fisher was alert and talking when she was brought in.
She said the 18-year-old was in stable condition in the hospital's intensive care unit and would remain in the hospital overnight.
Mr.
Naiburg declined to respond to telephone calls this evening, but his answering service said he would hold a press conference Sunday morning to discuss Miss Fisher's condition and the circumstances surrounding the overdose.
Miss Fisher, who pleaded guilty to reckless assault in the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco on May 19, faces 5 to 15 years in jail.
Sentencing is scheduled for Dec. 1.
She has agreed to testify against Mrs.
Buttafuoco's husband, Joseph, on charges of statutory rape.
Miss Fisher was videotaped, apparently without her knowledge, on Tuesday, nearly 12 hours before she pleaded guilty in State Supreme Court in Mineola.


SEPT. 20-27: Parental Leave Bill; Family Values: Dueling Versions
Sometimes President Bush does not act like a candidate in search of friendly voters.
Last week he vetoed one of the more politically appealing bills of this Congress, a proposal to make large businesses give workers up to 12 unpaid weeks off yearly to tend newborns and ill relatives.
The Democratic-run Senate, which waited 10 months until election time to send the finished bill to Mr.
Bush, voted 68 to 31 to override the veto.
The House will vote Wednesday.
The President's veto hurt where he needs help most: with women, whom polls say lopsidedly favor Bill Clinton.
Mr.
Bush insisted he had acted on the merits: the measure would raise labor costs and force layoffs, he said.


Gina Sanders, Steven Newhouse
Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold R. Sanders of Ardsley, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gina Susan Sanders to Steven O. Newhouse, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Newhouse of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sanders, 32 years old, is the sales-development manager at HG magazine in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father, a retired clinical assistant professor of urology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, is an emeritus associate attending urologist at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
Her mother, Joyce Sanders, is a columnist for Women's News, a monthly community newspaper in Harrison, N.Y.


Playing It Safe by Installing a Deadbolt
A DEADBOLT not only increases the security of any door, but also is among the least expensive and easiest kinds of locks to install.
It consists of a sliding metal bar mounted horizontally in a door's edge and is operated by a key and a small knob called a thumbturn.
Most homes have deadbolts on their main entry doors, but it is wise to add them to doors leading to the garage or basement and to doors on outdoor storage sheds.


Lucy Schulte and James Danziger
AS Lucy Schulte sees it, every wedding has a left brain and a right brain.
There is the solemn side and the shooting-champagne-corks-at-the-moon side.
"You want to do the vows with dignity in an intimate setting," said Miss Schulte, who is 32 years old.
"But you also want to let your hair down and celebrate. We decided the prefect solution was a two-part deal -- a small ceremony with a big party four days later."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed a four-year player development contract with Cedar Rapids of the Midwest League.
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association  ALBANY PATROONS -- Acquired the rights to Ron Cavenall, center, and Randy Henry, forward, from the Grand Rapid Hoops for the rights to Pete Myers, guard.
Football  National Football League  NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Placed Tim Gordon, safety, on injured reserve.
Activated Darren Anderson, cornerback, from the practice squad.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Waived Cary Blanchard, placekicker.
Activated Tommie Stowers, tight end, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  DEVILS -- Assigned Martin Brodeur, Doug Dadswell and Chad Erickson, goalies; Todd Copeland, Kevin Dean, Petr Kuchyna, Dean Malcoc, Jaroslav Modry, Chris Nelson and Matt Ruchty, defensemen; Jim Dowd, David Emma, Donovan Hextall and Kevin Riehl, centers; Jeff Christian, Jason Miller, Scott Pellerin and Curt Regnier, left wings; and Mike Bodnarchuk, Ben Hankinson and Brian Sullivan, right wings, to Utica of the American Hockey League.
Returned Heath Weenk, defenseman, to his junior team.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Agreed to terms with Joe Mullen, right wing.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Assigned Shawn Boston, Jeff Buchanon, Tyler Ertel, Mark Green, Brent Gretzky , Jeff Harding, Matt Hervey, Jason Lafreniere, Chris Lipuma, Kevin MacKay, Colin Miller, Keith Osborne, Manon Rheaume, Bob Robinson, Garin Smith, Shayne Stevenson and Dan Vincelette to Atlanta of the International Hockey League.
Returned Trevor Robins, goalie, to Saskatoon of the Western Hockey League.
American Hockey League  ADIRONDACK RED WINGS -- Named Joe Paterson assistant coach.
College
BROCKPORT STATE -- Named Joan Schockow women's assistant basketball coach.


TEST-MARKETING A PRESIDENT
Focus groups are turning Presidential aspirants into followers of capricious public opinion ("Test-Marketing a President," by Elizabeth Kolbert, Aug. 30).
It's dangerous.
The candidates should repudiate "test marketing." It has nothing to do with leadership.
MARGARET T. HOLLINGSWORTH
Kennebunkport, Me.


Ready for Winter
House plants should be cleaned, pruned, checked for bugs and safely inside their winter spots by now so that they can get used to less sun and fun before the heat comes on and stresses them further.
Mitigate dry conditions by grouping them together and placing the pots on trays of pebbles, which can hold water.
But don't overwater; doing so is the greatest cause of death among indoor plants.
Continue to clean the garden, pulling up old bitter lettuce and other spent crops, planting green cover crops like rye and hairy vetch, or simply digging in compost.
Now is a good time to check the soil pH (measure of alkalinity) and add lime if it is acid.
Most vegetables and flowers are fine in the 6.5 range.


Elise Hillman, Andrew Whitaker
Elise Hillman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard B. Hillman of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Andrew Burnet Rhett Whitaker, a son of Mrs.
Donald Stewart of Bloomfield, Conn., and Francis C. Whitaker of Southampton, England.
The Very Rev.
Francis Sayre performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Old Whaling Church in Edgartown, Mass.
Mrs.
Whitaker graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
Her father is the president and chairman of Autotrol Corporation, a software company in Denver, and the president of Taconic Group, a venture capital concern in New Canaan, Conn.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Armonk, N.Y. 365,000
22 Windmill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; family room, fireplace, skylights, stone patio, 2-car garage; taxes $5,249.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 285,000
45 Kathleen Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old split-level; fireplace, new eat-in kitchen, screened porch, family room; taxes $5,323.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 575,000
43 Church Lane  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 39-year-old split-level; 2 fireplaces, wet bar, deck, Jacuzzi, family room; taxes $12,224.
Bridgeport, Conn. 125,000
381 Cleveland Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old raised ranch; kitchen skylight, oversized family room, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,698.
Stratford, Conn. 158,000
96 Blakeman Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; slate entry foyer, historic area; taxes $1,866.
Wilton, Conn. 382,000
11 Wilton Woods  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; brick terrace, screened porch, ceiling fans, 2.8 acres; taxes $3,603.
OTHER AREAS Demarest, N.J. 260,000
75 Stelfox Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; deck, full basement; $5,300.
Millburn, N.J. 163,000
36 Ocean Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, h/w floors, dining room; taxes $2,698.
Northport, L.I. 217,000
18 Center Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 75- year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sunroom, 1-car garage; taxes $1,800.


The True Story About Nassau Finances
Reading "A Silver Lining for Nassau Bonds"  [ Aug. 30 ]  makes one wonder whether the Nassau County Republican Party is the true author of the piece or if smoke and mirrors have replaced reality.
John V. Scaduto is quoted as saying, "The problem is political rhetoric and media hype, but if you really read Moody's reports, the condition of the county is tremendous." I guess rhetoric and hype refer to stories of those laid off by the county and struggling to make ends meet and by the cutback and elimination of services in the health areas that have devastated many of those dependent on the services.
But according to Mr.
S., the condition of the county is tremendous.


Giving up a Home Run and Ground to the Brewers


Astros to Retire Scott and Cruz Numbers
The Houston Astros said Friday they would retire the numbers of two of their most popular former players, pitcher MIKE SCOTT and outfielder JOSE CRUZ.
The numbers will be retired during a ceremony before the Oct. 3 game against the Los Angeles Dodgers at the Astrodome.


Detroit Teachers Vote to End 27-Day Strike
With a tentative contract in hand, the Detroit Federation of Teachers voted today to return to school on Monday, ending a 27-day strike.
The vote, taken at a meeting attended by about 2,000 union members, was virtually unanimous.
The 10,500 members of the union will return to school on Monday to prepare for the start of classes on Tuesday.
The strike in the nation's seventh-largest school system delayed the start of school for 168,000 students by nearly a month.


Two Are Charged in East Village Slaying
Two men have tentatively been charged with second-degree murder in the slaying of a man who attacked them with a pipe in the East Village early yesterday morning, the police said.
One of the men, Scott Machaens, 30 years old, of 60 Avenue C, was walking with his girlfriend on St.
Marks Place about 5:15 A.M. when he was attacked with a metal pipe by Kenneth Rivas, 20, of 485 Ridgewood Avenue, Brooklyn, and another man, according to Officer Scott Bloch, a Police Department spokesman.


A Motley Crew, But a Tough One
It's a quartet of contrasts, this United States Davis Cup squad that advanced to the final round by asserting itself with a vengeance against a more homogenous but less explosive Swedish team in the semifinals this weekend at the Target Center.
And in December in Fort Worth this same collection of disparate talents will reconvene in the final against Switzerland.
That nation is a first-time finalist led by Marc Rosset, the Olympic gold medalist and a big server the United States plans to neutralize with a surface of clay or cement.
Now in its 58th final, the United States is pursuing a 30th Cup title.


Beijing Journal; Army's Business Sideline: These Guns for Fun
It is a lazy afternoon on the outskirts of China's capital, in the hills near the majestic tombs of the Ming emperors.
Little breaks the stillness except occasional birdsong, a quiet conversation barely overheard and, every so often, the convulsions of a heavy machine gun sending tracer bullets slamming into a hillside a half-mile away, then ricocheting hundreds of feet in the air.
The gun's fierce bark grows quiet, but just as the ears stop ringing the harsh report of an AK-47 assault rifle shatters the calm.


Daly Is Delighted to Be the Dominator
Being everything he had appeared to be when he rocketed onto the golf scene last year, John Daly convincingly proved he is more than a one-shot wonder with a dominating six-stroke victory at the B.C.
Open today.
Playing at an even higher level than he did in winning the 1991 PGA Championship 13 1/2 months ago, Daly put together a flawless final round of five-under-par 66 over the soggy En-Joie Golf Club course for a 72-hole total of 18-under-par 266.


Now It's Books 'R' Us As Toy Giant Expands
Super Mario is about to face some stepped-up competition from Dr.
Seuss.
Toys "R" Us is joining forces with the largest publisher of children's books to make an aggressive push into book retailing.
Through a venture with the Western Publishing Company, the publisher of the popular Little Golden Books, Toys "R" Us is creating small bookstores in 30 of its cavernous warehouse-style stores this fall.
If sales go well, the new Books "R" Us sections will be open in many of the company's 451 stores by Christmas of 1993.


Rabin Rebukes a Voluble Education Minister
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin warned today that his governing coalition could collapse if his outspoken Education Minister does not temper remarks that have angered him and outraged Orthodox Jews.
Mr.
Rabin called in the Cabinet official, Shulamit Aloni, and rebuked her.
But he made no attempt to remove her from office, even though he is reported to regret having appointed her when he formed his Government in mid-July.


Italian Stakes Office on Austerity
Facing an array of protest from Italians as diverse as retirees, auto workers and legislators, Prime Minister Giuliano Amato played one of his few chips in the country's economic crisis today, threatening to resign if his proposals for austerity were challenged.
He issued the warning in a published interview as Parliament prepared for a debate this week on tax increases and spending cuts that will mold Italy's immediate future and determine its ability to coax some credibility as a European player from the tatters of economic and financial mess.


Transactions
Hockey  National Hockey League
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Sent Rene Chapdelaine and Paul Holden, defensemen; Shawn McCosh, center; Sylvain Couturier, left wing; and Brandy Semchuk, right wing, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
Returned Darcy Austin and Sandy Allan, goaltenders; Justin Hocking, Michael Gaul and Troy Hjertaas, defensemen; Jeff Shevalier, left wing; and Kevin Brown and Ryan Pisial, right wings, to their respective junior clubs.
Released Martin Maskerinec and Mattis Olsson, defensemen; Steve Bogoyevac and Joe Flanagan, centers; Jim Larkin, left wing; and Pauli Jaks, goaltender.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Assigned Martin Brodeur, Doug Dadswell and Chad Erickson, goalies; Todd Copeland, Kevin Dean, Petr Kuchyna, Dean Malcoc, Jaroslav Modry, Chris Nelson and Matt Ruchty, defensemen; Jim Dowd, David Emma, Donovan Hextall and Kevin Riehl, centers; Jeff Christian, Jason Miller, Scott Pellerin and Curt Regnier, left wings; and Mike Bodnarchuk, Ben Hankinson and Brian Sullivan, right wings, to Utica of the American Hockey League.
Returned Heath Weenk, defenseman, to his junior team.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Agreed to terms with Joe Mullen, right wing.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Assigned Shawn Boston, Jeff Buchanon, Tyler Ertel, Mark Green, Brent Gretzky, Jeff Harding, Matt Hervey, Jason Lafreniere, Chris Lipuma, Kevin MacKay, Colin Miller, Keith Osborne, Manon Rheaume, Bob Robinson, Garin Smith, Shayne Stevenson and Dan Vincelette to Atlanta of the International Hockey League.
Returned Trevor Robins, goalie, to Saskatoon of the Western Hockey League.
American Hockey League
ADIRONDACK RED WINGS -- Named Joe Paterson assistant coach.


McCann's Shake-Up In Los Angeles
McCann-Erickson Los Angeles has named Robert J. McKinley, 48 years old, executive vice president and general manager, succeeding Rona Pashkin-Boyer, 46.
Mr.
McKinley was previously a senior vice president and group account director at McCann's New York office.


CHRONICLE
ATLANTA CONSTANCE SAMPSON has lived in five states in her 96 years, so nine Senators who represent those states will band together to give a reception honoring her on her birthday Wednesday in the Mansfield Room of the Capitol.
Miss Sampson, who now lives in Toeterville, Iowa, has been painting for 84 years and studied with Hans Hofmann.
But she did her figurative, floral and abstract works in almost total obscurity until 1988 when OWEN RYAN, a marketing executive, saw some of them in a New York delicatessen and arranged for a show in the National Arts Club on Gramercy Park.
"She painted exquisitely, and when critics finally saw her work, she got rave reviews," Mr.
Ryan said.


For a Film Producer, Success Runs Hard Into Nervousness
Art Linson is a very nervous movie producer. And who can blame him?
His latest film, "Singles," a romantic comedy set in Seattle, has just opened to good reviews.
And set to open in the next few months are "This Boy's Life," an adaptation of Tobias Wolff's autobiographical novel starring Robert De Niro and Ellen Barkin, and "The Specialist," an American remake of the French drama "La Femme Nikita," which stars Bridget Fonda and Harvey Keitel.
The two films are now being tested before preview audiences.


Dance in Review
Garth Fagan Dance  Joyce Theater 175 Eighth Avenue (at 19th Street) Chelsea Through Sunday
Looks can be deceiving.
Garth Fagan's dances often appear to be plotless.
But take another look.
Buried in many of them are dramas: hidden, almost invisible dramas.
Yet their conflicts and tensions give power to what might otherwise be considered abstract choreography.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the resignation of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs incorrectly rendered his name in some copies.
He is Edward J. Derwinski.


Tina Antonik, John Albright
Tina E. Antonik, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Antonik of Flushing, Queens, was married yesterday to John Sewell Albright, the son of Suzanne S. Albright of Akron, Ohio, and Archie Albright of Newport Beach, Calif.
The Rev.
William B. Bryant performed the ceremony at the Greens Farms Congregational Church in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Albright is an associate in the law firm of Latham &amp; Watkins in New York.
She graduated from Hunter College and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is the staff architect for New York University.
Her mother, Greta Antonik, is an assistant director of nursing for Booth Memorial Medical Center in Queens.


Bush Plan Protects Both Owl and Logging
To the Editor:
"Don't Blame the Owl" (editorial, Sept. 21) totally ignores the fact that President Bush has devised a sensible, balanced protection plan for the owl and for logging.


To Hold Jobs, New York City Revises Goals
For a decade, New York City's efforts to stem the exodus of business to the suburbs, the Sun Belt states and elsewhere has increasingly resembled a game of five-card-stud, complete with cash on the table and poker-faced bluffs.
But rarely has the game been played more intensely than it was last week.
At stake were a financial services subsidiary of the First Chicago Corporation and Bradlees, a department store chain.
Compared to many of the titans of Wall Street and midtown Manhattan, both are relatively small players.


Topics of The Times; Democracy Double-Crossed
New York State's election laws are as perversely undemocratic as any in the country.
By the time November rolls around, registered Democrats in a Manhattan district will have twice been denied the chance to vote for an important public office.
The death of Representative Ted Weiss of New York the day before this month's Democratic primary triggered an obscure provision of the state election law that put the choice of his successor into the hands of Manhattan Democratic Party leaders.
At a raucous meeting last week, nearly 1,000 Democratic county committee members selected veteran Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler as their nominee -- virtually guaranteeing his election in the six-to-one Democratic district.


Silicon Valley May Have Lost Its Way
After more than three decades as a fertile breeding ground for hundreds of technologies, Silicon Valley is in the midst of a midlife crisis, wondering if it still has the right stuff.
"We are definitely the equivalent of a 40-year-old male who just discovered he has a little paunch," said T. J. Rogers, chairman of Cypress Semiconductor, a chip maker in Sunnyvalewho has long symbolized the Valley's fiercely independent management style.
"We've got troubles here in Silicon Valley."


The Dead of Winter, in Bosnia
Western spinelessness is about to let hundreds of thousands of Bosnians die from hunger, cold and military bombardment in the cruel winter months ahead.
In a shameful abdication of responsibility, the United States and its European allies continue to pursue a policy of nonintervention in the face of unbridled brutality.
Bosnians by the dozens are dying daily in Serb-run ethnic-cleansing and concentration camps, nightmarish reminders of World War II.
As if constant artillery barrages were not enough, the Yugoslav Air Force, under the control of Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic, still bombs Bosnia's cities with impunity.


Consumers Face Rise In Gas Heating Costs
As the first frosts of autumn roll across the Northeast and Midwest and home furnaces are lit for cooler weather ahead, prices for natural gas are fluttering at the highest level of any of the last seven Septembers.
Energy analysts say that homeowners, apartment dwellers and other gas consumers who have benefited from falling or stable gas prices since 1984 should brace for higher winter heating bills, perhaps $50 or more above the heating costs from last year's mild winter.


Corrections
A schedule in Weekend on Friday for the New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center misstated the opening date of "Leolo." The film is to be screened at 6:15 P.M.
Tuesday (not Monday), and again at 9:30 P.M.
Wednesday, at Alice Tully Hall.


U.S. Is Starting to Declassify H-Bomb Fusion Technology
The Federal Government, which battled for decades to keep the workings of the hydrogen bomb secret, is beginning to declassify some of the most sensitive aspects of its design and to let American scientists publish them in scientific literature.
The reason for this reversal is not internal policy considerations, the end of the cold war or the collapse of the Soviet Union as a military threat.
Rather it is foreign competition.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  WHY U.S. SKIRTS BOSNIA
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is reluctant to consider military intervention to protect Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
His rationale -- that in most situations, the goal of military action must be decisive victory -- is increasingly being questioned.
A1  ALL KINDS OF SERBIAN FIGHTERS
The ability of Serbs to deliver on peace pledges appears to be limited by the extreme diversity of Serbian forces in Bosnia.
And Bosnia's border with Serbia seems porous.
A5


Approaching Life As a 'Five-Setter'
TORE MEINECKE of Germany was the 46th-ranked male tennis player in the world ("Some people thought I could get as high as 10") when his car crashed in France three and a half years ago.
He was in a coma for more than a month.
"The doctors thought that if I survived I would never walk, then never speak, that I would be permanently damaged," he said recently.
"I was very lucky. I can speak English. I can speak French. I can walk."


163 Nigerians Dead As a Military Plane Crashes Near Lagos
A Nigerian military-transport plane crashed soon after takeoff from Lagos, killing all 163 people aboard, officials said today.
Many of those killed on Saturday night in the crash of the Hercules C-130 were believed to be middle-ranking army, navy and air force officers attending a staff college course in northern Nigeria.


Mets Are All Stares As Pirates Celebrate
The picture at the center of Three Rivers Stadium was a study in subdued celebration.
The Pirates, their third straight National League East title official, exchanged hugs and handshakes, took in the fireworks without flinching, almost without noticing.
Then, the parade for the clubhouse began.
The Mets, all too familiar with their own sense of defeat, were transfixed by the quiet scene of joy and accomplishment.
At last, Jim Leyland, the Pirates' manager, was hoisted onto the shoulders of Barry Bonds and Lloyd McClendon.


U.S. and Canada May Meet on Trade
The new United States Ambassador to Canada, Peter B. Teeley, a longtime friend of and adviser to President Bush, says he is working toward a "mini-summit" meeting at which the two countries' trade chiefs, despite American electoral preoccupations, might be able to settle some of the disputes that have rankled the world's largest trading relationship.
The 53-year-old former Washington political operative said that though his tenure might be brief he intended to be active, especially in the area of trade, where the two countries are engaged in a number of skirmishes that have sown political discord.


Fishing for Memories of Summer


Review/Opera; In 'Magic Flute,' Familiar Sights and Unfamiliar Sounds
The New York City Opera's production of Mozart's "Magic Flute" returned to the New York State Theater for its first performance of the season on Saturday afternoon, and although it looks much as it did when it was last seen, it sounds notably different.
When the production had its premiere, in 1987, it was noted that the City Opera was presenting the work with its original German text for the first time.
The company maintained its German version for three seasons, before sending the production into storage.
But this season it is returning to its earlier practice of offering it in English.
The translation, by Andrew Porter, is thoroughly singable, and it strikes an artful balance between the work's comic and serious currents.
One could argue that "The Magic Flute," with its important spoken sections, is an ideal candidate for translation.
And the cast put across much (though not all) of the text distinctly.


Cultural Bounty From a Harvest Feast in Queens
IRVING GREEN of Flushing wandered into the Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens yesterday and discovered an ancient and exotic culture.
Tucked behind the trees on a vast field, he found lithesome dancers in flowing silk outfits, revelers pounding drums in a harvest ritual and men and women chanting above the rumble of planes from La Guardia Airport.
He had found himself amid the joyous spectacle of the Korean Harvest and Folklore Festival.


Black Ally Assails de Klerk On Accord With Mandela
Hours after Nelson Mandela and President F.W. de Klerk agreed to resume their search for a democratic order, Mr.
Mandela's bitterest black rival, Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, furiously broke off relations with the Government today and vowed to oppose the creation of an interim government.
In a broadside that was both a howl of betrayal and a call to defiance, Chief Buthelezi, the volatile leader of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party, accused the South African President, who he has generally supported, of "connivance" with Mr.
Mandela.


Review/Performance Art; Mexican Pop on a Skewer
As part of its Out-of-Towners series, the Dance Theater Workshop is presenting multi-media artists from Latin America.
Their intention, as stated in the program, is to "disturb and revise post-Columbian history in a way that creates a visible identity of self and regional culture." Astrid Hadad, a vibrant singer and performer from Mexico City, was featured last Monday in a sharp-edged musical comedy routine titled "Heavy Nopal."
Although this critic does not understand Spanish, Ms.
Hadad's purpose soon became clear: to appropriate Mexican popular song and render its content either socially relevant or willfully absurd.
She also seemed to be tinkering with the musical mechanics of the songs, but that technique became obvious to the un informed observer only in the Mexican-American pastiche "South of the Border." The accompanying musicians (playing accordion, guitars, flute, saxophone and percussion) provided some inventively peculiar touches, but for the most part they deadpanned underneath Ms.
Hadad's bravura shenanigans.
The satire was always good-natured and affectionate.


Muslims Hold a Parade in Manhattan


Corrections
A headline yesterday on an article about the announcement that the United States would send Army helicopters to Israel incorrectly described the terms of the transfer in some copies.
Israel will not pay for the helicopters.


Georgina Heredia, S. A. Christensen
Georgina E. Heredia, a daughter of Antonio L. Heredia and Georgina Delgado, both of New York, was married yesterday to Steven A. Christensen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Christensen of Ellenville, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Rooney performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Snows Roman Catholic Church in Floral Park, Queens.
Mrs.
Christensen, 28 years old, is an executive secretary at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in New York.
Her father is a retired restaurant and store owner in New York.


Review/Pop; A Longtime Rocker Still Seeking His Audience
Alejandro Escovedo is not a name that rolls off the tongue when one is considering major contemporary singers and songwriters.
In fact, although he has been making records for 10 years, Mr.
Escovedo has little name recognition at all.
In the early 1980's, he was one of the guitarists in the cowboy-rock outfit Rank and File; after that he formed True Believers, which had a brawnier, rootsy approach and made an album, "True Believers," in 1986.
The band eventually crashed to a halt without a commercial breakthrough, and this year Mr.
Escovedo re-emerged with a solo album, "Gravity," on the independent label Watermelon, based in Austin, Tex.; at Tramps on Saturday night, opening for Tracy Nelson, he performed songs from the new album.
Mr.
Escovedo is just one of his generation who is facing enormous obstacles of underappreciation.
Like Paul Westerberg of the Replacements, Peter Holsapple of the dB's, Steve Wynn of the Dream Syndicate and Exene Cervenka of X, he is making song-oriented music that is stranded between adolescent fury and baby-boomer maturity; he's too old for MTV and too young for VH-1.


World Economies


Review/Film Festival; Video Violence Turns Real for a Boy
The title character of "Benny's Video," a portrait of a 14-year-old electronics nut in present-day Vienna, lives in a sort of televised hall of mirrors.
Although the boy's bedroom window faces the street outside his apartment building, he prefers to take in the view through one of several video monitors positioned around the room.
Benny's television is almost never turned off.
Its relentless parade of violent images remains a visual backdrop even while he does his homework to blasting heavy metal music.
In his spare time, Benny sits in his room dispassionately flicking among channels and editing his own home videos.
His latest creation, shot on his parents' farm, shows the stunning of a pig before slaughter.
Alone in his room, Benny replays the scene over and over with the detached absorption of someone analyzing a new and improved system of torture.


Mott's Moves Over To Thompson
Mott's U.S.A. in Stamford, Conn., has named J. Walter Thompson New York to handle its beverages account after five years at Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications have estimated they will climb next year to between $12 million and $25 million, from around $3 million to $5 million recently.


Russia Loans Being Delayed By Bureaucracy and Anxiety
Bureaucratic red tape in Moscow and Western capitals, together with quarrels over the repayment of $70 billion in foreign debt incurred by the Soviet Union, has seriously slowed aid to Russia, international financial officials say.
The delays mean that Russia will not receive this year all the $24 billion promised in April by President Bush and Chancellor Helmut Kohl, although most of the money should arrive by the end of March.


Skepticism on Central Europe Trade Zone
Central Europe has reacted coolly to President Bush's recent proposal to establish a free-trade zone with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland.
Since the President raised the idea in a speech in Detroit on Sept. 10, policy makers and newspapers here have politely dismissed it as largely irrelevant and incompatible with efforts to speed the countries' integration into the European Community.


Two Media Groups Appoint Agencies
Two media organizations have appointed agencies for the first time to handle their advertising and marketing needs.
The Outdoor Advertising Association of America in New York selected Carmichael Lynch Inc. in Minneapolis to promote outdoor advertising as a medium.
Billings were not disclosed.


Storm in South of France
Torrential rains caused flash floods in southern France and the island of Corsica overnight, killing at least two people and wrecking homes and bridges, local officials said today.
Four people were missing in the wake of the storms, just days after disastrous floods in southeastern France killed at least 39 people and left 30 missing.
The Mayor of Rennes-les-Bains, Jacques Ortola, said the Sal river rose 22 feet in less than two hours, cutting roads to the town and bringing down power lines.
"It was a catastrophe," he said.
"Everything was carried off."


Ralph Manheim, 85, Translator Of Major Works to English, Dies
Ralph Manheim, for nearly 50 years a prolific and widely acclaimed English translator of major German and French works, including books by Hitler, Freud, Proust, Brecht and Grass, died Sept. 26 at his home in Cambridge, England.
He was 85 years old.
He died of complications of prostate cancer, his family said.


Pirates Get In. Jays, Braves, A's in the Wings.
The only slight pennant chases left in the major leagues are in the American League East and the National League West, and even those are barreling toward their expected conclusion with the final week of the regular season upon us.
Since the Pittsburgh Pirates clinched the National League East by beating the Mets, 4-2, and the Oakland Athletics are within a whisker of winning the American League West, it is up to the Toronto Blue Jays and Atlanta Braves to complete the probable playoff foursome.


Democrat's Senate Bid Stumbles in Pennsylvania
Lynn H. Yeakel, who won a stunning upset in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate, has stumbled in recent months and lost much of the momentum she had coming out of her April victory.
In an effort to regain some of that strength, the Yeakel campaign began blanketing the state this week with three image-building television commercials.
A lot is riding on these advertisements and those that come in the next five weeks, because political analysts say Ms.
Yeakel, a fund-raiser for women's charities who is making her first bid for elected office, has lost ground to the two-term Republican incumbent, Arlen Specter, who is seeking a third term.


Fatal Fire Leads to Arrest
A fire yesterday afternoon killed a 3-year-old boy and then led to his parents' arrest, when rescuers who arrived at the apartment found marijuana, hashish and other evidence of drug dealing, the police said.
Officer Scott Bloch said Aris-Louis Maria Jr. and his sister, 4, appeared to have been playing with matches and started the fire about 2:30 P.M. in their family's apartment at 1061 St.
Nicholas Avenue, in Washington Heights.
Their father, Aris-Louis Maria, 28, and their mother, Vilma Checo, 22, were charged with criminal posession of a controlled substance and possession of a deadly weapon.


4 Hits in 7 Games? Looking Good
Now that ROBIN YOUNT has become the 17th man to reach the 3,000-hit plateau, will GEORGE BRETT be able to accomplish the same feat in this last week of the season?
Brett needs four hits in the Kansas City Royals' remaining seven games to do it.
By one statistical measure pointed out by BERT SUGAR after consulting his 1990 book "Baseballistics" (St. Martin's Press), the odds are in Brett's favor.


Serbs Pour Over Border to Join Fighting in Bosnia
When the morning bus from Belgrade to the Bosnian front paused at the border here, Brano Tadic leaped off and started running.
A few minutes later he returned with a big grin on his unshaven face, a Zastava machine gun clasped in his right hand and a couple of grenades strapped to his belt.
Mr.
Tadic, a 25-year-old Serb who was a waiter in Sarajevo before the Bosnian war started in April, said he had been in Belgrade for a week visiting family.
But immediately after crossing from Serbia into Bosnia and Herzegovina, he was transformed from a civilian into a warrior for the Bosnian Serbs, flaunting his weapons and proclaiming war without end on the Muslims of Bosnia.


The Fans Fill Candlestick, Not Sure if This Is Goodbye
What irony.
On the day the Giants may have played their last game in San Francisco, the sky was cloudless, the sun was bright and warm and the fans filled nearly every seat in Candlestick Park.
It should have been this way every summer since 1958, the year the Giants arrived in California from New York.
But instead, the long, windswept days and dank, foggy nights left the Giants playing their final home game before they pack up and leave for St.
Petersburg, Fla.


CHRONICLE
The deal is done, and starting today, MARKY MARK, the hip-hop performer and teen-age idol, will be seen on bus-shelter posters all over town in his Calvins -- underwear, that is, and in some cases, jeans that slip insouciantly below the underwear.
"It all started with him," said CALVIN KLEIN, whose label the singer flaunts on stage.
"He has been wearing the underwear and jeans in his concerts for the last year and has been photographed in them a lot. He is so great looking, and when I saw him on the cover of Rolling Stone in our underwear, I decided to do a deal."


Review/Music; A South Korean Baritone Fascinated With Singing
Hans Choi is a 33-year-old baritone from South Korea who has been circling the opera establishment with appearances in Philadelphia, San Francisco and New York.
He has also won five competitions in three different countries, the latest being the 1990 Tchaikovsky Competition.
There he was named best male vocalist and best interpreter of Russian repertory.
Mr.
Choi brought a generally modest repertory to his Carnegie Hall recital on Thursday night.
It was framed with the kind of music he does best: Bellini and Donizetti songs at the beginning, Tosti at the end.
His sound is exceedingly pleasant, offering a cushioned resonance, relatively seamless transitions between registers, acceptable command of sotto voce and falsetto and serviceable diction in a number of languages.


Eviction Suit Threatens Bitter End, a Folk Legend
Tom Paxton, the folk singer, saw the Bitter End as a "place to learn, to be bad, a place where you could clock your hours, learn what worked and didn't." Peter Yarrow of Peter, Paul and Mary liked it because it was "one of those intimate places that nurtured artists, let them learn who they are and how their audiences see them." Kris Kristofferson viewed it as the place where "people like me and Bob Dylan didn't just come to perform, we came to hang out."
But now, if the club's landlords have their way, the 32-year-old Greenwich Village coffeehouse-cum-performance showcase and former home of Carly Simon, Joni Mitchell and Judy Collins might become a nostalgic relic.
A battle that began over the posting of seating plans has cost the club its lease.


Surrender? These Brewers Have Just Begun to Dream
AMERICAN LEAGUE EAST
BREWERS 5, A's 3 -- For the second straight day, a home run by Greg Vaughn allowed Milwaukee to keep pace with Toronto in the American League East division race while preventing Oakland from clinching in the American League West.
The Brewers swept the three-game series to remain two and one-half games behind Toronto.
Milwaukee has won six in a row, but now must finish the season with six games on the West Coast, while the Blue Jays wind up the year at home, with five games against the Red Sox and Tigers.


No Headline
"As soon as they tell me it is limited, it means that they do not care whether you achieve a result or not. As soon as they me tell me 'surgical,' I head for the bunker." -- General COLIN L. POWELL, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.  [ A1:5 ]


Youths Adrift in a New Germany Turn to Neo-Nazis
He is tall and powerfully built, with close-cropped hair, a pockmarked face and a rough charisma that has made him a leader of rightist youth gangs in the Chemnitz area.
Although he will not give his name to outsiders, many young people here know and admire him.
They see him as someone who not only complains about conditions in eastern Germany, but also stands ready for action, including attacks on foreigners.


Bucs Shatter the Mold and Beat Lions
Buccaneers 27, Lions 23
PONTIAC, Mich., Sept. 27 (AP) -- Two streaks went crashing in a wild fourth-quarter shootout between the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and the Detroit Lions today.
The Bucs ended Detroit's 11-game winning streak in the Silverdome and snapped their own 15-game losing streak on the road.
The 24-point flurry by the teams was capped by Vinny Testaverde's 14-yard touchdown pass to Ron Hall with 49 seconds left in the game, lifting Tampa Bay to a 27-23 victory.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Perot Plan to Attack Deficit Thrusts Issue at Opponents
In the 21 weeks from when his unorthodox campaign for President blasted off until it exploded, Ross Perot basically offered voters only himself and an outlet for their anger.
Now, as he flirts with reviving his candidacy, he is proffering something else: a bold, and some say drastic, plan to eliminate the Federal budget deficit in five years and reinvigorate the nation's economy.


Topics of The Times; Judicial Ethics 101
One of the Brooklyn Democratic Party's handpicked candidates for the New York City Civil Court, Karen Yellen, is being pursued by the state's tax department for nearly $84,000 in back income taxes and penalties.
It's too late to remove Ms.
Yellen from the ballot.
But the episode suggests a prompt inquiry by the state's Commission on Judicial Conduct, which has broad power to police judicial ethics.
The commission could, if warranted, censure or even remove Ms.
Yellen after she reached the bench.
Ms.
Yellen owes her nomination to strong backing from Brooklyn real estate lawyers, who sought a judge sympathetic to landlord interests.
Though the amateurish screening committee that reviewed Ms.
Yellen's credentials never inquired about her tax status, she clearly had a duty to come clean about her difficulties.


High Noon in Europe's Currency Standoff
"I will fight, we will fight, France and Germany will fight," vowed Michel Sapin, France's Finance Minister, as he declared war last week on speculators who were betting that a French franc would soon buy fewer German marks.
If Mr.
Sapin seemed overwrought, it was understandable.
The stability of the exchange rate between the franc and the mark had, for better or worse, come to symbolize the stability of the French-German alliance.
And those who expected the franc to crack under pressure as easily as the British pound or the Italian lira did were clearly mistaken.


Corrections
A headline on an obituary article on Saturday gave an incorrect age for Walter A. Miller, a Brooklyn lawyer.
Mr.
Miller was 87 years old.


U.S. SET TO OPEN NATIONAL FORESTS FOR STRIP MINING
The Bush Administration is about to complete a policy change that will open millions of acres of national parks and forests to strip mining for coal except in cases where the Government buys the mineral rights from the families and energy companies that own them.
The policy change, in the form of a new Interior Department regulation that is due to become final shortly after Election Day, would give coal companies the authority to mine a mother lode of coal that now lies beneath 40 million acres of parks, preserves and protected lands in 24 states.
The area holds roughly 16 percent of the nation's reserves.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Will There Be Any Space For Outer Space on Cable?
Like other cable channels before it, the new Sci-Fi Channel sees itself as a bold new frontier for television, ready to satisfy the burning interest of millions of viewers for science fiction and fantasy by providing programming ranging from "Star Wars" to "The Incredible Hulk."
But first it has to avoid being gobbled up by the Thing That Came From Washington.


Abroad at Home; Triumph and Tragedy
Two years ago, in the Persian Gulf crisis, President Bush summoned up a vision to support his call for international military action against Iraq.
Whatever one thought of the war and the way he took us into it, the vision was inspiring.
"A new world order," he called it.
The strong would be called to account if they attacked the weak.
Human rights would be respected.
America, the one superpower, would provide leadership by seeking international consensus through the United Nations.


Bush Plan Protects Both Owl and Logging; Jobs and Timber
To the Editor:
"Economists Strive to Find Environment's Bottom Line" (Science Times, Sept. 8), on the search for the economic benefits of environmental regulation, was a timely report on a topic that has become a Presidential campaign issue.


Cross Burned on Property Of Suffolk Black Family
A two-foot high cross doused in gasoline was set aflame Saturday night on the front yard of a black family's home in Medford, L.I., a mostly white suburb in Suffolk County where residents say there is little apparent racial tension.
The police had no suspects yesterday and were uncertain whether the family, Anthony and Yvette McKenzie, was being targeted specifically.
Another black family lives next door on Peconic Avenue, a street of ranch and colonial homes with generous lawns, and a third lives across the street.


Litter City
Simplified driving instructions for getting to New York City from Long Island: Drive west until you reach the garbage.
Then you know you are in New York City.
The dividing line is precisely that clear.
On major gateway highways, one abruptly sees old tailpipes, hubcaps and other refuse.
Why?
One reason, obviously, is money.
New York has a financial crisis and many services have been curtailed.
It would cost several million more a year to clean and maintain major highways properly.
But another reason is determination.


Review/Opera; A 'Falstaff' as Tasteful as Its Hero Is Not
"This is my kingdom" Falstaff loudly proclaims about his imperial paunch.
"I must increase it." By all means, one could only think on Friday night as the Metropolitan Opera revived its production of Verdi's opera, let it increase; let it expand; let it be plentifully fed and extravagantly nurtured.
And let this opera's kingdom thrive as well, as it did on this occasion.
This "Falstaff" was, minor quibbles aside, exemplary.
Its cast was about as good as can be currently gathered.
James Levine's conducting had the right combination of delicacy and panache.
And though Franco Zeffirelli's 1964 production may have a few excesses, it was inspiringly modest given his future development .
Friday night's performance, in its taste and care, in its lack of pretense and its intelligent humor, was everything Falstaff is not.
The production is to be taped later this season for television broadcast.


Ft. Dix Loses Recruits, Customers, Friends
This old Army post resembles a ghost town these days.
No more raw Army recruits are getting their hair shorn, or doing push-ups for snarling drill sergeants, or struggling to tell their left foot from their right.
Streets once filled with marching columns and throaty cadence calls are silent and empty.
Seventy-five years of tradition as the biggest Army boot camp in the Northeast formally ends here Wednesday, and Dix begins a new life as a summer and weekend training camp for reservists and National Guard members.


The Industry Is Set to Start A Global Self-Promotion
THE advertising executives who toil so diligently at selling products to skeptical shoppers will now try to sell the selling process itself.
The International Advertising Association is scheduled today to discuss the details of a worldwide pro bono campaign to explain the benefits of advertising to consumers while countering criticism of it as intrusive, coercive and manipulative.


Review/Television; Ill Wind From Buckingham Palace
On the list of subjects coveted by television movies, royal scandals rank just below murderous moms and serial killers.
The once titillating and now sad story of the Duke of Windsor and Wallis Simpson has gone through several television dramatizations.
Now, inevitably, it's time to exploit a new Buckingham Palace generation.
The first of several movies on tap this season can be seen tonight at 9 on NBC: "Fergie and Andrew: Behind the Palace Doors."
The title characters are, of course, the former Sarah Ferguson and Prince Andrew, the Duchess and Duke of York, who have separated.
They are played by Pippa Hinchley and Sam Miller.
She very much looks the part; he doesn't, being more moodily handsome than the original.


Jews Welcome the New Year 5753


After Election Day, a Revolution With a Mixed Message for Congress
While each Presidential candidate claims that only his election can bring change to the capital, change of historic proportions in another branch of government, Congress, is guaranteed.
Both parties' insiders and outsiders are already at work trying to shape those changes.
The next Congress will almost certainly have more new members than any other since 1949, when there were 134, and it is likely to reflect greater political change than any other since 1981.
But unlike most major shifts in the past, the partisan message will almost surely be mixed, with more Democrats in the Senate and more Republicans in the House.


Books of The Times; Suspense Story: Real Perils vs. Hippie Rebellion
Nothing but Blue Skies  By Thomas McGuane 349 pages.
Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $21.95.
Frank Copenhaver, the hero of Thomas McGuane's drolly engaging new novel, "Nothing but Blue Skies," is a businessman whose success had once "consisted in an ability to mix himself in the throng wholeheartedly while maintaining a kind of detachment that told him what the general currents were in what seemed to be pure Brownian movement." He knew ahead of time where people were going to move to, and when they got there they would have to buy from him.
He was on his way to becoming one of the rich men of Deadrock, Mont.


Sounds of Silence May Fill a Greenwich Village Relic


Canadian Firm Is Facing An Anti-Semitism Case
One of Canada's biggest and most prestigious brokerage firms, Scotia McLeod Inc., has been embarrassed by accusations of anti-Semitism in a $5 million complaint brought by the former vice president of its New York mergers and acquisitions department.
In the action, Simon J. Israel, a 37-year-old accountant educated at Cambridge and Yale universities, contends that he was under-compensated and then unlawfully dismissed about a year and a half ago because of his complaints about anti-Jewish conduct.


Market Place; What to Buy If Optimistic On Economy
SCOTT BLACK isn't happy to see that the Red Sox are in last place.
The last time they finished in last place, Herbert Hoover was in office expounding that prosperity was just around the corner.
And everybody knows what happened after that.
But Mr.
Black, the proprietor of Delphi Management Inc., a money management firm in Boston, says that while the Red Sox are hopeless, the current economy is not.
Social programs provide "built-in stimuli" to guard against a 30's-style depression, he says.


Zulu Leader Breaks Off Relations with Pretoria


A Prince on the Run In New York City
The Crown Prince of the Netherlands, also known as the Prince of Orange -- ALEX to his pals -- decided one day last February to run in the New York City Marathon.
So on Nov. 1, the Prince -- under an assumed name and surrounded by bodyguards and friends -- will take off from Staten Island.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN The Governor: Clinton in Arkansas -- A special report.; An Early Loss Cast Clinton As a Leader by Consensus
In a Victorian meeting room on the second floor of the Arkansas Capitol, the state's former governors, captured in oil paint, maintain an unblinking vigil.
Among these white-haired figures, Bill Clinton, looking oddly youthful and overeager, has already taken his place.
Mr.
Clinton has been Governor of Arkansas since 1982.
But as his portrait indicates, he is also a former governor; his first term ended in defeat in 1980.
More than his accomplishments, this defeat defined his identity.


Arthur Miller to Open The Y's Literary Series
Arthur Miller will read from his latest works to open the 54th season of literary readings at the 92d Street Y, on Lexington Avenue, on Oct. 5 at 8 P.M.
More than 30 events, including the first New York readings by Philip Roth (March 22) and Muriel Spark (May 22), are scheduled at the Unterberg Poetry Center, which has been named in honor of Bella Unterberg, a founder and president of the women's division of the Y.
The playwright A. R. Gurney will introduce Mr.
Miller, who will read from his plays "The Last Yankee," to be presented in January at the Manhattan Theater Club, and "The Ride Down Mount Morgan," which was presented in London in the spring.


Iron Study Findings Don't Affect Kids' Diet
To the Editor:
The findings of the recently completed Finnish study on the possible link between iron and heart attacks is certainly intriguing ("High Level of Iron Tied to Heart Risk," front page, Sept. 8).
However, it concerns me that the prominent coverage of this study might leave the impression that iron, in all cases and all populations, is harmful.


Monday Night Won't Ever Be the Same
One hundred years ago tonight, some people had an idea that you could actually play a football game under those newfangled electric lights.
Would they have gone ahead with it if they knew that, eventually, a good portion of America would be housebound on Monday nights in the fall?
That historic event will be recreated in Mansfield, Pa., between the same schools that played in 1892: Wyoming Seminary and Mansfield University.
There's a bureaucratic hitch, though, one that didn't exist way back then.


Bush Plan Protects Both Owl and Logging; You Can't Save Trees
To the Editor:
In "Ducking the Environment" (editorial, Sept. 6), you say there's no reason why the United States cannot save its old-growth forests.
You cannot "save" the forests.
They are called "old growth" precisely because they are old.
They are growing slowly and they are dying.
Like any living thing, trees do not live forever.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The weak dollar has turned the world's wealthiest economy into the Filene's basement of industrial countries.
Despite its rebound during the European currency crisis, the dollar, which fell to record lows this summer, remains extraordinarily weak by historical standards.
Indeed, the weakling dollar has made United States the least expensive rich country for people to visit and shop, and for businesses to manufacture their products.  [ Page A1. ]
Prices for natural gas are at their highest levels of any of the last seven Septembers.
Energy analysts say consumers who have benefited from falling or stable gas prices since 1984 should brace for higher winter heating bills.  [ D1. ]


Peru Cuts Inflation and Pays a Price
The Government of President Alberto K. Fujimori is being accused by its critics of overzealousness in its attack on inflation and budget deficit problems and its move toward a freer market economy.
In the last year alone it has created a budget surplus of $300 million by raising taxes and it has cut inflation sharply.
But it has also thrown the country into a deep recession.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
MONDAY: 7 A.M. ABC (Channel 7) "Good Morning America," taxes.


Essay; Reading J.A.B. III's Mind
I am being blamed for a mistake I never made this summer and a mistake I am not making this fall.
The media, which I have been cultivating for these 13 years, is poised to hold me responsible for the delay in taking over the campaign before the disastrous Houston convention. (Is "poised" a good word, as in "poised for recovery"? Sounds effeminate; better tell Zoellick to drop it.)


London Concert Season Opens Amid Bickering Over Rival Orchestras
September is the month all five of London's hotly competing orchestras set up seasonal shop.
On the 17th the London Philharmonic opened its season at the Royal Festival Hall, and on the 20th the Philharmonia followed suit at the same location.
No great news in that, one might think.
But optimists hope the Philharmonic's opener may in fact presage a profound change in London's orchestral life.
The concert signaled the beginning of a five-year agreement that makes the Philharmonic the resident orchestra of the South Bank Center, of which the Festival Hall is a part.


Enlist Hovercraft in New Ferry Service
To the Editor:
A Sept. 4 news article describes a plan proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for New York's High Speed Ferry Task Force.
The hope is to revive ferry services in the metropolitan area, including service from Long Island (Oyster Bay) as well as Rockland (Nyack) and Westchester (Yonkers and Rye).


Rough Around Edges And Raw to the Core
Dehydrated by 100-degree haze, not to mention smog that left "pain in my chest," quarterback Browning Nagle was ordered away from post-game interviews today to consume electrolyte fluids.
Instead, he renourished himself with a wad of tobacco.


Accounts
*
New York Switch Corp., New York, began a review on its account, after seven years at Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, because of a conflict between New York Switch's New York Cash Exchange electronic banking network and the agency's recently acquired Metropolitan Transportation Authority account.
Billings were not disclosed.
The conflict stems from M.T.A. plans to introduce an automated fare card with uses that may overlap those of the Nyce cards.


Effort Against Breast Cancer
Two Conde Nast monthly magazines are joining with two large advertisers to help increase awareness about breast cancer.
Glamour magazine has teamed with Hanes Hosiery for a five-year program on breast health awareness, aimed at women between 18 and 39.
Posters and booklets, carrying the theme "Good looks start with good health," will be distributed at sites like sorority houses, exercise studios and department stores.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
Aug.
Consumer Confidence . . .
Sept.
Farm Prices . . .
Aug.
Wednesday  New-Home Sales . . .
Aug.
Thursday  Construction Spending . . .
Aug.
Purchasing Mangers' Report . . .
Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Factory Orders . . .
Aug.
Employment . . .
Sept.


After Hurricane Duty, Military Unit Heads Home


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Focuses on Patriotism as He Warns of Clinton
President Bush leaned into the microphones attached to the platform of his campaign train this morning and warned of economic disaster for a small Michigan town that relies on a Lincoln Continental plant for survival.
If Gov.
Bill Clinton has his way with automobile pollution standards, Mr.
Bush shouted, he will "toss 40,000 auto workers out on the unemployment line right here in Michigan."


Torborg in Chicago: Very Good, but Not Perfect
Jeff Torborg's trying first season with the Mets has inevitably provoked speculation and wonder about the quality of his performance with the Chicago White Sox for three seasons.
There are, based on conversations with White Sox players and management officials, certain indisputable facts: Torborg's mixture of discipline and enthusiasm helped positively transform a young club and dreadful scene in Chicago.
His players played hard for him, compiling a 250-235 record while he was there, and there remains in that clubhouse an ample amount of goodwill and respect.
Torborg was named the American League's Manager of the Year in 1990.


Boy Accidentally Shoots A Cousin While Playing
Playing with a gun he thought he had unloaded, a 9-year-old boy accidentally shot and killed his 12-year-old cousin on Saturday.
The boys, who had been watching television, apparently got the gun out of the bedroom of a tenant who lived with them in a house on a well-kept street in Brooklyn, relatives said.
"You see stuff like this all the time, you know, I mean I seen this on the news countless times, seen it in the paper," said Oral Beckford, a 30-year-old city correction officer and the uncle of the dead boy, Shamel Strobert, a seventh grader at Meyer Levin Junior High School.
"When you come over here and look at a little kid lying there, he didn't live a life yet, you know." Shot in the Head
The 12-year-old was shot in the head about 11:30 P.M. on Saturday inside the home where the two boys lived on Albany Avenue in East Flatbush, said Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.


Brown's Pullout From Title Bout Leaves More Questions Than Answers
All week the billboards around this desert city promoted the notion of a slam-bang fight between Terry Norris and Simon Brown.
The idea was advanced through a photo of a fighter shown from the chest down, lying horizontal on the canvas, with this notation: "Look What's Going Down September 26."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI SOFTENS TONE IN POLICE DEBATE
Rudolph W. Giuliani met with civil rights leaders and issued a plea for a calmer, less divisive debate about how to police the Police Department.
Though he said he wanted to defuse the racially charged atmosphere between himself and Mayor David N. Dinkins, the bitter war of words between the likely mayoral rivals showed few signs of abating.
Mr.
Giuliani accused the Mayor of weak leadership, and Mr.
Dinkins and the president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association attacked each other on separate, recorded television programs.
B2.
ONE BOY'S GUNPLAY KILLS ANOTHER
Playing with a gun he thought he had unloaded, a 9-year-old boy fatally shot his 12-year-old cousin on Saturday.
The boys, who had been watching television, apparently got the gun out of the bedroom of a tenant who lived with them in Brooklyn, relatives said.
The police said the shooting was an accident.
"You see stuff like this all the time," said the uncle of the dead boy, Shamel Strobert.
"When you come over here and look at a little kid lying there, he didn't live a life yet, you know." B3.


Maddox Lends a Hand in Bronco Victory
Broncos 12, Browns 0
CLEVELAND, Sept. 27 (AP) -- The most important adjustment the Denver Broncos made after they were shut out last week may also have been one of the subtlest.
They changed their holder on field goals.
With rookie quarterback Tommy Maddox doing the holding, David Treadwell kicked four field goals today as the Broncos blanked the Cleveland Browns, 12-0.
Maddox was made the holder so Mike Horan could focus on his punting.


CHRONICLE
Former Representative SHIRLEY CHISHOLM and Dr.
GLORIA E. A. TOOTE were honored yesterday in Washington for their contributions to "the political progress of African-American women" by the National Political Congress of Black Women, which the two helped to organize.
Ms.
Chisholm, a New York Democrat who in 1972 became the first woman actively to run for President, was chairwoman of the organization from its founding in 1984 until last July.


Miami Journal; Drawbridge Slowly Vexes One and All
This is the youngest of the nation's major cities -- still four years shy of its centennial -- but it probably tries harder than most others to dazzle with constant newness.
Which other city would outline part of a new elevated people mover with purple neon lights?
Given such predilections, it is no wonder that Miami cannot wait to be rid of the old Brickell Avenue drawbridge over the Miami River.
This rusting, clanking, 63-year-old reminder of the city's not-so-distant past may have survived Hurricane Andrew with hardly a scratch, but it is slow and temperamental and so annoying that its day are numbered.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Rain Shows No Respect for Elders  Isao Aoki and Ray Floyd were looking forward to their matchup yesterday in the Senior PGA Tour's Nationwide Championship in Alpharetta, Ga.
It never happened.
Aoki won without picking up a golf club when rain washed out the final round.
Aoki's rain-shortened 36-hole victory was worth $120,000 and deprived Floyd of the opportunity to capture his second consecutive senior event.
Aoki, Japan's most accomplished player, turned 50 on Aug. 31, making him eligible for the Senior Tour.
He increased his senior earnings to $183,900, in four events.
Play began yesterday morning but was suspended at 12:50 P.M.
The round was canceled less than an hour later by the heavy rain, and the leaders never started play.
Aoki birdied four of his last five holes Saturday for a six-under-par 66 and two-round total of 136.
Floyd finished a stroke behind. (AP) Scranton Wins L.P.G.A.
Tourney: Nancy Scranton shot a seven-under-par 65 and came from seven strokes back to win the $500,000 Los Coyotes L.P.G.A.
Classic, her second victory in eight years on tour.
Scranton finished at 279, nine under and one stroke ahead of Meg Mallon, who posted a final-round 70 at Los Coyotes Country Club.
Jan Stephenson, leading after three rounds by two shots, slipped to a 75 and ended tied for fourth with Kathy Postlewait.
Stephenson, who earned $23,902, became the ninth player in L.P.G.A. history to go over the $2 million mark in earnings.
She has now won $2,014,186 since joining the L.P.G.A.
Tour in 1974. (AP) Jimenez Wins in Belgium: Miguel Angel Jimenez won a battle with Nick Faldo when the world's top-ranked golfer lost his touch down the stretch of the Belgian Piaget Open in Knokke.
It was the Spaniard's first European PGA Tour victory.
Jimenez, who broke the Royal Zoute course record with a 64 on Saturday, played squeaky-clean golf on the final day, finishing with a two-under-par 69 that gave him a total of 10-under 274.
He finished three strokes ahead of Barry Lane of England.
Faldo was leading by three strokes with 10 holes to play, but he found shrubbery, trees and thick rough from there on and finished in a tie for fifth at 279 with Sandy Lyle, Ian Woosnam and Per-Ulrik Johansson. (AP) TENNIS  Seles Makes Quick Work of Sabatini  Top-ranked Monica Seles, reeling off 11 straight games, overwhelmed second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 6-2, 6-0, yesterday and won her second consecutive Nichirei International Ladies Championship in Tokyo.
Sabatini was shut out after breaking Seles for a 2-1 lead in the first set of the hourlong match, played mostly from the baseline.
Seles drilled passing shots past her Argentine opponent on the few occasions when Sabatini rushed the net.
In the eighth game of the first set, Sabatini, ranked third in the world, began hitting backhand shots wide.
Her hitting remained erratic in the second set. (AP) AUTO RACING  Mansell Keeps Roaring Along  The world champion, Nigel Mansell of Britain, set a single-season victory record yesterday, leading from start to finish in the Portuguese Grand Prix in Estoril for his ninth triumph of the Formula One season.
Mansell, who is leaving Formula One at the end of the campaign to join the Indy-car series in the United States, had been tied with Ayrton Senna of Brazil at eight victories.
Senna also won eight times in 1988.
The triumph, in a Williams-Renault, was Mansell's 30th over all.
He ranks third on the career list, behind three-time world champions Alain Prost of France, who has 44 victories, and Senna, of Brazil, who has 33.
Earlier, Williams-Renault announced that Prost, who has not driven this year, would return to racing next year to drive for Williams-Renault.
Mansell, who clinched the world title three races ago, started from the pole and finished in 1 hour 34 minutes 46.659 seconds.
Gerhard Berger of Austria was second in a McLaren-Honda, 37.533 seconds behind, with the McLaren-Honda driven by Senna third, more than a minute back. (AP) Too Wet for the Wheels: The Goody's 500 Nascar race at Martinsville Speedway in Virginia was rained out and rescheduled for today. (AP) HORSE RACING  Who Else in Rain but Argyle Lake?
Argyle Lake beat out Whiz Along by a neck in Belmont Park's $75,000 Hudson Handicap yesterday.
Majesty's Time was third, a nose back, in the field of nine, all 3 years old and up.
Ridden by Herb McCauley and carrying 113 pounds, Argyle Lake won for the fourth time in 10 starts this year.
He covered seven furlongs on a sloppy track in 1:242/5 to earn $54,900 for James Riccio.
Argyle Lake, who ran coupled with Applebred, returned $17.60, $8.80 and $4.40 for $2 across the board. (AP)


Bridge
There is no way to identify the world's best female player, but Kerri Shuman of Manhattan would be on anyone's short list for that honor.
She has determination, concentration, stamina, experience and an impeccable technique which was demonstrated on the diagramed deal.
The occasion was the Master Mixed Teams at the Summer Nationals in Toronto in July, and she sat South.
As this was Board-a-Match scoring, it was important to make as many tricks as possible.
After a spade lead she guessed right by playing low from the dummy, and East won with the ace.


INSIDE
Military Plane Crashes In Nigeria, Killing 163
A Nigerian military plane crashed shortly after taking off from Lagos, killing all 163 aboard, officials said.
Many of the victims were said to be officers heading back to an elite academy in a northern province.
Page A6.
Quarrels Delay Aid to Russia
Red tape and squabbles over debt repayment have seriously slowed Western aid to Russia's teetering economy, officials say.
Page A7.
An Upstart Stumbles


Let the Senate Alone Impeach
Who says nobody can tell the U.S.
Senate what to do?
Judge Stanley Sporkin of the U.S.
District Court in Washington has just instructed the legislators to hold a new impeachment trial for another Federal judge.
He would require the entire Senate to hear all the evidence instead of leaving that task to a committee.
Judge Sporkin's ruling would disrupt the Senate's ability to conduct its other business -- and is almost certainly judicial overreach.
Federal judges have no more power than anyone else to tell Congress how to handle impeachments.


Bush Plan Protects Both Owl and Logging; Yes to Private Exports
To the Editor:
"Bush, in Far West, Sides With Loggers" (news article, Sept. 15) was misinformed on a key element of the timber-policy debate.
The President did not have to promise to mandate that logs from Federal forests in Washington State be processed locally because they are already so restricted and have been since 1973.
He did act to tighten restrictions on exports of logs from Washington State-owned timberlands from 75 percent to 100 percent.


Cable Bill Advocate Divides and Conquers
Gene Kimmelman, a tireless and unflappable consumer advocate, brushes aside criticism from those who think he is too pragmatic and too willing to team up with moneyed interests.
"There are people who say there are good guys and bad guys, and you should never deal with the bad guys," he said.
"I don't work that way. I've found it's very important to not take on the industry all by yourself. You need allies."


Powell Delivers a Resounding No On Using Limited Force in Bosnia
Reflecting a debate about the use of United States forces in regional conflicts, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is questioning even the most limited forms of military intervention to protect the Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina or to try to stop the fighting.
In a lengthy and sometimes emotional interview, the Chairman, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, offered a strong defense of his philosophy that military force is best used to achieve a decisive victory and for the first time publicly explained his reluctance to intervene in Bosnia.


Germany's Asylum Code Fuels Racism
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 6 news article on the outbreak of violence by neo-Nazis against foreigners in Germany points out that the riots are a byproduct of widespread hostility against refugees in the general population.
It is also worth mentioning that both the German Government and the country's political parties have done very little to discourage these convulsions of racism.


To Promote a City For Sake of Goodwill
In 10 minutes, tell us why New York is the world's greatest sports city.
That is the assignment BUD GREENSPAN is finishing up this week: a film that will promote New York as the best place to host the 1998 Goodwill Games.
At first, it seemed like a joke to jaded New Yorkers.
New York has never hosted anything remotely like an Olympics, and it is a massive undertaking.
But the city is one of four finalists, along with St.
Louis, Miami and Dallas.


Manley Puts Woes Down in Writing
Once again DEXTER MANLEY is at a crossroads -- or is it roadblock? -- in his often-troubled life.
Manley was the quarterback-chasing defensive end of the Washington Redskins who appeared two years ago before Congress and admitted he had only recently learned to read.


Weak Dollar Makes U.S. World's Bargain Bazaar
The declining dollar has turned the world's wealthiest economy into the Filene's basement of industrial countries.
Despite its rebound during the European currency crisis, the dollar, which fell to record lows this summer, remains extraordinarily weak by historical standards.
To the Swiss businessman just off the Concorde, the $120 tab for a room at the Plaza looks like the lunch check back home.
To the teen-ager from Paris, the $9 sticker on the tape at Tower Records and the $30 tag on a pair of Levi 501's read like big signs that say buy one, get one free.


Winning Isn't Enough to Be No. 1
Miami's flimsy 1-point victory over Arizona cost the Hurricanes their No. 1 ranking in the college polls, a drop Coach Dennis Erickson had expected.
"I wouldn't be real impressed if I was a pollster," Erickson said after his team's 8-7 victory at home over Arizona, which had tied Oregon State and lost to Washington State in its previous two games.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Clinton Uses Farm Speech to Begin New Offensive
Stripped across the top of The Des Moines Register this morning was a banner headline: "Clinton Explains Plans for Rural U.S."
The accompanying article, based on an interview with Mr.
Clinton, was long and thoroughly positive in tone, as it outlined what the newspaper called the Democratic Presidential nominee's "plan to help rural America."


California Governor Vetoes Civil Rights Bill
A civil rights bill promising new job and housing protection to homosexuals, the disabled and people who do not speak English was vetoed Saturday by Gov.
Pete Wilson, who said other laws, including a gay-rights bill he signed Friday, give adequate protection.
The rejected bill, sponsored by the Assembly Speaker, Willie Brown, included gay-rights language that Mr.
Wilson vetoed last year.
On Friday, Mr.
Wilson, a Republican, signed a similar bill outlawing job discrimination against gay men and lesbians.


Th-Th-That's All, Folks! Yanks Lose Home Finale
There was a mixture of comedy, frustration and reality yesterday when the Yankees concluded the home portion of their 1992 schedule with a game against the Blue Jays.
The Yankees did not rejoice about any of the elements that prevailed on a wet Sunday.
If the Yankees were looking to send their dedicated fans home for the winter with neat memories, they failed.
All that the spectators left with, it seemed, was soggy clothing after they endured a two-hour rain delay and soggy memories of the Blue Jays' 12-2 hammering of the Yankees.


New Attacks On Oversight Of the Police
Saying he wanted to defuse the racially charged atmosphere between Mayor David N. Dinkins and himself, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday met with civil rights leaders and issued a plea for a cooler, calmer, less divisive debate about how to police the Police Department.
But the bitter war of words showed little sign of abating.
Within minutes of making his plea early yesterday afternoon, Mr.
Giuliani -- a likely Republican candidate in next year's mayoral race -- accused Mr.
Dinkins of showing weak leadership on race issues and of causing worsened relations between the Police Department and minority communities.


Big Drop In Orders For Tools
Orders for American-made machine tools plunged 23.3 percent in August from the previous month's level, according to a monthly survey by the industry's trade association.
The level of machine tools orders gyrates wildly from one month to the next, analysts said, but they added that the August numbers indicated signs of sluggishness remaining in the nation's manufacturing industries, which appear reluctant to spend money to upgrade their plants and equipment.


44 Seconds to Ejection: MacLean Out of Victory
John MacLean returned for the Devils tonight in a 6-3 exhibition victory over the Islanders, but he lasted only 44 seconds.
He was ejected from the game in his first shift for retaliating.
MacLean got back in a game three days short of a year after reconstructive surgery for a tear of the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee.
He was injured in an exhibition game against the Islanders here last Sept. 30.


In Hell's Kitchen (Not Clinton), Tammany Still Reigns
THE morning after James R. McManus delivered the votes that cinched Jerrold Nadler's nomination for Congress, Mr.
McManus was back at his paying job at the Board of Elections doing what a party leader is supposed to do best: making judges.
"I have three out of four and I'm working on the fourth," Mr.
McManus said, referring to his candidates for judgeships.
"You may want to call it power or whatever, but it's just helping friends. The funny part of it is, there's nothing in it for me. It's the game."


On the Field of Play, a Life Is Remembered
Lincoln defeated South Shore, 30-7, yesterday.
But South Shore had to cope with a much more serious loss early last week in the stabbing death of a sophomore fullback, and the killing had given the team a rare sort of perspective.
"It's only a football game," Marty Senall, the South Shore coach, told his players yesterday.
"You played as hard as you can play. But it's just a game."


A Basic Idea in Paterson
Several years ago, an aggressive principal named Joe Clark brought nationwide attention to this city's school system with a baseball bat and tough love.
And though he inspired a movie and focused debate on the problems of turning around troubled urban schools, the district continued on a downward slide.
Last year, the State Education Department stepped in, seizing control of the district, removing the administration and installing a new one.
Only one other district in the state, Jersey City, had suffered the same blatant declaration of utter failure.


4 Months Into Strike, Pittsburgh Dailies Struggle Against Uncertain Future
An eerie calm, disturbed by the sporadic crackle of a police band radio, fills the newsrooms of The Pittsburgh Press and The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Ears still turn toward the radio, and pencils jot down a note or an address.
But there is little reason for reporters to grab a telephone or rush to the scene of a crime.
Because for yet another day, there will be no daily newspaper.


Dividend Meetings


Seoul Chief Begins Visit to China, Looking for Help to Reunify Korea
President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea arrived in China today for the first state visit between two one-time enemies, and he quickly made it clear that he hoped to use Beijing to help overcome the most bitter legacy of the cold war in North Asia, the division of the Korean peninsula.
Mr.
Roh landed here this afternoon with an entourage of nearly 500 Government officials, business leaders and journalists for what is regarded as a landmark in creating a new order in the region.
It was a cool, clear afternoon, the streets filled with families and shoppers enjoying a holiday-like atmosphere.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Politics and College Coaches
LATE last week, someone jokingly asked Joe Paterno whether it was significant that the President of the United States had asked the Penn State football coach and not the university's president to introduce him during a visit to the campus.
On Thursday, Paterno, the Nittany Lions' 65-year-old coach, introduced President Bush to 10,000 spectators in State College, in what was billed as a "Beat Maryland Rally."


Jockeying Is Already Intense For Seat Abrams Hasn't Left
Election Day is more than five weeks away and nobody here knows whether Robert Abrams, the State Attorney General, will succeed in his quest to become a United States Senator.
But here in the State Capitol, the uncertainty hasn't stopped a gaggle of politicians from jockeying for his job.
Several of those politicians are engaged in intensive backstage lobbying for the right to succeed him, while others have discreetly left word of their interest with the two people with the most influence in the selection process: Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


In End, Neither Rain Nor Sleep Nor Lack of Game Deters Fans
There were two ways for Giants fans to spend this fourth Sunday of the National Football League season, designated as a day off for teams in the Eastern Division of the National Conference.
They could sit home, safely out of the rain, and catch a few games on television -- including one involving the 0-3 Jets.
Or they could head to Giants Stadium for the "N.F.L. Experience" and get relatively drenched.
A healthy number of Giants fans -- several hundred, in fact -- chose to get soaked.
Lisa Stouffer of Hoboken explained.


U.S. SAYS HOSPITALS DEMAND PHYSICIANS PAY FOR REFERRALS
Federal investigators say that hospitals, under severe financial stress, are increasingly looking to doctors as a source of additional money and demanding payments for the referral of patients, in apparent violation of Federal Medicare law.
A recent study by the Department of Health and Human Services said there had been "a proliferation of contracts" requiring such payments by doctors in return for the hospitals' efforts to direct patients to them.
Doctors who refuse to make the payments say they sometimes lose the right to practice at the hospital, a particular burden to radiologists and other specialists who are based in hospitals.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Caraustar Industries Inc., Austell, Ga., 10.3 million common shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Citation Computer Systems Inc., Maryland Heights, Mo., 1.52 million common shares.
William Blair &amp; Co.
Consolidated Pots Inc., two million common shares. Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Co.
Electronics for Imaging Inc., San Bruno, Calif., three million common shares.
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
4th Dimension Software Ltd., Israel, 2.55 million ordinary shares, 1.9 million in the U.S.
Lehman Brothers.
Just Toys Inc., New York, one million common shares. Gruntal &amp; Co.
Kemet Corp., Simpsonville, S.C., an initial public offering of 6 million common shares, 4.8 million in the U.S. and Canada.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrettes.
Mayday USA Inc., Houston, an initial public offering of 1.2 million common shares.
Access Securities Inc.
Perrigo Co., Allegan, Mich., 4.5 million common shares, 3.6 million in the U.S.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Plaza Homes Mortgage Corp., Santa Anna, Calif., five million common shares.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Puget Sound Power and Light, Bellevue, Wash., two million common shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Skandia America Corp., New York, 7.2 million common shares, 5.4 million in the U.S.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Takecare Inc., Concord, Calif., 1.6 million common shares. First Boston Corp.
Todhunter International Inc., West Palm Beach, Fla., 1.5 million common shares.
Dain Bosworth Inc.
Universal Standard Medical Labs Inc., Southfield, Mich., two million common shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Varlen Corp., Naperville, Ill., 1.8 million common shares.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Washington Energy Co., Seattle, 2.75 million common shares.
Lehman Brothers. (Source: MCM CorporateWatch.)


Amy Fisher To Stay Week In Hospital For New Tests
Amy Fisher, the Long Island teen-ager who shot and wounded the wife of her alleged 36-year-old lover, admitted herself to the psychiatric ward at Huntington Hospital today, as she continues to recover from two suicide attempts, her lawyer said.
Marie Romney, a spokeswoman for the hospital, said that Miss Fisher would remain hospitalized for at least a week to undergo psychiatric observation and examination.
"She's in good health physically, but mentally she is somewhat withdrawn and depressed," Ms.
Romney said.


BASEBALL: A Season Is Lost. But Why?; Accountability Is Issue for Mets
The hunt for a new manager was supposed to be an executive search of the most elaborate and sophisticated sort.
There wasn't room for another mistake, and so the process, the Mets pledged, would leave no margin for error.
The search ended after one interview.


Treasury Will Sell Only Bills At Auctions for This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular auction of new three- and six-month bills.
By late on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.79 percent, and the six-month bill was 2.82 percent.


Romanians Vote but Runoff Is Expected
Under the eyes of more than 500 foreign and 8,000 domestic observers, Romanians voted today in parliamentary and presidential elections for the second time since the violent December 1989 uprising that ousted the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu.
Despite opposition calls for a clean break with Romania's Communist past, initial projections gave the lead to the incumbent President, Ion Iliescu, a former high-ranking Communist Party official under Mr.
Ceausescu.
But the projections, based on interviews of voters leaving the polls, suggested that he had failed to attract the majority of votes needed to avoid a runoff.


Miscellany
*
Benetton S.p.A. signed a three-year contract with Artkraft Strauss Sign Corp. to rent a 6,000-square-foot billboard on the Embassy Suites Hotel at 47th Street and Broadway in Times Square, to advertise its magazine, Colors.


People
*
Peter Angelos was named executive vice president and creative director at Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco, succeeding Jay Jasper, who left.
Mr.
Angelos was previously a senior vice president and group creative director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding San Francisco, where he worked on campaigns for clients like Levi Strauss and Mazda. *
Michael J. Jeary, president and chief operating officer at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, San Francisco, was named to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding Ron Colnett, who continues as chairman.


Oh, When Will It Ever Change?
Twice the New Orleans Saints had the ball deep near the San Francisco 49er goal line in the closing minutes tonight.
Twice they endured frustration, losing another close and exciting fight to their prime nemesis, this one by 16-10 before 68,591 fans in the Superdome.
It always seems to wind up this way for the Saints against the 49ers.
Great start.
Lousy finish.


East Coast, West Coast, Jets Can't Win
A victory against the Rams here this afternoon would have stanched the flow of Jets losses and would have been a nice salve for the team's wounded confidence.
But instead of providing comfort and aid, the Rams added to the Jets' problems with an 18-10 victory.


N.J. Asks for Trouble By Cutting TB Funds
To the Editor:
Congratulations to New York City for understanding that to turn around the dismal rise in resistant tuberculosis cases, sufficient resources must be appropriated to give directly observed therapy to patients unlikely to cooperate with treatment ("Pill Monitors Make Sure TB Patients Swallow," news article, Sept. 5).


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans; Bush Cites Arkansas Crime In Attack on Clinton Record
President Bush made a new bid for support today on an issue that had served him well in the past, saying he would reduce crime in a second term by compelling Congress to pass a stalled anti-crime bill.
Declaring that the nation must now "win the peace," having won the cold war, the President listed an array of increased penalties and crimes that he said he would bring under Federal jurisdiction.
He contrasted these proposals, most of which he has offered before, to the record that Gov.
Bill Clinton has compiled on crime in Arkansas.


Statue Cleaning Is an Olympian Task


Executive Changes
INFONET, El Segundo, Calif., appointed John C. Hoffman executive vice president of communications sales and service.
MORAN, STAHL &amp; BOYER, New York, a management consulting unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, named Daniel Malachuk Jr. executive vice president.
MORGAN STANLEY GROUP, New York, named Hans Peters managing director.
He will be based in Frankfurt.
MTV, New York, a cable television network and unit of Viacom International Inc., named Carole Robinson senior vice president of media relations.
RAINBOW PROGRAMMING HOLDINGS INC., Woodbury, L.I., a unit of Cablevision Systems Corp., named James L. Dolan chief executive and Sharon L. Patrick president and chief operating officer.
TEXTRON, Providence, R.I., an aerospace, commercial products and financial services company, named Thomas P. Hollowell executive vice president, corporate development.
UNV BUSINESS INFORMATION SERVICES INC., New York, named Winthrop Stevens senior vice president for media and agency/advertising sales.


Philistines Were Cultured After All, Say Archeologists
AFTER all these centuries of calumny, the Philistines are finally having some good things said about them.
They were not, it seems, deserving of that withering epithet: Philistine.
Archeologists are uncovering increasing evidence that the Philistines, arch foes of the Israelites in biblical times whose name became synonymous with barbarity and boorishness, were actually the creators of fine pottery and grand architecture, clever urban planners and cosmopolitan devotees of the grape.
If anything, the Israelites, at the time mostly shepherds and farmers in the hills, were the less-sophisticated and -cultured folk.


Corrections
A sports article on Sept. 21 about Mike Ditka, the Chicago Bears' coach, misstated the New York Giants' history against the Bears in Chicago.
Before this season, the Giants had not won a football game in Chicago since 1962, when the Bears played at Wrigley Field.


Corrections
Pictures of Rear Adms.
George W. Davis and John E. Gordon on Friday, with an article about a Pentagon report on sexual harassment in the Navy, were reversed in some copies.
It was Admiral Gordon who wore glasses.


Marge R. Manderson, Civil Rights Advocate, 64
Marge R. Manderson, a program officer with the Southern Regional Council for more than 35 years, died Wednesday at her home in Atlanta.
She was 64.
Miss Manderson died of bone cancer, said Ellen Spears, a spokeswoman for the council.


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sports of The Times; Let Nagle Learn How To Cope
THE young Jets quarterback had thrown five interceptions in a 28-28 tie in Oakland the week before and now he had thrown two more interceptions in a 42-27 loss in San Diego.
If the young Jets quarterback persisted in throwing interceptions, what would the Jets' coach do?
"Get rid of him," the Jets' coach said.
The young Jets quarterback was Joe Namath, the Jets' coach was Weeb Ewbank and the year was 1966.
Not that Ewbank could ever have persuaded the late Sonny Werblin, then the Jets' impresario, to trade their franchise player who two seasons later would provide a tray of Super Bowl III rings for his teammates.


In Some Species, Eating Your Own Is Good Sense
CANNIBALISM, at least among animals, may not be as bad as it sounds.
Biologists once considered the eating of an individual's own species a behavioral mistake made by animals that were unnaturally overcrowded or hungry.
But after new analyses, scientists have begun to see the consumption of one's fellow beings as a shrewd strategy for survival.
In fact, among some species, cannibalism is so common that it has molded some of the animal world's most elaborate social behaviors, including courtship and parental care.


Czech Leader Regrets the Rift With Slovakia
As Czechoslovakia moves closer to a split into two nations, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus of the Czech Republic has expressed deep regret over the breakup and confidence that the resulting two sovereign nations will continue a relationship of special closeness.
Mr.
Klaus has held talks over the breakup with Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar of Slovakia, an advocate of Slovak independence.
The two sides have agreed that they will split on Jan. 1, dissolving the state that was founded in 1918 after the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.


Hard Times for Women in Construction
Lisa Narducci gets up at 5 every morning to commute to the Coney Island Water Pollution Control Project.
With the acrid stench of sewage rising around her, she drills and saws through plywood, crawls over hot concrete and lifts wooden planks -- all part of her day's work as a carpenter.
There are no separate changing rooms for her or the other five women on the job.
There are no separate bathrooms.
The trailers have pin-ups of naked women on the wall.
Sometimes, a co-worker or supervisor says he doubts she can do her job.


Surprise Upsets Theories of Comets' Uniformity
IF comets share the same birthplace and if that birthplace is homogeneous, they should be as smoothly uniform as well-mixed cake batter.
Those assumptions underlie the prevailing theories of comets' origins, but a recent study has turned up what appears to be a lump in the batter.
In an analysis of the spectra, or chemical fingerprints, of nearly a score of comets, one called Yanaka (1988r) turned out to be drastically depleted in two charged carbon molecules: C2 and cyanide.
"The comet is really totally different from the others," said Dr.
Uwe Fink of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the University of Arizona in Tucson.
He reported the study in the current issue of the journal Science.


Communications &amp; Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


By Design; Solving the Shoe Problem
It's fun to slink around in a longer skirt, but first you have to solve the shoe problem.
The success of the new silhouette hangs not on the hem length, but on the shoes that balance it.
Women who wear high heels are all set.
They can put on any of the new platform-sole shoes and look great.
But what about those who can't make it through a whole day on towering heels?
It takes some searching; take your new long skirt with you.


Lomas &amp; Nettleton Mortgage Investors reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Symphony Orchestra  Manhattan School of Music
Student orchestras like the Manhattan School of Music's are collections of individual skills less accustomed to techniques of togetherness.
Here is where older and wiser conductorial hands can step in, urging the various sections of instruments to listen to one another, maintain a common intonation and step forward or draw back according to the music's needs.


Bosnia, in Arms Plea to U.N., Says Sarajevo May Fall Soon
The Bosnian Government has sent an urgent appeal to the United Nations Security Council warning that Sarajevo is in "imminent danger" of falling to besieging Serbian nationalist troops unless Bosnian forces are exempted from a United Nations arms embargo.
The appeal said that Serbian military moves, including an increase in tank strength in Grbavica, an area of the city that is barely a mile from key government installations like the presidency, indicated that Sarajevo was facing "what is likely to be the final assault."


If Statistics Are for Losers . . . Here's What 0-4 Looks Like
Some coaches say statistics are for losers.
It is a cliche that aptly fits the Jets.
They have not won in four regular-season games after going 5-0 in preseason games.
A peek inside the numbers one-fourth of the way through the season tells a lot about where the Jets are and why they aren't where they expected to be.
GIVEAWAYS LEAD TAKEAWAYS
Last season, the Jets finished with 37 takeaways and 25 giveaways, which came out to a plus-12 turnover differential and ranked them No. 2 in the American Football Conference and No. 4 in the National Football League.


Centennial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Forest at South Pole
Fossils from a forest that grew nearly 300 million years ago in the Antarctic indicate that the region was warmer and more supportive of plant life than scientists had previously thought.
A study recently published in the journal Science showed that the fossils came from deciduous trees, which characteristically grow in temperate and markedly seasonal climates, blooming in spring and losing their leaves in winter.
The fossil forest flourished during the Permian period on Mount Achernar within about 400 miles of the South Pole, making it nearer either pole than any previously found.


Chief Financial Officer Quits Abruptly at Goodyear
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that its chief financial officer had resigned abruptly.
The move intensified speculation at the world's second-largest tire producer, behind Groupe Michelin of France, about who will replace Stanley C. Gault, the Goodyear chairman, who is now a third of the way through a three-year contract.
The company said that Oren G. Shaffer, who is also the company's executive vice president, would retire to "pursue other interests" and that the resignation will become effective on Thursday.
The 50-year-old Mr.
Shaffer will be replaced by Samir F. Gibara, who will also retain the position of vice president for strategic planning and business development.
Other Opportunities Sought
In a telephone interview from the company's headquarters in Akron, Ohio, Mr.
Shaffer said that he had long looked to move on to other opportunities but that until recently the timing had not seemed suitable.
"We had a period where it wasn't possible for the chief financial officer to move on," he said.
"But the company is on much stronger foundation and I've accomplished a great deal here."


Data Translation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


In Their Own Words
GOV.
BILL CLINTON On the NBC news program "Today" in response to a question yesterday about the lack of Presidential debates.
"I have not played any games. There is a recognized, bipartisan debate commission. The co-chairman of it is Gerald Ford, a Republican former President. Frank Fahrenkopf is on it. He worked in three of George Bush's national cam;paigns. They have been the recognized sponsor of this. They made a recommendation. There was just as much Republican input as Democratic. And I accepted it.


Mortgage Industry Bill Withdrawn in House
A senior House Democrat today withdrew from the House floor a bill to regulate the two companies that dominate the home mortgage industry.
The move came three days after one of the companies reversed itself and began lobbying vigorously against the measure.
With Congress scheduled to adjourn at the end of the week, the withdrawal hurts the prospects for passing any legislation to regulate the multibillion-dollar market where existing mortgages are traded.
But Congressional aides and a Treasury Department official said that the bill still might be put back on the House agenda.


Mr. Bush Sells Out Arms Control
One happy consequence of the end of the cold war is that defense budgets around the world are shrinking.
One unhappy consequence is that nations are scrambling to peddle arms abroad in order to keep their arms makers in business.
The U.S. is not alone in this ruinous practice.
Russia, China and France, among others, are eager sellers.
But America's arms sales dwarf anyone else's.
So, too, does its capacity to insure a more stable world by restraining sales.


Manufacturers Urged to Make Environmentalism a Goal
When making commercial products, American companies should consider the effects on the environment at every stage in the manufacture and life of the product, the Office of Technology Assessment says in a new report.
Instead of focusing solely on the elimination of pollutants and solid waste that result from products, manufacturers should use a design process in which protecting the environment becomes a goal rather than a constraint, the Congressional agency said in the report released Friday.


Don't Undermine Basic Research
Biomedical research is facing its annual mo ment of truth the House-Senate conference tomorrow to decide on appropriations for the National Institutes of Health.
This year, basic research faces the ax.
That would hurt medicine.
The economy, the deficit and the election will affect N.I.H.'s portion of the dwindling Federal pie.
There is another reason to worry: the view on Capitol Hill that more of the N.I.H. budget should go for predetermined goals like cures for specific diseases and improved competitiveness in biotechnology.


Fall in Medical Care America's Stock Continues
Seeking to stop a free fall in shares of Medical Care America Inc., company executives conferred with analysts and big investors for over an hour yesterday morning.
But the talk seemed to do little good: the shares, which on Friday dropped by more than half, losing roughly $1 billion in market value, kept heading downward, dropping $2.875 more yesterday, to $22.125.
Trading in the stock did not begin on the New York Stock Exchange until after the conference call was completed at 10:50 A.M..


Critic's Notebook; Today's Anxiety Stalks a Revival Of a Musical Satire on Politics
At each performance of its new production of "Of Thee I Sing," the 1931 Gershwin musical satirizing Presidential politics, Arena Stage takes a straw poll of the audience's own Presidential preferences.
So far Clinton-Gore is whipping Bush-Quayle by an 8-to-1 margin -- no surprise in this overwhelmingly Democratic city.
But the Arena's "Of Thee I Sing" and the audience response to it send a more complicated message about the mood inside the Beltway.
While major change may or may not be in the wings for the capital, one senses that the correlative of change, anxiety, has already arrived.
Scattered laughs still survive in George Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind's script for "Of Thee I Sing," but the most telling passage in this rendition may be an exchange that falls flat: The house lapsed into dead silence when the show's preening President, John P. Wintergreen (Gary Beach), and his hapless Vice President, Alexander Throttlebottom (David Marks), exchanged a pointed volley about the difficulty of winning a second term.
However devoutly the 8-to-1 audience here may wish for a new Administration, the prospect of that new order was greeted in the theater as a sobering jolt back into an uncertain, unnerving reality, not as an occasion for the happy release of laughter.


Voices of Europe: Need for Germany Far Outweighs Any Fears
Many of Europe's most painful memories revolve around Germany, and in recent weeks it has seemed as if history was being recalled not by armies, but by German economic might.
Where Britain, France and Italy once resisted, were occupied by or were led to ruin by Hitler's Germany, this time, it seemed to some Europeans, their currencies were facing the power of the Bundesbank just as their forebears once confronted or were subdued by the Wehrmacht.


Chess
With their exhibition match in Yugoslavia scheduled to resume tomorrow, Bobby Fischer is leading Boris Spassky 5-2.
This is admirable for a player who deserted the arena 20 years ago and is only now making a comeback.
But one must temper praise by the consideration that Spassky is 101st on the International Chess Federation's current list of best players.
If Fischer goes on to win, continuing to improve as he did in the last four games, he may be ready to take on the heavyweights.
It has already been rumored that he has put out feelers to Anatoly Karpov, and the former world champion would be a good choice.
Karpov got Fischer's world title by default in 1975 when the American refused to play under federation rules.
At the time, Karpov chased Fischer around the globe trying to persuade him to play.


Ramtek Corp. reports earnings for Year June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Volunteers; Perot Representatives: Their Cause Is the Texan, Even When He Disappoints
When he was a teen-ager, John Bishop was a page for Senator Barry Goldwater, the conservative Republican from Arizona.
In his 20's, he was a self-described "hippy" hanging out in San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district.
He is now a businessman from Sante Fe, N.M., who says he is willing to stick by his new cause -- Ross Perot -- no matter how much the Dallas billionaire may have disappointed him in the past or might again in the future.
"Whatever I believe in, I become very committed to," said Mr.
Bishop, one of the 52 representatives of Mr.
Perot's grass-roots organization that have gathered here.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.  reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 12


Morris Is Good-Luck Arm, And Toronto Will Rub It
Having barreled through September at a maddening pace, many players heading toward the post-season must be doing a great deal of soul-searching.
For instance, is Oakland's Rickey Henderson wondering if he can sponge some of the tarnish off his reputation with a repeat of his great 1989 post-season performance?
Is Atlanta's Tom Glavine harboring memories of merely routine performances in the 1991 post-season and praying for renewed invincibility?
Is Pittsburgh's Barry Bonds hoping that the slumps that haunt the most -- those after the regular season -- do not find him for a third straight year?


Police Dept. Report Assails Officers in New York Rally
Acting Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday ordered 42 New York City police officers disciplined, in a report that condemned both on- and off-duty behavior in the recent demonstration at City Hall.
The strongly worded 13-page interim report assailed the actions of officers who took over the steps of City Hall and blocked traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge as "unruly, mean-spirited and perhaps criminal."


Raiders Cry Uncle As They Fall to 0-4
The biggest crowd in Kansas City in 20 years got exactly what it wanted tonight, watching the Los Angeles Raiders plunge to their worst record in 28 years.
Quarterback Dave Krieg scored two touchdowns and Barry Word muscled up the middle for 125 yards as the Chiefs (3-1) beat the Raiders 27-7, leaving the Silver and Black with an 0-4 record for the first time since 1964 and putting any hope of saving their season severely in doubt.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS
Francisco Clavet and Javier Sanchez of Spain needed three sets apiece to win first-round matches in the Campionati Internazionali di Sicilia tournament in Palermo, Sicily, yesterday.
Clavet, the fourth-seeded player, defeated Claudio Pistolesi of Italy, 6-1, 1-6, 6-3, and the eighth-seeded Sanchez, beat Rodolphe Gilbert of France, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4, in the $315,000 clay-court event.
In other matches, Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina beat Paul Kilderry of Australia, 6-3, 6-2, and Thierry Champion of France breezed past Francisco Roig of Spain, 6-4, 6-2.
Carlos Costa of Spain, the top-seeded player, starts today against Lars Johnson of Sweden, along with second-seeded Sergio Bruguera and third-seeded Emilio Sanchez, both of Spain.
Bruguera faces Jordi Burillo and Sanchez plays Massimo Valeri. (AP) Stark of Oregon Gains: Jonathan Stark of Medford, Ore., beat third-seeded Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan, 7-5, 6-4, yesterday in the opening round of the $260,000 Queensland Open tournament in Brisbane, Australia.
Stark, ranked 92d in the world, took slightly more than two hours to defeat Matsuoka.
A 10th-game service break in the second set clinched the verdict.
Stark turned professional last year after two years at Stanford University, where he was a singles and doubles all-American both seasons.
In another upset at the Milton Tennis Center, Guillaume Raoux of France defeated fourth-seeded Sandon Stolle, a Miami-based Australian, 6-4, 6-3.
Stolle, son of former Australian tennis great Fred Stolle, hit on only 43 percent of his first serves.
Top-seeded Henrik Holm of Sweden beat Richard Fromberg of Australia, 2-6, 7-5, 6-4; seventh-seeded Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands beat New Zealander Brett Steven, 5-7, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4, and eighth-seeded Jim Grabb of the Tucson, Ariz., beat Jamie Morgan of Australia, 6-4, 6-3.
Gianluca Pozzi of Italy, the tournament's defending champion and second-seeded player, will start play today with a first-round match against Patrick McEnroe. (AP) Martinez and Sukova Advance: Second-seeded Conchita Martinez and fifth-seeded Helena Sukova advanced to the second round of a $225,000 women's tournament in Leipzig, Germany, with straight-set victories yesterday.
Martinez, of Spain, defeated Isabell Demongeot of France, 6-2, 6-4, and Sukova, of Czechoslovakia, eliminated Meike Babel of Germany, 6-3, 6-1.
Alexia Dechaume of France needed more than three hours to beat Wiltrud Probst of Germany, 5-7, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4.
Another German, Claudia Porwik, defeated Petra Holubova of Czechoslovakia, 3-6, 6-0, 6-2.
Radka Zrubakova of Czechoslovakia beat Katrina Adams of the United States, 6-3, 6-2.
Top-seeded Steffi Graf begins play today. (AP) AUTO RACING  Bodine Edges to First Victory
Geoff Bodine held off Rusty Wallace to earn his first victory in nearly a year yesterday, taking the rain-delayed Goody's 500 Nascar race at Martinsville Speedway in Virginia.
For the second straight race, it was a late gamble that brought victory to a team for the first time this season.
A week ago at Dover, Del., Ricky Rudd chose to take on only gas and no tires on a late pit stop and barely beat Bill Elliott to the finish.
This time, Bodine didn't pit at all during the last caution period, running the final 126 laps on the half-mile oval on the same tires.
Wallace pitted on lap 471 of the 500-lap event, taking on new tires.
He came out of the pits fourth and made it to second on lap 484, but couldn't catch Bodine's Ford Thunderbird, which crossed the finish line .19 of a second ahead. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Nominees' Camps Make Their Cases to Perot Backers
Top delegations from both Presidential campaigns conducted a careful courtship of the supporters of Ross Perot today, but the Texas billionaire kept everyone dangling.
He suggested he would announce by Thursday whether he would re-enter the race.
It was a day choreographed to highlight Mr.
Perot's power in Presidential politics, and the organizations of Gov.
Bill Clinton and President Bush dutifully played their designated roles.
At the invitation of Mr.
Perot, each campaign sent high-level delegations to meet privately with the on-again, off-again candidate and his state coordinators, to brief them on their candidates' positions and to appeal for support.


3Com Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Urban Graveyards' Loss Isn't Due to Prejudice
To the Editor:
Your reporting on the Negros Burial Ground unearthed in New York's City Hall area has been outstanding: we applaud the burial ground's preservation.
However, the disappearance of urban graveyards is not due to racial prejudice.
One has only to look at modern Manhattan to note that only a few downtown burial grounds survive, like Trinity churchyard and St.
Marks in the Bowery.
The Municipal Archives lists many more that no longer exist: victims of churches' financial problems or of the need for space for streets or buildings.


Market Place; Pace Slows a Bit For Mutual Funds
MUTUAL funds continue to attract investors who are dismayed by the low interest rates available on bank deposits, but the inflow of cash to stock and bond funds has slowed in recent weeks to its lowest level of the year, executives at mutual fund companies say.
"There has been some slowdown, but only compared to the pace earlier this year," said Jane White, a spokeswoman for T. Rowe Price Associates.
"Any other year we would have thought our recent numbers were wonderful."


Classical Music in Review
Ustad Salamat Ali Khan  Merkin Concert Hall
Whether for genetic reasons or simply through the act of living together, musical talent tends to gather within a single family.
At Saturday night's concert of classical Pakistani vocal music, Ustad Salamat Ali Khan brought his progeny with him, and in a series of solos, duos and trios, six performers let their imaginations roam within the strictures of raga themes, tala rhythms and the stately procedures by which the two are developed.


Missing Archival Records Set Back Highway Repairs
Reconstruction of three blocks of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive that hang partly over the East River on a platform had to be halted two months ago after workers found that more than half of an old, 400-foot timber retaining wall under the roadway was missing, state transportation officials said yesterday.
Because the wall keeps soil under part of the highway platform from being eroded into the river, a new retainer of steel and concrete is to be built over the next two months, and work on the highway between 15th and 18th Streets will not be resumed until that job is finished, the officials said.


Comfortable Shoes and Other Tricks of a Baritone
Not the least of the problems that have kept Ferruccio Busoni's "Doktor Faust" out of circulation is the phenomenal difficulty of its title role.
Faust must hold the stage for three and a half hours, and the score demands a range of nearly two octaves.
The New York City Opera, whose widely praised and essentially unabridged production of the opera closes tonight, was fortunate to find a baritone of exceptional artistry and stamina for the role: William Stone, a native of North Carolina who until now has been best known in Europe.
When Mr.
Stone, who says he is "in my 40's," began preparing to sing Faust in July, he canceled various other projects, knowing full well what he was getting into.
This was a role that had frustrated even the omniverous Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau back in the late 1960's.
Now, Mr.
Stone has found that City Opera's cerebral staging makes the task even harder.


Playing Into the Public's Fears About AIDS; Doubts on Viral Theory
To the Editor:
In "A Dangerous Delusion About AIDS" (Op-Ed, Sept. 10), Jerome E. Groopman of Harvard complains about scientists who question the hypothesis that H.I.V. causes AIDS, including me, "the champion of this erroneous theory."
I have been called irresponsible and pernicious by Dr.
Groopman's colleagues for proposing in scientific journals that the long-term consumption of recreational drugs and AZT is causing AIDS, rather than sexual transmission of H.I.V.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; When Trust Is at Issue, The Trusted Are Scarce
Henry Stimson, the diplomat and soldier who was greatly admired by the young George Bush, said that the chief lesson he had learned in a long life was this: "The only way to make a man trustworthy is to trust him; and the surest way to make him untrustworthy is to distrust him and show him your distrust."
This might well be the problem with the Presidential race this year.
Maybe if the American public showed more trust in their candidates, the candidates might seem more trustworthy.
Or maybe not.


Walter H. Hindle, 83, Authority on Textiles
Walter H. Hindle, an authority on the manufacture and marketing of textiles and man-made fibers, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a long illness, said a niece, Judith Riegle.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans; To Ex-Deserter, Urban War Should be the Real Debate
Jack Colhoun wears a gray pigtail, a modest relic of a life disrupted by seven years of exile and protest in Canada as a military deserter during the Vietnam War.
The real pain for him in this year's Presidential campaign is that his old issue, the war, has emerged only as a kind of grotesque aside in his eyes, a cynical evasion of far more immediate problems, he says.
He cites an issue haunting America right outside his window here: the nightly specter of teen-agers shooting at one another with semiautomatic pistols as a symptom of scandalous national failure.


Review/Television; Aristide as a Hero of Haiti's Downtrodden
Over the centuries, the Haitian people have known more than their share of misery.
"Haiti: Killing the Dream" covers the most recent event, the military coup a year ago that sent the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's first democratically elected President, into exile.
Father Aristide, a young Roman Catholic priest who was influenced by the liberation theology movement, began gathering support among the poorest of his country's mostly poor and illiterate people after the overthrow of the unlamented Duvalier dictatorship.
By tonight's account, his plans to take from the rich and give to the poor angered the country's elite, which joined with Army commanders and a bought Parliament to bring him down.
The camera does not fail to contrast the fancy villas of a few with the shacks of the many.


Political Gadfly Hurls Himself Into Governing; Fans and Foes Marvel as Greenburgh's Town Supervisor Tries One Idea After Another
There was Town Supervisor Paul Feiner, in his wrinkled suit (as usual) on the defensive (again) at a tense public meeting here on Wednesday night.
This time, some residents called him a racist because he suspended a black town employee and, before a police investigation was complete, accused the man of skimming town funds.
The week before, Mr.
Feiner had been defending himself against claims that he had abused his power in this Westchester town by improperly trying to control the independent housing authority.


No Popgun This; Its Eventual Target Is the Moon
IN the next several weeks, scientists intend to blast an 11-pound projectile from a 155-foot-long cannon into a California hill.
If the novel gun works as planned, the shot will be a long step toward realizing Jules Verne's dream of firing a shell to the Moon.
The test shot by scientists at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California is intended to demonstrate that an ultra-high-velocity gun hitherto used only for laboratory research can be adapted to send payloads into space at only about one-fortieth what it costs to orbit them by space shuttle.
If a projectile from this type of gun were equipped with a small rocket booster, it could be fired directly from the Earth into a lunar orbit, the scientists believe.


U.S. Paging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Retailers' Latest Tactic: If It Says $15, It Means $15
At Lazarus department stores, a pair of men's patterned socks used to sell for $7.50 -- except when they were on sale for 25 percent off, which was more often than not.
But these days at Lazarus, the same socks are part of a package deal: three pairs for $15, period.
No markdowns, no one-day sales, no pricing gimmicks.


China Warns About Pressing North Korea
President Yang Shangkun of China warned President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, on a visit here today, that too much international pressure on the hard-line Communist Government in North Korea might slow rather than advance the reunification of the Korean peninsula, a Korean official said.
"International pressure may not be desirable," Mr.
Yang was quoted as telling Mr.
Roh.
The statement suggested some opposition by China to South Korea's strategy of persuading Pyongyang to halt a suspected nuclear weapons program and to adopt a less hostile stance toward Seoul.


Atlas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Macy's Slump: Losses and Sales Decline Continue
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company's sales and profits continued to hemorrhage in August, documents filed yesterday showed, as the weak economy and the company's strategy of curtailing profit-eroding promotions intensified the struggle to get out of bankruptcy.
The troubled retailer reported a $34.7 million loss in August in papers filed with the Federal Bankruptcy Court.
From February through June, Macy lost $329.5 million; it will report its July loss in its third-quarter filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


The Bump And Replace Puts Walls On the Bench
Everson Walls is confused. And frustrated. And more than a little bit angry.
Giants Coach Ray Handley announced today that he would be making a change in his starting defense for this Sunday's game against the Raiders in Los Angeles.
Lamar McGriggs will start at one of the two safety positions, along with Greg Jackson.
For the second time in this short season, Walls is out of a job.


Iraq, Assets at Risk, Asks to Reopen U.N. Oil Talks
Iraq, in a move apparently aimed at stopping the Security Council from seizing its frozen financial assets, has changed position and said it wants to reopen talks on selling oil to compensate victims of the invasion of Kuwait and pay for the relief aid it receives from the United Nations, diplomats said today.
Over the summer, Iraq broke off the talks it was holding with the United Nations in Vienna on a Security Council plan to let it sell $1.6 billion worth of oil for these purposes, saying that the proposal violated its sovereignty.


A Candidate Attuned to Colorado's Quirky Rhythm
In the cowboy- hat country of rural Colorado, a Democratic politician who wears long hair in a pony tail might not be expected to hang around much past sundown.
But Representative Ben Nighthorse Campbell, who besides the hat and the pony tail also wears a string tie, has shown staying power.
The lone American Indian in Congress, he has easily won three terms from the state's rugged western Congressional district, a world away from the corporate offices of Denver.
Now Mr.
Campbell is running for the United States Senate, and voter surveys put him far ahead of the Republican nominee, Terry Considine, a conservative State Senator from suburban Denver.
In the Democratic primary, Mr.
Campbell polished off two challengers, one a former governor, Dick Lamm.
The Senate seat is being vacated by Tim Wirth, a Democrat who is retiring in frustration over what he says is the ineffectiveness of Congress.
Campbell Expresses Confidence
"We whipped them in the primary," Mr.
Campbell said, "and I think our numbers our going to hold up in the general."


Currency Specialist Goes to Soros Management
Robert Johnson, a managing director and foreign exchange specialist at Bankers Trust, yesterday joined Soros Fund Management, an investment firm with a reputation for making huge bets in the currency markets.
Mr.
Johnson, a 35-year-old economist, says he likes the investment style of of George Soros, the firm's founder, and Stanley Druckenmiller, the chief portfolio manager, both of whom he has known for years.
"They are fundamental, anticipatory risk takers with a longer-term time horizons," Mr.
Johnson said.
"And I believe that's my strength as well."


The Feeling of Drawing and Painting
FOR their imaginative packaging alone, two programs from the Fractal Design Corporation, called Painter and Sketcher, would be worth a prominent place on the software shelf.
Painter comes in a real paint can, minus the paint, while Sketcher comes in a box reminiscent of the cigar boxes we used to use to hold charcoals, pencils, crayons and sketch pads.
But the packaging is just the first of many surprises.
Both Painter and Sketcher are powerful tools for creating and modifying computer-based art.
Each comes in versions for either Apple Macintosh or Microsoft Windows computers.
Painter is for people who want to create color images, while Sketcher is for gray-scale images.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 21 about New York City's search for a film commissioner referred incorrectly to a labor dispute in New York last year between the major motion picture studios and film craft union members.
The studios boycotted New York for seven months during a contract dispute over compensation; there was no strike by cinematographers and stagehands.
An accord was reached last summer.
A reader pointed out the error in a letter dated Aug. 31; this correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Critic's Notebook; Paging Through a New New Yorker
So what could be more unfair than judging the new editor of an old magazine by her first issue?
All right, having got that out of the way, let's look at the Oct. 5 New Yorker, Tina Brown's first.
The name of Edward Sorel on the funny cover drawing should startle no constant reader.
Does the punk-in-a-Central Park-carriage joke portend covers that are more Manhattanish and more cartoony?
Are those quieter decorative drawings on the way out?
Are cover lines on the way in?
Ask me next year.


Harold Seymour, 82, a Pioneer In the Field of Baseball History
Harold Seymour, a one-time bat boy for the Brooklyn Dodgers who turned his childhood passion for baseball into an academic specialty as one of the first recognized historians of the national pastime, died on Saturday in Keene, N.H., where he had lived since 1985.
He was 82 years old and suffered from Alzheimer's disease, according to his wife, Dorothy.
A former college teacher who left academia in 1969 to devote full time to research and writing about baseball, Mr.
Seymour was the author of a three-volume history that many regard as the seminal work in establishing baseball as a subject for serious scholarly inquiry.


INSIDE
167 Lost in Nepal Air Crash
A Pakistani jet plowed into a pine-covered hillside near Katmandu, and rescuers reported no survivors among the 167 aboard, most of them European tourists.
Page A8.
Europe Money Plan Opposed
European finance ministers opposed a plan to let some nations move toward a single currency while others deal with domestic woes.
Page D1.
Bidding Begins in N.F.L.
The San Francisco 49ers and the Miami Dolphins became the first teams to agree to sign players granted unlimited free agency.
Page B9.
Now, About the Philistines
Though maligned, they were cultured and may even have descended from the Mycenaean Greeks, archeologists say.
Science Times, page C1.


Radical Brain Surgery, The Earlier the Better, Offers Epileptics Hope
SHORTLY after he was born, Jacob Stark's arms and legs started jerking every 20 minutes.
Weeks later he could not focus his eyes on his mother's face.
The diagnosis: uncontrollable epileptic seizures involving his entire brain.
His mother, Sally Stark, recalled: "When Jacob was two and half months old, they said he would never learn to sit up, would never be able to feed himself. Nothing could be done to prevent profound retardation. They told us to take him home, love him and find an institution."


Patterns
The Quiet Italian
Piazza Italia, the Italian Trade Commission's monthlong promotion at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, runs until Oct. 9.
But last Thursday's runway show of the Genny, Byblos and Complice fall styles, sponsored by Henri Bendel, was the last fashion event.
After vino and antipasti, 700 guests sat at small tables covered with leopard-printed scarfs for a 30-minute show that ranged from the sophisticated (Genny) to the whimsical (Complice).


College Soccer Report
The Bronze Boot
St.
Louis University and Southern Illinois-Edwardsville, two neighboring powerhouses who won national titles under the same coach, the late Bob Guelker, challenged each other for this trophy for the 22d consecutive year on Saturday night at Edwardsville.
The Billikens, who reached the Final Four last season and have been much stronger than the Cougars in recent years, captured the trophy for the 10th consecutive time.
The 1-0 victory didn't come easy, however: The lone goal in the game was scored with 3 minutes left in the 30-minute overtime.


3 NATIONS STAGE ANTI-DRUG SWEEP
Law-enforcement authorities from the United States, Colombia and Italy announced today that they had arrested more than 165 people on charges related to the laundering of money from worldwide sales of cocaine by the Sicilian Mafia and Colombian cocaine cartels.
American and Italian officials said their investigations supported recent assertions of closer cooperation between the Sicilian mob and the Colombian cocaine industry.
The Mafia, they said, acquired large amounts of Colombian cocaine for distribution throughout Europe.


Many Americans Say Genetic Information Is Public Property
A MAJORITY of Americans believe that people found to carry a genetic disease or a defective gene do not have a right to absolute privacy about their condition, a survey has found.
Among those thought to have a right to information about a patient's genetic defects are not only people with an immediate concern, like spouses and other family members, but insurance companies and even employers.
The results, being released today, suggest that Americans are not as wedded to the concept of unequivocal patient confidentiality as many ethicists and legal scholars might have thought or hoped.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- Missouri; Missouri's Words of Advice to Bush: Jobs, Jobs, Jobs
In November 1976, Christopher S. Bond, then the Governor of Missouri, gathered family and friends for a party to celebrate what he confidently expected to be his re-election.
But he lost, unable to overcome the drag of a losing Republican Presidential candidate, Gerald R. Ford.
Now seeking a second term in the Senate, Mr.
Bond is haunted by the prospect of a repeat performance.
President Bush is doing badly in Missouri, trailing Bill Clinton by more than 20 percentage points in the St.
Louis Post-Dispatch poll and running behind in private surveys for the two parties as well.


Commissioner's Report Cites Series of Failures
Citing lapses ranging from the failure of police officers to keep order at the Brooklyn Bridge to delays in dispatching reinforcements, an interim report concludes that the events of Sept. 16 "raised serious questions" about how the Police Department polices itself.
The report from Acting Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly to Mayor David N. Dinkins also criticized the leadership of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, which it said bore "ultimate responsibility" for the "disgraceful actions of some demonstrators."


Thor Energy Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Marketing the New Nissan: A Peek First, the Facts Later
NISSAN is teasing again.
Three years ago, the Japanese auto maker set the advertising industry buzzing with Zen-like rocks-and-trees ads for its fledgling Infiniti luxury division.
The agency that created the campaign, Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, justified the strategy of hiding the cars from view by explaining at the time: "We're not selling the skin of the car, we're selling the spirit."


Numex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Prime Hospitality Corp.  reports earnings for Year June 30


On My Mind; Kissinger, Peace and P.O.W.'s
In the winter of 1973, the Nixon-Kissinger team and its most passionate American enemies were in agreement on one overriding judgment: The war in Vietnam was lost and had to be ended.
About 17 years earlier, President Eisenhower had begun sending military advisers and intelligence operators into Vietnam -- the first American involvement.
Then Presidents Kennedy and Johnson each chose to deepen a war that tore apart American society long before it was over.


James J. Herron, Executive, 83
James J. Herron, a retired executive of the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation in New York, died on Friday at North Florida Regional Hospital in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 83 years old and lived in Edison and Gillette, N.J., before moving to Gainesville four years ago.
He died of respiratory failure, the hospital said.


Gregory Needed the Divorce
After Gregory Kingsley was allowed to "divorce" his natural mother, the 12-year-old boy greeted Florida circuit court judge Thomas Kirk, who made the ruling, with a smile and a handshake.
The decision struck a valid blow for children's rights.
Beyond the smile, however, is the painful recognition that the interests of children and their parents are not always the same.
With all the Presidential campaign rhetoric about "family values," this may look to some people like a dangerous precedent.
But given the troubled circumstances, it's the right result.


Bridge
There are a great many players who have great experience with social bridge, usually the four-deal variety, and feel uncomfortable if pushed into any form of duplicate.
There is a rather small number for whom the converse is true: If there are only four of them, they are interested in seeing how well they have done with the cards they were dealt.
If there is no desire to play for a stake, it is quite possible to play a deal, retaining the cards as in duplicate, analyze it and reach a consensus: North-South have gained 12 imps, or, if preferred, scored 8 match-points out of a possible 12.


COMPANY BRIEFS
A.T.&amp; T.'s computer unit, NCR Corp., plans to unveil a pen-based computer in Paris today, analysts said, which may expand the slow-growing pen computing market.
NCR's 3130 will be an upgrade of the NCR 3125 pen computer, based on Intel Corp.'s 386SL chip, with up to 60 megabytes of storage.
J.C.
Penney Co., Dallas, reached an agreement with Audio Services Inc., a privately held developer and provider of telephone-based interactive services and interactive television, for Penney to acquire a minority interest in ASI, and ASI to acquire an additional block of voting shares of Cableshare Inc., a Canadian company.
BALLY MANUFACTURING CORP., Chicago, announced the successful completion of its consent solicitations for its 10 percent convertible subordinated debentures due in 2006.


Few Donors Found To Help D'Amato Pay His Legal Bills
While the re-election campaign of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is having unparalleled success in raising money, the New York Republican is finding few donors to help him pay off almost $400,000 in outstanding legal bills from his defense against charges of ethical misconduct.
So far this year the Senator has paid $25,000 of the $417,000 he owes his lawyers for their work in defending him during a Senate ethics investigation that lasted almost two years.
Mr.
D'Amato's spokeswoman, Zenia Mucha, said the Senator has been in touch with his lawyers and intends to settle the bill.


No Quick Decision on Mills
The Nets, who have until 5 P.M. tomorrow to decide whether to match the lucrative Detroit Piston offer to backup power forward Terry Mills are not likely to make a decision much before then, Willis Reed, the team's senior vice president for basketball operations, said yesterday.
That delay, Reed said, is partly because Mills's refusal to meet with him in Detroit yesterday has made the decision more difficult and partly because the full Nets ownership will not meet before late today.


Health Management International Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Bush Uses Veto Power To Thwart People's Will
To the Editor:
The members of Congress, trying to represent the interests of the majority of Americans who elected them, pass legislation that is so often rejected by Presidential veto.
The political diversification of the Congress makes it extremely difficult to muster the necessary two-thirds majority to override these vetoes.
In a sense President Bush is using his veto power to thwart the will of the people.
Yet he has the chutzpah to point a long accusing finger at the Democrats in Congress for failing to pass his legislative proposals.
Isn't it somewhat presumptuous of him to imply that his programs are unerringly right for the country and that Congressional solutions are so bad they deserve swift decapitation by a Presidential swing of the sword?


Perot's Budget Cuts: How He'd Do It
Unless we take action now," wrote Ross Perot in the preface to his deficit reduction plan, "our nation may confront a situation similar to the Great Depression -- and maybe even worse."
Relatively few mainstream economists buy Mr.
Perot's jeremiad at face value.
And fewer still believe that the Perot plan, suddenly in the spotlight again now that he seems poised to re-enter the Presidential race, is more than the roughest of drafts for what amounts to a sea change in budget priorities in the midst of a recession.
Nowhere does Mr.
Perot tackle the sticky question of how many jobs or how much output should be sacrificed in order to put the plan into effect if the economy has not yet fully recovered.
Nor does he acknowledge that the plan asks relatively little sacrifice of those who benefited most from the great tax cuts of the 1980's.


Federal Paper Board Co.  reports earnings for 12wks to Sept 5


Bush, This Time in Election Year, Vetoes Trade Curbs Against China
Juggling yet another delicate issue handed him by Congress at peak election season, President Bush vetoed legislation tonight that would restrict China's trade with the United States unless the Chinese improved their records on human rights, free trade and arms proliferation.
It appeared that there would not be enough votes in Congress to override the veto, meaning that Beijing's favorable trade status would continue for another year.
Bush's Rationale
In a statement issued in Dallas, where he was campaigning, Mr.
Bush said he completely shares the objectives of the legislation.
But he argued that punishing China by restricting its American trade would only hurt ordinary Chinese citizens and American companies that sell goods there.


Hello, Larry. This Is Mike
Ross Perot, who managed to conduct a campaign (of sorts) without talking directly to voters or to the press, was doing his thing again last night, taking calls on CNN's "Larry King Live." One reporter apparently had had enough.
"New York City for Ross Perot," Mr. King said, introducing a next caller.


I.B.M. IS CLOSE TO MARKETING VOICE-RECOGNITION DEVICE
I.B.M. is close to marketing a device that can recognize vocal commands.
At the recent Unix Expo trade show, the International Business Machines Corporation demonstrated a product still in research, code-named Tangora, on its RS/6000 work station.
It has a vocabulary of 20,000 words and can take dictation at a speed ranging from 50 to 70 words a minute.
An I.B.M. executive said it could be available this year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  165 ARRESTED IN DRUG CASE  United States, Colombia and Italy said they had arrested more than 165 people in several countries on charges related to laundering of money from cocaine sales.
A1  ROCKET CEREMONY CANCELED  Political debate forced the cancellation of a planned commemoration of rocket technology that enabled Germany to rain missiles on London in World War II.
A1


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Richter Returns: Heard a Good Rumor Lately?
Goaltender Mike Richter reclaimed his share of the crease last night, and his long-delayed exhibition debut for the Rangers marked the official beginning of the new rumor season.
While the Devils were beating the Rangers in overtime at Madison Square Garden, 5-4, Richter's respectable complete-game appearance eased many concerns about his stubborn groin injury.
It also gave General Manager Neil Smith the right to start taking phone calls again, from parties interested in John Vanbiesbrouck.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  OFFICERS ASSAILED OVER PROTEST
Acting Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly ordered the disciplining of 42 police officers in a harshly critical report that condemned police behavior in the recent demonstration at City Hall.
The report assailed as "unruly" and "perhaps criminal" the behavior of some officers who took over the steps of City Hall and blocked traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge.
At the same time, the report said that the response of commanders and officers assigned to control the demonstration was "lethargic at best." It singled out a captain and two sergeants for failing to maintain the police lines, as well as a uniformed officer who it said had waved protesters past barricades at City Hall while he shouted racial slurs.
A1 and B3.
FACT OR FICTION: LEAD SCARE AT P.S. 3
At P.S. 3, people had to decide whether their school was safe from lead, and they had trouble doing so.
And in the end, as in the beginning, some felt that it was still dangerous, while others thought it never was.
Lead is a substance that many children encounter in playgrounds, on the subway and in their own bedrooms.
But there are no guidelines for acceptable lead content in most places or in schools, which makes it difficult to judge the health hazards, regardless of how much testing is done.
A1.


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Progress Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Napco Security Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year June 30


CST Entertainment Imaging reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
If you're feeling some nostalgia for the 1960's, wait no more.
On Wednesday, MARY TRAVERS will deliver a lecture at the McIntosh Center of Barnard College, Broadway at 117th Street.
And Ms.
Travers plans to deliver part of her message in song -- which is, of course, what she has tried to do during her years as a member of Peter, Paul and Mary.
The lecture is titled "The Politics of Music: Music's Role in Social Change."


Mets Fall Twice to Phillies
The Mets, doing their best to preserve the last remaining element of drama to their season, kept alive their chances of finishing in last place in the National League East by being swept in a doubleheader by the Phillies last night at Shea Stadium.
Both scores were 7-6.
The extra-inning loss in the opener and the failed comeback effort in the nightcap allowed the last-place Phillies to get within a game of the Mets with five to play.
If the Phillies beat the Mets again tonight and tommorow night, they would take over fifth place.
It's hardly a far-flung possibility, for with their triumphs last night, the Phillies improved to 11-5 against the Mets in 1992.


Accounts
*
The California Table Grape Commission, Fresno, Calif., to McCann-Erickson, San Francisco, to handle the commission's advertising account previously at BBDO San Francisco.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age and Adweek estimated them at $5.3 million. *
Haverty's Furniture, Atlanta, to Fitzgerald &amp; Co., Atlanta, to handle the home furnishings retail chain's advertising in Atlanta, previously handled by M. Finkel &amp; Associates Inc., Atlanta.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Timken Co., Canton, Ohio, to Wyse Advertising Inc., Cleveland, to handle the alloy steels and bearings manufacturer's corporate and business-to-business account, previously at Eric Mower &amp; Associates , Rochester.
Billings were not disclosed.
Wyse was also named to handle national and regional advertising for McDonald &amp; Company Securities, Cleveland, previously at Fitzsimons Advertising, Cleveland.
Billings were not disclosed.


Editorial Notebook; Making Sense of Civilian Review
As in the past, New York City's current argument over the board that reviews citizen complaints against the police focuses on whether civilians or police should control it.
Yet that's a largely symbolic issue.
The effectiveness of the board depends less on structure at the top than on reforming the process at the lower levels -- giving both angry citizens and the cop on the beat a chance to thrash out their grievances face to face.
Last year, New Yorkers filed 3,379 complaints against police officers.
The board "substantiated" -- that is, investigated and confirmed police misconduct -- only 131 cases, a measly 3.9 percent.


The Talk of Hollywood; Achieving A State Of Grace By Water
Norman Maclean hated Hollywood.
Maclean, the author of the classic, elegiac memoir "A River Runs Through It," once told Robert Redford that Hollywood was the land of grease and the weasel.
Mr.
Redford recalled Maclean's words: "After the handshake you notice how greasy your hand is, and they always try to weasel out of a deal."
Mr. Redford, in an interview, started to laugh. "That's no great news, is it?" he said.


Playing Into the Public's Fears About AIDS
To the Editor:
Dr.
Jerome E. Groopman raises an important point in "A Dangerous Delusion About AIDS" (Op-Ed, Sept. 10), but I believe that the problem is more complex than his analysis implies.
Certainly, the claim that H.I.V. is not involved in AIDS is suspect, but it is also true that we do not know what role the virus plays in the development of the disease.
Many virologists who are firmly wedded to the viral etiology of AIDS are aware that unknown co-factors may play a determining role.
I find it unfortunate that so many of my fellow scientists have responded to Prof.
Peter Duesberg's urging that we ignore the role of H.I.V. by suggesting that we ignore the possibility of such co-factors.


For Absent Fathers, a Ray of Hope
In an old law office building on East Hanover Street here, a dozen men, all fathers of welfare children, are trying to leave the rootlessness of street life behind and learn how to become responsible parents, wage earners, maybe even husbands.
These are the goals of Operation Fatherhood, the New Jersey version of a federally assisted experimental program called Parents Fair Share.
While there are numerous programs to help welfare mothers, the program's reasoning goes, little has been done to help the absent fathers straighten their often tangled lives so that they can take responsibility for their offspring and start paying child support.


Kuwait Oil Fires Didn't Alter the Climate
To the Editor:
Regarding the possible effects of the Kuwait oil well fire pollution on the world climate (perhaps including the cooler than normal summer experienced in the Northeast), it is reassuring to note that a group of 50 scientists from 14 countries has concluded the fires caused no long-term weather effects.
These experts in oil combustion, atmospheric monitoring and modeling of air pollution met under auspices of the World Meteorological Organization.
They found that the smoke was confined by the region's weather and geography to a horizontal layer at an altitude of 10,000 feet over the Arabian Peninsula.


Cerbco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Berkeley Law School to Change Admission Policy
The law school of the University of California at Berkeley has agreed to change its admission practices so that they no longer violate civil rights laws, Education Department officials said today.
The agreement comes after a two-year investigation into whether the university's affirmative action program, designed to increase diversity among students admitted to the law school, met the requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which outlaws discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Matt Fish, center, to a one-year contract.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed David Wood, forward.


Michael Anthony Jewelers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Angry Veterans Groups Say They Made Bush Oust Agency's Head
American veterans groups said today that they pushed for the ouster of Veterans Affairs Secretary Edward J. Derwinski, who resigned last week, because they were angry over a series of perceived political slights and steadily eroding health care benefits.
Fearful of further alienating America's 27 million war veterans, a core constituency of the Republican Party, the Bush Administration said on Saturday that Mr.
Derwinski would resign immediately to join the Bush Presidential campaign as an adviser on ethnic issues, particularly those involving Eastern European nationalities.


He's a Ballplayer. But Will He Play for the Yankees?
When second baseman Andy Stankiewicz reported to spring training with the Yankees last February, he was filled with uncertainty.
Could he play in the major leagues?
Would he ever get the chance?
After six minor league seasons, Stankiewicz was desperate for answers to both questions.
He only learned the answers because Mike Gallego was placed on the disabled list on opening day and Stankiewicz received his first, and what could have been his last, chance to play in the majors.


Bethlehem Resources reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.37
3.19
5.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.73
2.79
5.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.85
2.82
5.14
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.86
5.91
7.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.35
7.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.40
8.40
8.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.39
6.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Playing 'Star Trek' by the Minute; Beam Me Up. I'm Out of Change.
"Star Trek" plans to boldly go to the mall.
Paramount Pictures has licensed its "Star Trek: The Next Generation" television series as the theme of mall-based entertainment centers that are to incorporate "Star Trek" into so-called virtual reality games.
The computerized playgrounds will use complex software to create the illusion that participants are immersed in a life-size fantasy world.


Malfunction Causes Midtown Explosion
An explosion sparked by an electrical malfunction beneath 42d Street sent a manhole cover flying and caused power outages in at least three buildings last night, fire officials said.
No one was injured.
Albert Turi, chief of the 9th fire battalion, said the 10:40 P.M explosion was probably caused by wear on the insulation on electrical cables within a Con Edison vault.


Learning When to Hold 'em, When to Fold 'em
AFTER one-armed bandits, video poker machines are the most popular mechanical games in casinos.
Masque Video Poker for Windows can help a player sharpen his skills or just have fun without risking the old plantation.
Video poker differs from real poker.
The only bet is made before the cards are dealt.
Then you decide whether to discard for the draw and, after the new cards, if any, are dealt, the machine determines your winnings, if any.
The Masque program imitates the most generous machines found in Las Vegas and Atlantic City, with variations including jacks or better, deuces wild, jokers wild and two pairs or better.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; At Bush Camp, a Debate On Whether to Debate
Now there seems to be a debate about debates within the Bush campaign itself.
When President Bush's aides first announced that he would not debate Gov.
Bill Clinton unless the format was changed, the dispute seemed to be mainly with the commission that set up the debates.
But to hear Mr.
Bush's backers talk lately, there is no agreement within the Bush campaign about what kind of format there should be and, for that matter, no agreement about whether Mr.
Bush should debate at all.


Coslet Is Stuck On Nagle. Period.
His team has scored just 24 points in the last two games and the season appears to be going up in smoke or down the drain.
But after Coach Bruce Coslet gave his 0-4 Jets two days off today, he insisted that he was comfortable with Browning Nagle running the offense while conceding that he was uneasy about the defense.
Especially the pass rush.
For the second time in three weeks, Coslet must replace a defensive end.
Dennis Byrd dislocated his right shoulder against the Los Angeles Rams in Sunday's 18-10 defeat and will miss a minimum of six weeks.
Against Pittsburgh two weeks earlier, Jeff Lageman tore knee ligaments and is out for the season.


Iraq Opposition Says Parley In North Unifies Its Ranks
Strengthening its drive to topple the Baghdad Government, the Iraqi opposition has announced a unification of ranks after meetings in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq, and has called on all Iraqis to join in its efforts.
The meeting of about 60 opposition officials, from Shiite Muslim clerics and Kurds to Arab nationalists, held its closing session on Sunday.


Researchers Develop 'Smart' Window to Cut Energy Consumption
IN an effort to make buildings and vehicles more energy efficient, and reduce energy consumption in the United States, researchers at Tufts University have developed a window that can regulate the amount of sunlight flowing into a building or car and the amount of heat flowing out.
The technology, known as electrochromic "smart" windows, uses a relatively short pulse of electrical current to vary the transparency of two thin layers of material in the windows at various optical wavelengths.
In cold weather, a window could be adjusted to allow the full amount of available sunlight through to warm a room, while in hot weather it could reflect the light, preventing it from warming the room.


Ministers Reaffirm Unity Plan
European finance ministers said today that they opposed a "two speed" approach to monetary unification that would allow one group of nations to proceed quickly toward a single currency while leaving others to deal first with domestic economic problems.
The statement came at the end of a day in which European currency markets remained relatively stable.
The franc gained in value against the German mark, removing the French currency from any immediate danger of devaluation.


Edward Bland, 91, Cardiologist And Expert on Rheumatic Fever
Dr.
Edward Franklin Bland, an authority on rheumatic fever and a cardiologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, died on Sunday.
He was 91 years old.
A Massachusetts General spokesman said Dr.
Bland suffered a heart attack at his home in Brookline, Mass., and was taken to the nearest hospital, Beth Israel in Boston, where he died hours later.


The Perot Faithful
Despite their disappointments, the followers of Ross Perot remain committed, even as they listen to Bush and Clinton pitches.
Page A18.


Corrections
An article on Friday about an appearance by Gov.
Bill Clinton at the headquarters of Merck &amp; Company in Rahway, N.J., referred imprecisely to an invitation from Merck, which was solicited by the office of Gov.
Jim Florio.
Mr.
Florio's office asked that Merck invite Mr.
Clinton to appear, not that Mr.
Florio be included.


A Seagate Founder Is New President of Conner Peripherals
Conner Peripherals Inc. said today that it had named David T. Mitchell president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Mitchell, who is 50 years old, formerly held those positions at Seagate Technology Inc., a key rival of Conner in the computer disk drive business.
At Conner, Mr.
Mitchell succeeds William J. Almon, 59, who has been named vice chairman.
Mr.
Almon joins William Schroeder, 47, another vice chairman, with whom he will focus on new business opportunities.


Business and Health; Competing Plans For Californians
CALIFORNIA, hit hard by a recession compounded by military cutbacks and permanently lost jobs in electronics, is giving special attention to health care policy and political issues.
At least six million Californians do not have health insurance.
With 9.8 percent unemployment, even more people are in danger of losing coverage.
This week Gov.
Pete Wilson is expected to sign a measure that would make it harder for insurers to raise premiums steeply for small businesses when an employee becomes seriously ill.


Classical Music in Review
'Wrong Verdict'  Taipei Theater
Family values of a sort fought the law over the weekend in a production by the Ho Lo Taiwanese Opera Troupe, and the law won.
In the sternly moralistic "Wrong Verdict," Liu Chien-ping, a promising young judge, shows favoritism toward his lustful and murderous brother-in-law, Yen Pai-chu, insuring that both will incur the righteous wrath of Liu's father-in-law, Yen Hui, the Minister of Justice.
The elder Yen pronounces Pai-chu an "unfilial good-for-nothing," in the quaintly translated supertitles, and over familial pleas and after much hesitation, sees to his beheading.
Liu, for his part, is in effect disbarred and severely punished.


Bernard Alpern, 90, Head of Iron Company
Bernard E. Alpern, a former corporate executive, builder and philanthropist in New York, died on Friday in Palm Beach, Fla., where he was living in retirement.
He was 90 years old.
His family said he died of prostate cancer after a long illness.


Borden Reviewing Pasta Account
Borden Inc. said yesterday that it had placed its North American pasta products account, with billings estimated at $15 million to $20 million, in review as part of a companywide consolidation effort.
In a telephone interview, Nicholas R. Iammartino, a Borden spokesman in New York, confirmed reports of the review in this week's trade publications.
He said the company expected to consolidate its 19 agencies to four.
The pasta group is currently divided among four agencies: Bozell Palmer Bonner in Toronto; Grey Advertising and MacNamera, Klein &amp; Solin, both in New York, and M &amp; H Advertising in Minneapolis.


Nelson C. Walker, 79, Retired Family Doctor
Dr.
Nelson Clark Walker, a retired family practitioner in Hackensack, N.J., died Saturday at Southampton Hospital.
He was 79 years old and a resident of Hackensack and East Hampton, L.I.
His family said he died of a heart attack.


CHRONICLE
In another echo from the 60's, a record company in California plans to resurrect the sounds of the 1967 Monterey International Pop Festival, remembered as the first full-scale rock festival.
The three-day event, which took place in Monterey, Calif., featured many legends of the period, including Janis Joplin, the Byrds, Jefferson Airplane and Jimi Hendrix.
Rhino Records, in Santa Monica, said that most of the music on its package of four compact disks or cassettes has never been released commercially before.


Review/Film Festival: Leolo; Fleeing Youthful Misery In Feats of the Mind
To watch Jean-Claude Lauzon's daring, bracingly original "Leolo" is to descend into a carnal nightmare, the dream of a clever and desperate French Canadian boy.
His name is Leo Lauzon, but he has determined through sheer force of will to become someone else.
Renaming himself Leolo Lozone, he imagines a new life as an exultant young Sicilian in an effort to escape the misery he faces at home in Montreal.
Leolo's theory of his own genesis -- involving his corpulent mother (Ginette Reno), a Sicilian peasant and a sperm-laden tomato -- is typical of the bizarre lengths to which this boy will go to escape his fate.
As the film hauntingly demonstrates, through eccentric humor that gradually gives way to devastating seriousness, Leolo (Maxime Collin) is the only healthy member of a demented family.
He hangs onto hope and sanity by the most fragile thread.
Only by inventing various escape routes can Leolo endure the series of everyday humiliations that come his way, humiliations depicted by Mr.
Lauzon (whose film is described as semiautobiographical) in sometimes startlingly crude detail.
This film maker's taste for the scatological may send some viewers heading for the exits when "Leolo" is shown tonight at 6:15 and tomorrow at 9:30 at the New York Film Festival.
But that aspect is linked to a remarkable delicacy -- and to a pure, fearless sense of purpose that raises "Leolo" far out of the ordinary.


Review/Dance; Garth Fagan's Troupe On Image and Illusion
Garth Fagan Dance presented a stimulating selection of works from its repertory on Sunday night at the Joyce Theater.
Throughout the troupe's two-week engagement, Mr.
Fagan has been offering excerpts from "Griot New York," the evening-length production to music by Wynton Marsalis that received its premiere last year.
The three episodes performed on Sunday were especially rich in choreographic invention.


Salton/Maxim Housewares Inc. reports earnings for Year June 27


Assessing Germany: Potential or Peril?
In a Europe convulsed by financial turmoil, people are coming to terms with the economic power of Germany.
What seems clear to many is that a Germany in isolation would be far more of a threat than a Germany locked into European institutions, and that Germany's economic power is far less menacing than its military power ever was.


Books of The Times; Fantasizing on Kennedy's Death
Flying In to Love  By D. M. Thomas  242 pages. Scribner's. $20.
With his last novel, "Lying Together" (1990), D. M. Thomas seemed to have reached a dead end.
The characters in that novel did little but pop in and out of one another's lives and stories like an endless series of Russian dolls, and the reader quickly tired of their solipsistic antics.
In an effort to escape from that self-conscious world of literary artifice, Mr.
Thomas has now turned to the world of history.
He has taken on one of the seminal events of recent American history: the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.


Jerusalem Journal; Cry of the Ancient Kin: Don't Doubt Our Judaism!
At the start of the Jewish New Year, a period of spiritual reflection, Jews who were airlifted here from Ethiopia complain that Israel's religious and civil authorities treat them as somehow less Jewish than others.
Many of them became angry enough about it to stage repeated protests this month, including several that spilled into violence outside the Prime Minister's office.


BRISTOL-MYERS'S AIDS DRUG GETS FURTHER F.D.A. APPROVAL
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that the Food and Drug Administration had approved Videx, the company's AIDS treatment, as an alternative to the Burroughs-Wellcome Company's AZT for adults who have taken AZT over a long period.
Videx, also known as DDI, was previously approved only for AIDS patients whose health was significantly deteriorating despite AZT therapy or who could not tolerate it.


Fear and Fiction: The Furor at P.S. 3 -- A special report.; Lead Threat Exposes and Engulfs a School
If there was a single event that seemed to get this tangled drama going, it was a message on an answering machine.
On June 1, Daniel Saltzman, a winsome 9-year-old chatterbox with a mild case of asthma, phoned his mother, Lydia Saltzman, from Public School 3 in Greenwich Village.
She was out, so he left a message saying he was having trouble breathing and asking if she could fetch him.


Kent Is Easy to Figure, But His Statistics Aren't
Jeff Kent's numbers are rich with potential and risk.
There is power -- 10 of his 21 hits with the Mets have been for extra bases.
And there is peril -- he has struck out 27 times in 96 times at bat.
The starkness of both Kent's appeal and his shortcomings dramatizes the difficult decision the Mets have concerning the team's future at second base.


Perot's Budget Cuts: How He'd Do It
Unless we take action now," wrote Ross Perot in the preface to his deficit reduction plan, "our nation may confront a situation similar to the Great Depression -- and maybe even worse."
Relatively few mainstream economists buy Mr.
Perot's jeremiad at face value.
And fewer still believe that the Perot plan, suddenly in the spotlight again now that he seems poised to re-enter the Presidential race, is more than the roughest of drafts for what amounts to a sea change in budget priorities in the midst of a recession.
Nowhere does Mr.
Perot tackle the sticky question of how many jobs or how much output should be sacrificed in order to put the plan into effect if the economy has not yet fully recovered.
Nor does he acknowledge that the plan asks relatively little sacrifice of those who benefited most from the great tax cuts of the 1980's.


Puget Sound Power
The Puget Sound Power and Light Company said on Friday that an unexpected ruling by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission, affecting its ability to recover revenues, would reduce third-quarter earnings by 49 cents a share.
The utility went before the commission in June seeking a periodic rate adjustment of $92.2 million for Oct. 1, 1992, through Sept. 30, 1993.
Part of the requested rate increase was to recover expenditures by the utility during the current fiscal year.
On Thursday, however, the regulatory agency, acting on the recommendation of industrial customers, granted a rate increase of only $66.4 million and directed the utility to spread the recovery of the expenditures over three years instead of one.


Germans Plan, Then Cancel, Celebration of a Nazi Missile
Fifty years ago, a team of German scientists successfully tested a modern rocket and ushered in the space age.
The launching was a milestone in the history of flight, but more immediately, it gave Nazi Germany a new way to rain death upon London and other enemy cities.
So when the aerospace industry of modern-day Germany announced plans to celebrate that achievement this weekend, it aroused a storm of protest.


Judge Lifts U.S. Ban, Allowing Navajos to Build on Disputed Land
A Federal district judge has lifted a 26-year-old Government ban on public works and home building on 1.5 million acres of disputed land in the western portion of the Navajo Indian reservation.
The ruling by Judge Earl Carroll of Federal District Court in Phoenix also divided the land between the Navajo and Hopi tribes, giving almost all of it to the Navajos and thus sparing hundreds of Navajos from having to move.


Kimble Shooting for the Top Again
Cuffing the ball 45 feet from the basket, Bo Kimble says he would hear, "Shoot it," from the Los Angeles Clippers fans and "Don't dare shoot it" from the Clipper bench.
Kimble would slip into idle.
He had been weaned on the score-at-all-cost system of Loyola Marymount, where Coach Paul Westhead benched him for passing or chastized him for not hoisting the open 35-footer.


Veris (49ers) and Jackson (Miami) Hook On
In what could be the first sign of unlimited free agency coming to the National Football League, Garin Veris and Keith Jackson, two of four players who were granted temporary free agency by a Federal court ruling last week, today became the first to reach agreements with new teams.
Veris, a former defensive end for the New England Patriots, signed a two-year contract with the San Francisco 49ers, and Jackson, a former Philadelphia Eagles tight end and a three-time Pro Bowl selection, agreed to a reported four-year deal with the Miami Dolphins.
The Dolphins said he would arrive Tuesday to sign the contact and hold a news conference.
No Compensation Needed


After War, Vietnam Deported Americans
To the Editor:
Once again the Vietnam War has spilled into our newspapers and into our consciousness.
We are again debating whether Americans missing in action might have been left behind in Vietnam.
As someone who spent five years in humanitarian service in Vietnam during the war and who has visited that country several times in recent years, I also search for truths to guide us through this anguished history.


U.S. Unit of Olympia Plans To Ask More Concessions
The American arm of Olympia &amp; York, the troubled Canadian real estate developer, intends to ask its creditors tomorrow for permission to withhold principal repayments on its American holdings for another five years and to continue paying interest only on those buildings that generate sufficient cash.
The Olympia &amp; York American unit is also expected to inform the creditors that if they accept the deal, it could be cash-positive by the third quarter of 1993, largely by continuing to weed out the underperformers from its portfolio.


In Hurricane's Wake, Questions About Park Management


Being a Saint Isn't That Easy
Louis Lipps did not figure it would work out this way.
When he first used the threat of free agency through the courts, he looked upon it as a way of inducing the Pittsburgh Steelers to come closer to the contract terms he sought.
Instead, the Steelers released him and last week he signed a two-year deal with the New Orleans Saints.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Hanson Overseas Finance B.V., a unit of the British holding company Hanson P.L.C., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $1.25 billion of debt securities. *
Rhone-Poulenc S.A., a French holding company with operations in chemicals and pharmaceuticals, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $750 million of debt securities. *
South Washington County, Minn., is offering $24.85 million of tax-exempt general-obligation refunding bonds for Independent School District No. 833 through Kemper Securities.
The issue is priced to yield 5 percent for a maturity in 1999 and up to 6.15 percent for maturities in 2009 through 2011.
It is rated A by Moody's Investors Service.
Common Stock  *
John Alden Financial Corp., Miami, an insurance holding company, is making an initial public offering of 7.35 million shares of common stock at $15 a share with First Boston Corp. and Merrill Lynch the managers of the U.S. syndicate offering of 5.88 million shares.
Ratings  *
Bemis Co.'s senior debt rating has been upgraded to A, from A-, and its commercial paper to A-1, from A-2, by S.&amp; P. The company, a maker of packaging and industrial products, is based in Minneapolis.


Assemblyman in Trenton Suing To Block Union Worker Layoffs
With hundreds of state workers facing layoffs this week, a Republican Assemblyman filed suit today to force Gov.
Jim Florio to rescind the dismissals of union workers and to instead target high-salaried managers.
The Assemblyman, John Hartmann, a freshman legislator whose Mercer County constituents include nearly half of the state's 70,000 employees, charged in his State Superior Court lawsuit that the Governor had ignored legislation protecting rank-and-file state workers from layoffs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
European finance ministers opposed a "two speed" approach to monetary unification that would allow one group of nations to proceed quickly toward a single currency but let others deal first with domestic economic problems.  [ Page D1. ] Markets
The dollar closed below 120 yen to the dollar, as currency traders grew increasingly concerned about the economy and the Presidential race.
In New York, it fell to 119.65 yen.  [ D17. ]
Blue-chip stocks rebounded on bargain hunting with the Dow Jones industrial average up 25.94 points at 3,276.26.  [ D7. ]
Treasury bond prices rose on expectations that Friday's unemployment report would be weak enough that the Federal Reserve would push down interest rates.  [ D19. ]
Orange juice futures prices toppled amid talk of excess production.
Oil prices rose, but natural gas fell.  [ D17. ] The Economy
Ross Perot's plan for a balanced budget is simple: Reduce spending and generate revenues.
Economists applaud that notion, although Mr.
Perot does not tackle the question of how many jobs or how much output should be sacrificed for the plan.  [ D1. ]
A bill to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which dominate the home mortgage industry, was withdrawn from a scheduled House vote this week by Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, head of the Banking Committee, after Fannie Mae began opposing it.  [ D2. ] Companies
Medical Care America's shares fell $2.875 to $22.125, despite efforts by company executives to halt its free fall in an hourlong conference with analysts and big investors.  [ D3. ]
Robert Johnson left Bankers Trust for Soros Fund Management, the aggressive investment adviser for the $4 billion in four funds in the Quantum group.  [ D5. ]
The U.A.W. tentatively agreed to end a four-day strike against G.M. in Lansing, Mich., its second in recent days.  [ D4. ]
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company's losses deepened by $34.7 million in August, papers filed with the Federal Bankruptcy Court showed.
The bankrupt retailer's sales fell 8.2 percent, to $462.4 million.  [ D4. ]
Olympia &amp; York's American arm intends to ask its creditors on Wednesday for permission to withhold principal repayments on its American holdings for five more years.  [ D4. ]
Conner Peripherals named David T. Mitchell president and chief operating officer, succeeding William J. Almon, who becomes vice chairman.
Mr.
Mitchell formerly held those jobs at Seagate Technology, Conner's key rival in computer disk drives.  [ D13. ]
Robert B. Palmer plans to make Digital Equipment more customer-driven with a more focused organizational structure after he takes over as chief executive of the money-losing company on Thursday, PC Week reported.  [ D4. ]
Computerized "Star Trek" playgrounds are planned at malls under a licensing plan from Paramount Pictures.
Virtual reality games, using complex software, will create the illusion of being immersed in a life-size fantasy world.  [ D4. ]
Goodyear's chief financial officer resigned abruptly.
The move by 50-year-old Oren G. Shaffer intensified speculation about who will succeed the chairman, Stanley C. Gault.  [ D5. ]  Today's Columns
Health insurance has become a hotly contested political issue in California with several plans to provide fuller converage on the November ballot.
Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
The inflow of cash to stock and bond funds has slowed in recent weeks to its lowest level of the year with small investors on the sidelines, fund executives say.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
Nissan is teasing again, this time showing the car but holding back on the details.
By contrast, its Zen-like ads for Infiniti were intended to sell the spirit, not the skin.
Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Washington Starts Out At the Top
The undefeated Washington Huskies found themselves in familiar territory yesterday, on top of the season's first New York Times's college football computer ranking.
Washington (3-0) was followed by Michigan (2-0-1), Tennessee (4-0-0), Florida State (4-0) and Alabama (4-0).


Delaware Otesgo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Killers, for Apartheid and Against It, Are Set Free
When he was still a policeman and not yet a mass murderer, Barend Strydom once stole a black man's head from the scene of a highway wreck and posed for a snapshot of himself, the white avenger, holding the grisly prop aloft in one hand and a butcher's knife in the other.
On his big day, however, Mr.
Strydom eschewed the knife for a 9-millimeter pistol.
He walked into the lunch-hour streets of downtown Pretoria in November 1988, smiling as he methodically shot every black person he encountered.
He hit 22, killing 7, before a security guard overwhelmed him.


Proton Decay Theory May Be in for Revival From New Approach
HAVING vainly sought supporting evidence for more than a decade, most physicists have abandoned a once popular theory that the proton, a fundamental building block of atoms, spontaneously disintegrates.
But a new analysis of the problem suggests that experimenters may have misinterpreted some data and that proton disintegration may have actually been recorded.
The issue has implications that go beyond an understanding of the nature of matter.
If it could be shown that protons spontaneously decay, it would mean that eventually all atoms would disintegrate, and all the matter in the universe would be transformed into a diffuse and lifeless mist of photons, electrons and other isolated particles.


An Outsider's Amex Stewardship
Struggling to survive as the nation's third-largest stock market, the American Stock Exchange in 1989 undertook a bold experiment: In search of a new chairman, the Amex reached outside Wall Street's clubby world to tap James R. Jones, a former Democratic Congressman.
The idea struck some on Wall Street as a worthwhile gambit.
The exchange's future seemed to be in the hands of Washington as new rules that could reshape the industry were considered.
So, the thinking went, who better to present the Amex's case to Government officials than one of their own?


N.H.L. Skating Its Way Through Maze of Cables
ESPN is busily preparing its return to hockey.
The Oct. 6 premiere is a week away, but may not face off if SportsChannel America gets its legal way.
Tomorrow, SCA will seek to undo the ESPN-N.H.L. deal by contending before the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court that the league violated last year's SCA-N.H.L. contract when it signed a Sept. 2 deal with ESPN.


Univar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Big Changes Are Expected Soon at Digital
Robert B. Palmer is not planning to hold to the status quo for long after he takes over as president and chief executive of the Digital Equipment Corporation on Thursday.
Mr.
Palmer is planning to carry out major organizational changes within the troubled $14 billion computer maker, according to internal memos obtained by PC Week, an industry trade publication.
The documents lay out a "new direction" for Digital, in which a new, more focused organizational structure will make the company far more customer-driven than it has been in recent years.
Digital has been hit hard in recent years, losing $2.8 billion for the 1992 fiscal year.


Farmer Bros. Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Extra! Elevator Shaft Plunge Leads to Love and Marriage
HERE'S a follow-up to that two-paragraph article you all remember from The New York Times on Jan. 21, 1940. (You know how we prize thoroughness.)
That would have been a -- uh, let's see, Pearl Harbor was a Sunday 23 months later, so Jan. 21 was a Sunday, too.
"SAVED BY CABLE SLIDE," the headline screamed in type one-eighth-inch tall.
The story got such sensational Times play because it had everything, well, almost everything; it lacked a corpse.
But it did have danger, a damsel in distress, injuries and that creepy-cozy it-might-have-been-me impending doom flavor that still sells news in cities.


No Headline
Changes of fashion rarely happen in a neat and orderly manner.
Women who are constantly looking for the latest styles are in the vanguard.
If they look appealing enough in the new clothes, their lead is taken up by women in the next tier, those who are more comfortable with the familiar and don't see themselves as pathfinders.
At the moment, designers are accommodating both groups.
In their resort and early-spring collections -- clothes that will start arriving in the stores in November -- they have something for everyone.
There's Life in Short Skirts Yet


For the Sarajevans, Many New Graves
For years, the Dzirlo family has spent fall Sundays hiking in the mountains surrounding Sarajevo.
There have been herbs and flowers to pick, for the teas Sarajevans have been making for centuries, and there has been the glory of the autumn landscape, with russet leaves lending color to the plunging pastures.
On Sunday morning, when Sakir Dzirlo would normally have been pulling the family Ford out of the garage and loading a picnic, he was on one of the lower hills, standing with 150 other men beside the grave of Mugdim Kadric.


Storm Offers Chance To Rethink Everglades
When Hurricane Andrew cut a 25-mile-wide swath through this place of flat land and towering clouds in August, just about everything that stood higher than three feet tall, either living or man-made, was leveled.
Forty-year-old slash pines snapped like twigs; ancient mahogany and gumbo limbo trees were knocked from their fragile perches in the thin soil.
The two-story main visitor center was devastated.
A boardwalk leading out to the everglades "river of grass" was picked up and twisted like a telephone cord.
The wooden platform at Rock Reef Pass, one of the highest spots in the park (elevation 3 feet), was turned into a pile of lumber.


Ilio Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Observer; Incident At Hyannis
A man races to a pay telephone.
Something of great importance has occurred or is about to occur.
Perhaps something truly dreadful will happen unless timely telephonic communication averts it.
Watching him, I remember Gen.
Jack D. Ripper yearning for doomsday in "Dr. Strangelove." Can some 1992 Ripper, maddened perhaps by the vanishing of Soviet Communism, have set doomsday engines into action?


Insuring Pool In Final Days In New Jersey
At midnight Wednesday, 720,000 New Jersey drivers will begin entering the private automobile insurance market in the final phase of Gov.
Jim Florio's two-year plan to dismantle the state's high-risk insurance pool.
After Wednesday, the remaining policyholders who were shifted from the state pool, the Joint Underwriting Association, into a transition program will be unable to renew their coverage there and so will have to go onto the voluntary market as their policies expire over the next year.


Micron Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Would-Be Teachers Face Archaic Schools
To the Editor:
Re "Would-Be Teachers Who Are Being Turned Away" (front page, Sept. 9): I have taught in Germany, Brazil and France and at Stanford University, and yet there is no way any school will hire me to teach.
On top of that I have a Ph.D. in education from Stanford and if I want to work in the schools, I have to go back to college and get a teaching credential.
Further classes (at the credential level) in education would be a waste of time for me as well as terribly boring and useless.


Gorilla Bites Two Keepers In Ape House At Bronx Zoo
A panicked 500-pound gorilla bit two zookeepers at the Bronx Zoo yesterday, apparently after he wandered into an adjoining walkway for workers as he was being moved from his living area, zoo officials said.
The commotion set off rumors among zoo visitors that a gorilla was on the loose, but Kongo, a 27-year-old male, never went farther than the walkway, inside the popular Great Apes Building where he and 14 other gorillas live.


Search for Police Leader Enters the Final Phase
Mayor David N. Dinkins began the final round in his selection of a new police commissioner last night as resentment simmered against him in precinct houses throughout New York City over a report sharply critical of police conduct at a City Hall demonstration earlier this month.
The raucous demonstration and the issues that it raised -- including racism among white police officers and overall discipline in the department -- were the subject of a second round of interviews with the four finalists last night at the law office of Victor A. Kovner, the former City Corporation Counsel who is head of a screening committee advising the Mayor on the selection of a new police commissioner.


Robert Kreidler Memorial
A memorial service for Robert N. Kreidler, president of the Charles A. Dana Foundation, is to be held at 4:30 P.M. on Oct. 14 in the Tishman Auditorium of the New School for Social Research at 66 West 12th Street.
Mr.
Kreidler died on Aug. 30 at age 62.


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Brazil's House Impeaches Collor; Suspended, He Faces Senate Trial
President Fernando Collor de Mello was impeached today by the lower house of the Brazilian Congress, clearing the way for a trial on charges that his family and friends had accepted huge bribes on his behalf in return for Government favors.
Losing by a 441 to 38 margin in the Chamber of Deputies, the President, who in 1989 won Brazil's first presidential elections in 30 years on a clean-government platform, will be stripped of his powers for 180 days and will face a trial in the Senate.


Aharon Appelfeld, Writer of Contradictions
Aharon Appelfeld is a Jew and an author.
That is certainly not a unique or even uncommon combination, but with this writer it raises more questions than it answers.
He is an Israeli who has had 30 works -- novels, essays, even plays -- published in Hebrew, but he does not consider himself the same kind of Israeli author as those who were born there or arrived there before they could speak.
He is a Holocaust survivor, but he does not describe the Holocaust, although his writings are about the Jews and gentiles who were part of it.
His life has been traumatic, but he does not write about himself, although his experiences surely supply the format for his creativity.


Transat A.T. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Books of The Times; It's Not the Last Word, but It's Firsthand and Fast
It Doesn't Take a Hero  By Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, written with Peter Petre.
Illustrated. 530 pages.
Linda Grey/Bantam Books. $25.
Ulysses S. Grant's "Personal Memoirs" were written 20 years after the Civil War.
Dwight D. Eisenhower's "Crusade in Europe" was published four years after D-day marked the beginning of the end of World War II.
Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf's autobiography, "It Doesn't Take a Hero," now appears a few moments (well, about a year and a half) after the cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war, which still has loose ends, including the same dictatorial leadership in Iraq.
Considering the haste of General Schwarzkopf's book (written with the acknowledged help of Peter Petre of Fortune magazine), it's a remarkably smooth job, with excellent battlefield maps.


Snails and Pastries From an Ambassador of Cretan Cuisine
IT was definitely an odd menu.
After nibbling sticks of firm, salty sheep's-milk cheese dipped in honey, the guests dined on barley rusks topped with tomato, two dishes made with snails, a frittata of pork and greens, and rabbit stewed in red wine with onions.
They ate the dessert, fried pastries filled with fresh sheep's-milk cheese seasoned with mint and drizzled with honey, with their fingers.
This fare represented a taste of Crete, the largest Greek island, offered at a small dinner party on the Upper East Side last week by Christoforos Veneris, the chef and co-owner of Kalypso, a restaurant on the coast of Crete.
Mr.
Veneris was in New York to participate in a symposium about Greek cuisine last Thursday sponsored by the Greek Food and Wine Institute, a new educational and promotional group.


CHRONICLE
Another Burns is making plans for a birthday.
GEORGE BURNS'S 100th falls on Jan. 20, 1996, and the comedian said from Los Angeles yesterday: "I'm booked to play the Palladium in London when I'm 100, and I hope the Palladium is still there. I know I will be."
He couldn't talk long; he was preparing for a trip today to Livonia, Mich., a Detroit suburb, where the 1,400-seat Mai Kai Theater will be renamed the George Burns Theater for the Performing Arts tomorrow.


American Nursery Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


For the Creative or Obsessive, 100,000 Ways to Make a Mark
SOME people fantasize about climbing Mount Everest or winning the lottery.
"I dreamed of building a showplace for rubber stamps," said Gary Dorothy, whose store here, Stampa Barbara, is acknowledged by stampophiles to be the first and largest of its kind in the world.
Mr.
Dorothy's all-rubber-stamp emporium celebrated its seventh birthday this year.
"I had this vision of rubber stamps being creative tools that everybody, artistic or not, could use and have a wonderful time," he said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about President Bush's veto of legislation to restrict American trade with China omitted a word in some copies, thus misstating the prospects of a Congressional vote to override.
Senate Republicans predicted that the veto would in fact be sustained.


Market Place; Is the Worst Over For Tokyo Stocks?
AFTER falling for more than two and a half years, the Tokyo stock market seems to have recovered some of its lost ground and stabilized, leading a growing number of economists and analysts to say the worst is over.
But the recovery is a fragile one, based not on an end to Japan's recession or an improvement in corporate earnings but on Government promises to stimulate the economy and on Government arm-twisting to prevent big investors from selling their shares.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Debates; BUSH SHIFTS STAND, SAYING HE'S READY TO HOLD 4 DEBATES
President Bush challenged Gov.
Bill Clinton today to four debates on consecutive Sundays in a surprise move that was intended to shake up the Presidential race and silence Democratic accusations that he fears his opponent.
Mr.
Clinton, campaigning in Ohio, said he, too, was eager to debate, but he stopped short of accepting Mr.
Bush's ground rules.


Pharmakinetics Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


9 Killed in Southern Lebanon As Rival Militia Units Clash
In a new surge of fighting in southern Lebanon, nine people were killed today, including an Irish soldier serving with the United Nations peacekeeping force.
Lebanese security officials and the Israeli military said the clashes began when guerrillas from the pro-Iranian Party of God attacked positions held by the Israeli-controlled militia, the South Lebanon Army.


Johnson, Unbowed by H.I.V., Will Return to Pro Basketball
Undaunted by his infection with the virus that causes AIDS, Magic Johnson announced his return to professional basketball yesterday after a one-season absence.
Johnson, who said he planned to play in 50 to 60 of the Los Angeles Lakers' 82 scheduled games in the 1992-93 season, was the first active athlete to publicly disclose being H.I.V. positive.
And now his decision to compete again seems certain to cause support, concern and debate.


FUEL SPILL CITED IN A NAVY CRASH
The Navy said today that a prototype of its V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft that crashed in the Potomac River in July had suffered an engine failure and fire when lubricating oil and transmission fluid inexplicably spilled into the engine during flight.
Navy officials and the plane's manufacturer said the accident, which killed seven people, did not involve any flaw unique to the plane's exotic design that allows it to fly like an airplane but land and take off like a helicopter.


NCR Shows Pen-Based Computer
For computer visionaries, the pen has always loomed mightier than the keyboard as a way of entering data into a computer.
If computer users could tap on a screen with a pen or use one to write out a few instructions in normal human scrawl, they would no longer be confined to desks or chairs, but could wander wherever they would typically carry a clipboard or a briefcase, whether a factory floor or a courthouse.
Yesterday, continuing the industry's pursuit of that ideal, the NCR Corporation showed reporters the latest version of its pen-based computer.


Bergen Brunswig reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Senate Approves a Tax Bill Offering Benefits for Many
Six months after the Los Angeles riots unleashed a Congressional drive on urban aid, the Senate today finally approved a broad package to give tax incentives to businesses investing in impoverished city neighborhoods -- along with a medley of tax benefits for every other economic group.
With the memory of the disturbances fading, the legislation sailed to passage on election-year crosscurrents.
Provisions tacked on ranged from $500 million in fresh financing for social programs like Head Start for the poor, to an expansion of individual retirement accounts for the middle class, to a cut in luxury taxes on furs, yachts and expensive automobiles for the wealthy.


Sears Is Unlikely To Switch Agencies
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's proposed restructuring is unlikely to affect its longstanding agency relationships, company executives said.
Sears spent almost $1.2 billion on advertising last year, according to Advertising Age, making it the nation's fourth-largest advertiser.
A Sears spokesman in Chicago said that "it is up to each individual business to decide" on its plans, adding that Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago would remain the agency for Sears's merchandising group.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Quayle Sees Good Side To What Perot Decides
Vice President Dan Quayle says Ross Perot "certainly sounds" like a candidate to him, and he has some thoughts about whether a Perot candidacy would help the Bush-Quayle ticket or the Clinton-Gore ticket.
"If Ross Perot runs, that's good for us," Mr.
Quayle told pack of reporters yesterday in Rockford, Ill.
"If he doesn't run," he added, "it's good for us."


The Pop Life
A Life in Rock
Bill Graham, the rock music impresario, wanted audiences to get their money's worth, and would apparently go to great lengths to see that they did.
A man who considered an encore "dessert," Mr.
Graham once tried to persuade Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young to do just one more -- they had already done three -- by sliding eight hundred-dollar bills under the door of their dressing room at the Fillmore East in New York City.


Strong Words for a Police Riot
A heavy cloud of politics hangs over Acting New York City Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly's preliminary report on the police riot at City Hall.
The report is thick with language critical of the unruly behavior but apparently thin on charges against individual rioters.
Even so, the report is no whitewash; it serves the public's interest by maintaining the Police Department's credibility.
The demonstration two weeks ago to protest Mayor David Dinkins's plan for a more independent civilian complaint review board quickly deteriorated into a brawl.
Beer-drinking officers broke through barricades to rush the steps of City Hall; others blocked traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge and used racial epithets to describe the Mayor.


Cooks in Voting Booth
To the Editor:
Some time ago, during one of the ineffable Julia Child's little seminars in cooking, a cutlet popped out of a pan she was holding, and dropped on the floor.
In a twinkling, Mrs.
Child retrieved it, popped it right back into the pan and said with a level look at the television camera, "Remember, you are alone in the kitchen."


Seoul Gets Some Diplomatic Backing in China
South Korea's President, Roh Tae Woo, said on Tuesday that China's top leaders had endorsed his policy of persuading North Korea to abandon its nuclear-weapons program in return for a promise of normal relations with the West and substantial economic assistance from Seoul.
This morning, the two countries issued a joint declaration, and the South Koreans indicated they had received the sort of public endorsement they wanted.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Ducking Them, Perot Points to Issues
It somehow seemed fitting 10 days ago when Ross Perot, the ultimate media candidate, said that he might re-enter the Presidential race simply to buy television time to talk about the issues.
It also seemed appropriate when Mr.
Perot proceeded to appear on several television shows talking about how his only goal was to get the other candidates to talk about the issues.
And it seemed especially apt when Mr.
Perot appeared Monday night on his favorite television call-in show, "Larry King Live," and expressed his regret that the campaign was not being waged on the issues.


Wellco Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Year June 27


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Strategy; 2 Camps Regard A Perot Revival With Less Fear
Strategists in the Bush and Clinton campaigns agree that a revived candidacy by Ross Perot would not be the powerful third force that it seemed last spring.
But the Bush forces are hoping that it will help shake up a race that has seemed ominously stable for a President lagging in the polls.
Strategists in both camps say Mr.
Perot, if he enters the race on Thursday, will probably make his influence felt around the margins.
Citing the lateness of the hour, his current standings in the polls and the high negative ratings that Mr.
Perot has acquired since he bolted from the race last July, these strategists say they expect him to attract about the same percentage of votes as third-party candidacies in the past, in the teens or even single digits.


Assumptions of Bias Insult New Collegians
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 9 news article on Columbia University's freshman orientation is obviously intended to congratulate the school on its enlightened and humanistic approach to education, but it suggests a social and political arrogance and makes insulting assumptions about the freshmen and the social worlds they come from.
The arrogance of exposing the freshmen to "cultural otherness" through personal testimonies a la "Chorus Line" is reminiscent of the arrogance of the avant-garde theater in the 60's that believed a sexually repressed society needed to be assaulted by naked actors.


Environmental Politics Is Making the Kitchen Hotter
WOLFGANG PUCK, the celebrity chef whose duck- and shrimp-topped pizzas have become the snack of Hollywood stars, couldn't wait to join the Pure Food Campaign.
After years of fighting with the Federal Government over how he must label the frozen version of his pizzas, he is evangelical about the need to test and label genetically engineered foods, for which the Pure Food Campaign is vigorously lobbying.
Mr.
Puck has become politicized.
And so have thousands of other chefs across the nation, from Julia Child to Alice Waters.
They have begun to lobby in Washington and hold benefits to raise money for their favorite environmental issues, ranging from the stricter regulation of genetically engineered foods to mandatory inspection of seafood to cleaning up the Hudson River.


Hospital Executives' Pay Rose Sharply in Decade
The rise in compensation for executives at nonprofit hospitals in the 1980's was one of the fastest-growing components of the overall rise in medical costs, with the earnings of a few executives at the most prestigious institutions approaching or exceeding $1 million.
Although executive pay represents a small fraction of total revenues in any hospital, it is a matter of particular interest to Internal Revenue Service auditors.
Special audits of about 20 hospitals nationwide are under way, examining if these educational and charitable institutions, in their zeal to compete in the high-stakes health-care field, are straying from the ground rules governing tax-exempt status.


Three People Found Dead on Florida Campus


Wedding Information reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pique and Prejudice in South Africa
No sooner had South Africa's two most formidable leaders agreed to resume talks on a new democratic constitution than their jealous rival for the world's attention threw a tantrum.
Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, leader of seven million Zulus, stamped his feet and vowed not to take part in talks, elections or an interim government unless he gets more respect.
His performance is not only pathetic, it is dangerous; the peril of inciting an ethnic bloodbath is every bit as palpable as Chief Buthelezi's wounded vanity.
The chief has every right to a hearing.
But not to a veto of the historic compromise now reached by President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela's African National Congress.
In agreeing to a general amnesty and opening the way to an interim government, the two leaders have ended four months of deadlock.
With the whole nation moving from white rule to nonracial democracy, Chief Buthelezi would forfeit whatever reputation he has as a sensible conservative by playing the wrecker.


Cow's Milk And Children: A New No-No?
THE Physicians Committee on Responsible Medicine, whose interests include both preventive medicine and alternatives to animal research, has declared war on that great American icon milk.
"Parents," the committee said in a statement released in Boston yesterday, "should be alerted to the potential risks to their children from cow's-milk products." It added, "Milk should not be required or recommended in Government guidelines."
But while many pediatric experts say that cow's milk should not be given to infants, they strongly disagree with some of the committee's recommendations.


Crucial Charge Is Dismissed In Weinberger Perjury Case
A Federal judge today dismissed one of the five felony charges against Caspar W. Weinberger.
The charge accused the former Defense Secretary of having illegally concealed private diaries from Congress during its investigation of the Iran-contra affair.
The ruling, in response to a motion by Mr.
Weinberger's lawyers, left four charges against him.
But it removed an allegation at the heart of the Government's case.


9 Men Posing as Police Are Indicted in 3 Murders
Equipped with badges and plastic handcuffs, a gang of kidnappers posing as police officers staged the arrests of five New York City drug traffickers over an 18-month period and held them for hundreds of thousands of dollars in ransom, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
In one case, $650,000 in ransom was paid, the officials said.
In another, the victim was killed after his family refused to pay.
The other three escaped.
In several instances, victims were tortured with devices like staple guns.


Czechs More Eager Than Slovaks to Separate
To the Editor:
"Ugly Echoes in Slovakia" (editorial, Sept. 13) lays on Slovakia the sole blame for the breakup of the 74-year-old Czechoslovak federation.
The nation is called "uncompromising" and its leader, Vladimir Meciar, is painted as desperate "to end the . . . federation in a fast, painless divorce."
While Mr.
Meciar and his party, the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (H.Z.D.S.), initiated the move toward separation -- and indeed, were strident in their pursuit of it -- recent events show that these labels can more accurately be pinned on leaders of the Czech republic.
Czech leaders decided long ago that separation would benefit their nation.
They have seized the opening offered by the Slovaks and are pursuing with vigor a "take-the-money-and-run" policy, that is, driving the Slovaks to the wall on their proposals, even if they seem to have changed their minds on certain key issues.


Personal Health
THE symptoms can run the gamut from headaches and chest pains to memory loss and extreme apathy.
The diagnoses can range from heart disease to Alzheimer's.
But the real cause is often depression, a disorder of epidemic proportions that is typically unrecognized, misdiagnosed or improperly treated.
According to various surveys and studies, fewer than half of Americans consider depression to be a health problem, and more than two in five say it is a sign of personal weakness.
People who complain of depression are commonly admonished to snap out of it.
Countless others with physical symptoms like recurring headaches or backaches never realize that their complaints emanate from depression.


Physicians Support Johnson's Comeback
Medical experts yesterday applauded Magic Johnson's decision to return to professional sports.
They said that he should be able to return to the court without limitations and that the physical stresses of playing basketball should not hasten the progression of his disease.
"There is no medical reason why he shouldn't go back to the game," said Dr.
Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Disease in Bethesda, Md.


There's Little Delay In Free-Agent Game
With three of the four celebrated National Football League free agents now signed, sealed and delivered to new teams, was there any question that clubs would be quick to seek their services?
"Not in this sea of sharks," said Jim Finks, the New Orleans Saints' president and general manager and chairman of the league's competition committee.
"I'm surprised that it took this long for other teams to get them. This league is comprised of 28 barracudas. They'd eat their young to win. That's how competitive it is."


Script Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Why G.M. Buyer Unnerves Suppliers
The hype is the billions of dollars annually that Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriotua promises he will save the General Motors Corporation in lower outlays for parts and materials.
The cold reality is embodied in a nondescript factory here that makes millions of seat belts every year for Cadillacs, Buicks, Pontiacs and Oldsmobiles.
As G.M.'s new vice president of worldwide purchasing, Mr.
Lopez and his lieutenants rearranged machines and workers on the assembly lines at the General Safety Corporation.
The changes, said Alfred J. Fisher 3d, General Safety's president, yielded double-digit improvements in productivity.


I.B.M. Says Buyouts Will Trim 40,000 Jobs
I.B.M. said yesterday that twice as many employees as originally anticipated had taken incentives to retire early or resign, which will mean the elimination of 40,000 jobs this year.
It also said it was planning to cut back its manufacturing in response to "rapid changes in technology, shifting marketplace demand and prolonged worldwide economic weakness."
The company said that by the end of the year, it will have cut its employment by 25 percent since 1985 and reduced its manufacturing capacity by 40 percent.


Price Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 30


First Team Sports reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Microwave Filter Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A BBDO Exhibit Spotlights Two Quiet, Creative Auteurs
A RETROSPECTIVE of the creative output of BBDO New York is focusing attention on two executives there who, uncharacteristically for the ego-driven advertising business, usually remain behind the scenes.
The retrospective begins with the opening of an exhibit tonight at the One Club for Art and Copy, at its new location at 32 East 21st Street in Manhattan.
The exhibit, which runs through Oct. 30, is unusual for showcasing the work of an agency as large as BBDO New York.


Iraq Says It Will Not Assist U.N.'s Efforts to Help Kurds
A senior Iraqi official told the Secretary General today that Baghdad will not cooperate with his plans to launch a new relief operation to help the Kurds this winter if the Security Council seizes frozen Iraqi assets.
The warning was given by Iraq's Foreign Minister, Mohammed al-Sahaf, to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and the chief United Nations aid coordinator, Jan Eliasson of Sweden, at a meeting this morning, officials involved said.


An Old Pro Aches for a Title
Another potential victory had evaporated into the chilly night air Monday, tacking another loss onto an already dreary season, but the Yankees did not dwell on it.
The players showered quickly, dressed even more quickly and bolted for the door.
Every player except Don Mattingly.
Dressed in long underwear and a Yankee turtleneck shirt while nursing a beer, the team captain sat motionless in the visiting clubhouse at Cleveland Stadium and reflected on the last six months.
He asked how many more victories the Yankees had than last year.
Someone said three.
Mattingly shrugged.


Maytag's Accounts To Leo Burnett
The Maytag Corporation said yesterday that it will move advertising and public relations for its Magic Chef brand, effective Jan. 1, to Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago from the Keller Crescent Company in Evansville, Ind.
Keller Crescent will continue to handle some special projects for the premium-priced line of kitchen appliances.
Billings were not disclosed.


How New York Lags in Treating Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 7 news article "Mentally Ill: Unmet Goals for Albany" was an excellent analysis of the status of mental health programs in New York State.
It contained what should be a shocking fact: 50 percent of those in state psychiatric facilities are there because of a shortage of community support and residential programs.
Why aren't more New Yorkers outraged that 6,000 New Yorkers are unnecessarily hospitalized?
Why aren't taxpayers demanding that the Governor and his Division of the Budget and state legislators figure out how to break the gridlock that is keeping people institutionalized and a disproportionate share of mental health funds tied to deteriorating institutions -- at a cost in the billions?


SEARS SHIFTING AIM BACK TO RETAILING
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that it planned to dispose of its securities business, Discover credit card and real estate operations and to sell up to 20 percent of its Allstate insurance subsidiary in a public stock offering.
The broad thrust of the announcement represented the final burial of the decade-old Sears vision of providing middle-class consumers with almost every conceivable type of banking, investment and real estate service in addition to the clothes, appliances and other goods that had made the company a retailing legend in more than a century of business.


O'Brien Environmental Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Executive Changes
RALSTON PURINA CO., St.
Louis, named W. Patrick McGinnis chief executive of its grocery products group.
CROWELL &amp; MORING, Washington, appointed Robert Pettit partner of the law firm, where he will practice communications law.
He was previously general counsel for the Federal Communications Commission, Washington.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats; Gore Says Bush's Efforts to Befriend Iraqi Leader Led to Gulf War
Attacking President Bush's conduct of foreign policy, Senator Al Gore asserted today that the Administration's efforts to befriend Saddam Hussein in the years before he invaded Kuwait led directly to an unnecessary war.
In an effort to transform what was once viewed as the President's greatest foreign policy success -- the Persian Gulf war -- into a political liability in the final weeks of the campaign, the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate seized on an issue at which Democrats in Congress had been chipping away for months.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Hill Regains Title in Unanimous Decision
Virgil Hill reclaimed the vacant World Boxing Association light-heavyweight title he lost nearly 16 months ago with a unanimous decision over Frank Tate last night in Bismarck, N.D.
Fighting in the Bismarck Civic Center, where he had not lost a professional bout, Hill took the fight to Tate, chasing him around the ring.
There were a number of short flurries, followed by clinches.
Neither fighter went down, but both came close.
Hill was staggered by a right uppercut in the 11th and Hill threw Tate off balance with a right in the 12th.


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times yesterday about surgery to treat epilepsy in children reversed two labels for areas of the brain in some copies.
In those copies that included references to the temporal lobe and the basal ganglia, the basal ganglia should have appeared at the left.


Driver Hit by Chunk Of Concrete Is Killed
A Reading, Pa., man was killed last Saturday night when someone dropped a 40-pound chunk of concrete through the windshield of his van as he drove under an overpass on Route 78 in Somerset County, N.J., the New Jersey State Police said yesterday.
Sgt.
Paul Sinckler of the State Police said that the authorities had delayed announcing the incident, which has been deemed a homicide, so as not to hamper their investigation.
No suspect has been identified.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  BRAZIL'S HOUSE IMPEACHES COLLOR
Brazil's lower house of Congress voted 441 to 38 to impeach President Collor on corruption charges.
The President will be suspended from office for six months and now faces trial by the Senate.
A1  HAVEL IS READY FOR MORE
Vaclav Havel resigned in July as Czechoslovakia's President, not wishing to preside over the country's breakup.
But the onetime dissident's interest in politics, having been kindled, will not disappear.
He is girding for a comeback as titular leader of the Czech republic.
A3  VOTING BEGINS IN ANGOLA
Angolans voted on the first of two days in contested elections.
Many in the ravaged country seemed uncertain whether they were courting democracy or disorder.
A8  TAJIKISTAN'S WORRIED NEIGHBORS
Russia sent reinforcements to Tajikistan, where 10,000 Russian troops risk becoming caught up in a civil war.
Uzbekistan sealed its borders to refugees.
A12  DREADING THE WINTER IN BOSNIA
American intelligence experts warn that winter could cause well over 100,000 deaths from hunger and overexposure in Bosnia if the fighting continues to hamper relief and if aid is not increased.
A13  OUSTED HAITIAN FAULTS THE POPE
In a speech at the United Nations, Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, denounced the Vatican as the only state to recognize Haitian coup leaders.
A8  FRANCE REACHES OUT TO NATO
After years of holding the NATO command at arm's length, France said it is ready to do more to help define the alliance's role in a post-cold-war world.
A3  FILES IMPLICATE ROME BANK CHIEFS
A Federal judge in Atlanta says C.I.A. documents show that $5 billion in illegal loans were made to Iraq with the knowledge of top officials of a bank in Rome.
A10  Jumama Journal: Bedouins yield to the lure of the 20th century.
A4  National A14-22  BUSH'S DEBATE CHALLENGE
Unveiling one of the boldest tactical moves of the campaign, President Bush offered to debate Gov.
Bill Clinton on four consecutive Sundays.
The action, aides said, was partly inspired by the possibility that Ross Perot could enter the race.
A1  SHAKING UP THE RACE
Ross Perot has lost much of his magic, the Clinton and Bush campaigns agree.
But Republicans are hoping a revived Perot candidacy will shake up a race in which the President is lagging in the polls.
A1  PEROT AND HIS PEOPLE
As Ross Perot awaits the word from his supporters about whether he should run for President, there are increasing signs that his organization is neither as large nor as independent as he says it is.
A20  SHORT SHRIFT FOR ISSUES
Wherever he shows up, Ross Perot rails about his opponents and their fuzzy approach to politics.
But given broad latitude to discuss almost anything he wants, including what are commonly known as "the issues," Mr.
Perot rarely does so.
A20  THE CHICKEN STRATEGY
Mr.
Clinton's unexpectedly wide strength this late in the race is allowing the Democrats to play a highly offensive game, aides say.
A notable tactic: stationing supporters costumed as giant chickens at the President's campaign stops.
A21
Senator Gore attacks Mr.
Bush on his dealings with Iraq.
A21  A SHRINKING SEARS, ROEBUCK
Sears, Roebuck plans to dispose of its securities business, Discover credit card and real estate operations and to sell part of Allstate in a public stock offering.
The move represents the end of its vision of providing middle-class consumers with a variety of services.
A1  WASTE PLAN DROPPED
The White House has dropped a proposal to allow manufacturers to ship hazardous wastes to town dumps, prompted, Administration officials said, by concern that President Bush has become vulnerable to Democratic charges on the environment.
A1  TELEVISION LESSONS
A children's broadcasting law passed two years ago was heralded as a way to encourage educational programming on commercial television.
But consumer groups say broadcasters are obeying the rule by defining cartoons like "Super Mario Brothers" as educational.
A1  QUESTIONS ON SALARIES
In recent years, executives at nonprofit hospitals have enjoyed fast-growing salary increase, with some earning more than $1 million a year.
Now the I.R.S. is asking if such generous hospitals are straying from the rules on tax-exempt organizations.
A14  CHARGE IS DISMISSED
A judge dismissed one of the five felony charges against Caspar Weinberger stemming from the Iran-contra affair.
The action removes an accusation at the heart of the case against the former Defense Secretary.
A14  THWARTED INDICTMENTS
A grand jury hearing a case against a contractor running a polluted nuclear bomb factory so badly wanted to indict the people who ran the plant that it wrote the indictments itself, a member of the jury says.
But the prosecutor blocked the grand jury, the juror said, and ultimately, no individuals were charged.
A18  Education Page B8  College officials puzzle over Federal ruling on race and admissions.
In a rural school switch, boarding students go from city to country.
Campus Journal: Vermont student engineers do professional research.
Metro Digest B1  3 NEWARK OFFICERS INDICTED
A grand jury accused three Newark police officers of taking the law into their own hands four months ago by ambushing a teen-age car-theft suspect and trying to cover up their actions after one of them fired a shot from an illegal handgun that critically wounded the youth.
A1  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Perot: Where's the cattle?
Pique, prejudice in South Africa.
Seniors and juniors.
Strong words for a police riot.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: A feeling called Mama.
George Kenney: Blueprint for a wider war.
Garry Trudeau: The draft -- my story; my story -- the holes.
Saul B. Shapiro: Clumsy?
Sue New York City.
Business Digest D1  Living Section C1-10  Health Page C12  Obituaries D25


Dr. W. Henry Sebrell, 91, Expert On Nutrition and Use of Vitamins
W.
Henry Sebrell Jr., a pioneer in vitamin research and an international authority on nutrition, died yesterday at his home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 91 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Moscow Fears for Troops in Tajikistan
A civil war is intensifying in Tajikistan, causing increased alarm in Moscow over some 10,000 Russian troops who are caught in the middle.
Russia sent some 800 reinforcements to Dushanbe today, hoping to end continued attacks on barracks and arms depots by combatants looking for weapons.
There has also been new nervousness in neighboring Uzbekistan, where President Islam A. Karimov has sealed the border against refugees from the fighting and is increasing controls on his political opposition.


Theater in Review
The American Living Room Reupholstered Ohio Theater 66 Wooster Street SoHo Through Oct. 11 Two one-act plays.
Curators, Tim Maner and Kristin Marting; lighting, Cindy Breakfield; production manager, Rachelle Anthes.
Presented by Tiny Mythic Theater Company, Mr.
Maner and Ms.
Marting, artistic directors; Michael Hurst, managing director.
SOAP OPERA, by Ralph Pape; directed by Elizabeth Franzen; stage managed by Tina Trimble.
WITH: Julienne Greer, Shannon Malone and Gerard J. Schneider.
DIALOGUE WITH A PROSTITUTE, written and directed by Howard Ross Patlis; based on Dacia Maraini's "Dialogue Between a Prostitute and One of Her Clients"; translated by Gillian Hanna; stage managed by Tina Magnuson; assistant stage manager, Susan Nanes.
WITH: Susan Huffaker, Anthony Marshall and Howard Ross Patlis.


CHRONICLE
Which segues nicely to the involvement of KEN BURNS.
Mr.
Burns, the producer and director of the documentary series "The Civil War," will be at the party to announce that he will make a film on Jefferson in conjunction with the celebration But the film will take several years to complete.
"My central question always is: 'Who are we as a people?' " Mr.
Burns said yesterday.
"That question informs every film I make, and if there is one individual who answers it, it would be Jefferson."


Niagara Crash Of 2 Copters Kills 4 People
As hundreds of stunned tourists looked on, two sightseeing helicopters collided over Niagara Falls this afternoon, causing one to plummet into a wooded hillside, where it crashed, killing all four people on board.
The collision, which occurred on the Canadian side of the falls shortly after noon, rained metallic debris onto a parking lot filled with cars and a nearby restaurant on the edge of the Horseshoe Falls.
No one was injured by the falling pieces, but sightseers who were picnicking, strolling or gazing at the mists of the falls did not know whether to gape at the spectacle overhead or run for cover.


A Museum Devoted to the Culinary Arts
THE sign at the entrance to the building reads "Johnson &amp; Wales, Culinary Archives and Museum," but the atmosphere is more reminiscent of a colorful flea market, where shelves and tables are overflowing with a hodgepodge of cooking equipment, prints and assorted culinary memorabilia.
The museum and archives, modestly billed as the Smithsonian Institution of the food-service industry, include more than 200,000 items relating to food, including 30,000 cookbooks from as long ago as 1500, antique kitchen and restaurant equipment, menus from all over the world and oddities like the first poultry roaster, activated by a Swiss-clock movement.
More than 6,000 tourists and food professionals passed through its doors last year.
The culinary archives, founded in 1979, has become an important resource for food scholars all over the country.


Review/Film; Mamet's Real Estate Sharks and Their Prey
They're guys on the edge.
They are real estate salesmen on the North Side of Chicago, working out of a shabby office with a water cooler, trying to make ends meet by selling second-rate home sites in Florida and Arizona with names like Glengarry Highlands and Rio Rancho.
Everything they earn comes from commissions, which can mount up.
Yet it's not easy selling real estate even in the best of times.
When money is tight, forget it.
The salesman has to hustle.
He has to go out on "sits." That's when he hangs around for hours in the clients' kitchens, eating yesterday's store-bought crumb cake, while the clients lean this way and that until, at last, it's apparent they have no intention of buying anything.
They just like having company.


Weak Dollar Brings Rise in Rates
A sharp decline in the dollar kept United States credit markets from enjoying any gains yesterday from the sort of economic reports that usually propel bonds higher.
A decline in the leading economic indicators and a disappointing consumer confidence survey reported yesterday both implied that a robust recovery was still many months away, a condition that tends to support bond prices and lowers rates.


Hadron Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Boeing Asks To Sell Jets To Iran Air
The Boeing Company has tentatively agreed to sell nearly $1 billion of commercial jetliners to state-owned Iran Air, if American policy changes to allow such exports, two Boeing spokesmen and a lawyer for Iran Air said today.
But Richard Boucher, a spokesman for the State Department, said at a news briefing today that the Administration continued to bar the sale to Iran of American planes or aircraft with many American components.
A Boeing spokesman said the company's executives were trying to get the policy changed and had met with Commerce Department and Justice Department officials.


InstaCool Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


3Com Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Arthur Mosher, 82, International Expert On Agricultural Aid
Arthur T. Mosher, a former president of the Agricultural Development Council, an international agricultural development organization, died Sunday at his home in Black Mountain, N.C.
He was 82 years old.
Dr.
Mosher, who lived for many years in Ithaca, N.Y., before moving to North Carolina last year, suffered from Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease for several years, his son Richard said.


Davstar Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to June 30


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


Jury Fought Prosecutor on Bomb Plant
Before the Government accepted a plea agreement with the contractor running an illegally polluted nuclear bomb factory, the grand jury hearing the case so badly wanted to indict the people who ran the plant that it wrote the indictments itself, a member of the jury has said.
But the prosecutor blocked the grand jury, the juror said, and ultimately, no individuals were charged.
In a breach of the secrecy that usually surrounds grand jury proceedings, Westword, a weekly newspaper in Denver, yesterday published a long account of the two-and-a-half-year grand jury inquiry into accusations against the operator of Rocky Flats, Rockwell International, its executives, and officials of the Department of Energy, which owns the plant.
The Denver Post also reported Sunday that the grand jury had prepared its own indictments.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Rutgers
You are a quarterback and you have just been designated to start your first game.
The opponent is undefeated -- ranked among the nation's top 10 teams -- and your coach says the opponent's defense is one of the best he has seen in college football, particularly the front seven.
You are a 20-year-old redshirt freshman who has played briefly in only three other games.
But in 8 of the 13 possesions that you directed, your team scored by either touchdown or field goal.
Your name is Ray Lucas.
Your team is Rutgers.
The opponent is Penn State.
The game is Saturday in Giants Stadium at 6 P.M.


Under the Sign of a Topless Car Wash, Frustration


Johnson Goes From Dream Ride to the Rat Race
Pat Riley visited with Magic Johnson last week in Los Angeles.
There was no need to pop the question.
The gleam in Johnson's eyes was a happy announcement that he would be returning to the Lakers.
"How many games?" said Riley.


Czechs More Eager Than Slovaks to Separate; Unjust to Meciar
To the Editor:
Say what you will about Vladimir Meciar, the Slovak separatist Prime Minister, but it is unjust to say, as you editorialized ("Ugly Echoes in Slovakia," Sept. 13), that "no one would ever confuse  [ Alexander Dubcek ]  with the Meciar known to the world as a slavish supporter of the old hard-line Communist regime."
Mr.
Meciar and his first wife were, in fact, expelled from the Communist Party for his support of Mr.
Dubcek's short-lived 1968 Prague Spring experiment with democracy.
"She was against it; I was for it," he told me last spring, "but we both were kicked out because of my attitude. When we divorced, they took her back into the party."


Critic's Notebook; Taking the Spanish Out of Spanish Dance At the Lyons Biennial
"Spanish dance has been a purely Parisian phenomenon," the French Romantic poet Theophile Gautier once noted wickedly.
Gautier (who was also the originator and librettist of "Giselle") was writing during a 19th-century invasion of Paris by hugely popular Spanish dancers, and if his remark was ironic, the myth if not the reality of Spain is still highly attractive to foreigners.
The latest evidence can be seen here at the Lyons Dance Biennial's celebration of Spanish dance, now in its third and final week.
At the outset, the festival was dominated by Spanish companies with Spanish choreographers.
But increasingly foreign and non-Spanish choreographers, working with Spanish themes, have come to the fore.


Seniors and Juniors
Critics of Social Security and Medicare have long charged that as older adults get more, children get less.
The accusation has promoted the belief that seniors are "greedy geezers" while the nation's children are ever more deprived.
But now the seniors are fighting to restore their image by helping the kids; after all, they weren't born yesterday.
The new president of the 33-million-member American Association of Retired Persons listed "intergenerational action" as her top priority when she got the job a few months ago.
Just recently the A.A.R.P. said it was teaming up with the nationwide Coalition for America's Children to promote issues like health care and education for youngsters.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
DENVER BRONCOS -- Waived Ricky Nattiel, wide receiver, and Robert Perryman, running back.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Troy Stradford, running back.
Waived Eric Lynch, running back.
Waived Andre Jones, linebacker, from the practice squad.
Activated Larry Tharpe, tackle, from injured reserve.
Released D.J.
Dozier, running back.


ROME BANK LINKED TO ATLANTA LOANS
A Federal judge said today that raw, classified Central Intelligence Agency documents revealed that billions of dollars in illegal loans to Iraq made by the Atlanta branch of an Italian bank were known to the bank's top officials in Rome.
The disclosure by Judge Marvin H. Shoob of United States District Court came in a whispered conference at the bench with Government and defense lawyers during the sentencing hearing of Christopher P. Drogoul, a former manager of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro.
Judge Shoob later made the statement part of the court's written record.


A Month Late, School Opens in Detroit


Clarcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Medicis Pharmaceutical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Making Coal More Useful By Cooking Out the Water
The Powder River Basin in Wyoming has huge amounts of very clean coal, but nature does not organize itself for mankind's benefit: the deposit is a long way from market and shipping costs are bloated because the coal has a low energy content per pound.
But coal, like oil, can be refined, and this month a pilot plant built by Encoal, a subsidiary of Shell Oil, began full operation.
The plant daily cooks 1,000 tons of coal from the Buckskin Mine in Gillette, Wyo., turning it into more valuable hydrocarbons.
The process was developed by SGI International, a developer of energy technologies based in La Jolla, Calif.


California Amplifier reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Dinkins's Drug Chief Quits Over Tight Budget
Frustrated by what he described as a lack of Federal and state financing for the treatment and prevention of addiction, David C. Condliffe, who has served for two years as director of New York City's drug policy office, said yesterday that he had resigned.
"We need a Marshall Plan to deal with the drug problem," he said.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Wichita, Kan., is offering $50 million of tax-exempt general obligation sales-tax bonds through the First Boston Corporation, with yields ranging from 2.9 percent in 1993 to 5.4 percent in 2002.
The issue is rated double-A by both Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Broadcasters, to Satisfy Law, Define Cartoons as Education
It might seem like an ordinary television cartoon, but the Saturday morning adventures of Bucky O'Hare, a rabbit in space who fights alien toads with guns and lasers, is in fact "educational and informational."
At least that is what New Orleans television station WGNO told Federal regulators as it documented its efforts to comply with the Children's Television Act, a new Federal law that was intended to boost the number of educational programs on television for children.


At $3 Billion, Where Is Disaster Relief?
To the Editor:
Following Hurricane Andrew, the debate over the Federal Emergency Management Agency did not even mention the most basic issue of all: that FEMA and its predecessor agencies were established to carry out the national civil defense program, to alleviate the consequences of a nuclear attack on the United States, and that national and state responses to smaller disasters demonstrate they could scarcely have done so to the slightest degree ("Abolish the Disaster Agency," Op-Ed, Sept. 6).
For more than 35 years, national and state-level responses to every recent natural disaster like Hurricane Andrew, which was trivial compared with what a nuclear attack would have meant, have demonstrated the fantasy of post-nuclear attack planning and preparations.


In Oakland, the Return of the Native Is Bittersweet
Jose Canseco's return was not exactly triumphant.
His back hurt.
His feelings still hurt a little, too.
But at least the fans didn't forget him.
When Canseco emerged from the tunnel that leads to the field at the Oakland Coliseum today, he was no longer one of their own.
He wore a blue top, gray pants and the look of a visitor.
But almost one month after he was traded by the Oakland Athletics to the Texas Rangers, the fans embraced him.


At Last, Giants' Baker To Hit Coliseum Turf
The last time Stephen Baker stood in the Los Angeles Coliseum, his uniform belonged to a security company.
His job was to keep wild fans off the field, monitor the stands, escort the Raiders' cheerleaders to their cars after games.
It wasn't what he had planned.
Baker grew up 10 minutes from the Coliseum, had always dreamed of playing there.
The Los Angeles high schools held their championship games in the stadium every season.
Every year, Baker looked forward to the opportunity.
Every year, his team from Hamilton High School failed to qualify.


A Dome Rises Where Science -- Not Running Backs -- Will Be Tackled


The Freedom to Worship, the Freedom to Park; With a Nod Toward Mecca, Weary Car Owners Give Thanks for a Parking Reprieve
New York is a city that never stops asking for more, and its residents clearly know whom to ask.
Their City Council has responded to their requests by extending suspension of alternate side-of-the-street parking to two Muslim holidays, a move that makes the streets a little dirtier and reduces municipal revenue by more than $500,000.
But so what?
In so doing, the municipal Solons mightily pleased millions of New Yorkers.


Heads of Store Clerks' Union Held in Theft
Two officials of a union representing department store employees have been arrested on charges that they embezzled almost $1 million from their union's welfare fund, Federal prosecutors announced yesterday in Brooklyn.
The officials were identified as Cloyd Holmes of Huntington, L.I., the president of Local 377 of the United Service Employees Union, and Salvatore Frasca of Deer Park, L.I., the secretary-treasurer of the local and administrator of the welfare fund.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Sears, Roebuck said it would dispose of its Dean Witter securities business, Discover credit card, Coldwell-Banker real estate operations and sell up to 20 percent of its Allstate insurance subsidiary in a public stock offering.
The reversal of its decade-old vision of synergy would halve its $38 billion debt.  [ Page A1. ]  Analysts praised Sears's plan, which leaves the battered retail business to sink or swim.  [ D7. ]
I.B.M. is eliminating 40,000 jobs this year, double the number expected earlier, through early retirements and incentives to leave.
It is also cutting back manufacturing operations.  [ D1. ]


Gelman Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Food Notes
More Coffee Bars
New coffee bars are appearing faster than you can say espresso.
Last week, Cooper's Coffee, 2151 Broadway (75th Street), opened in a sleek modern space trimmed with granite, honeyed mahogany and stainless steel for a look that suggests the 1930's or the 50's.
Or is it the 90's?
The shop serves excellent coffees in the now-familiar array that includes espresso, cappuccino, macchiato, latte and Americano, as well as rich regular coffee, tea and fruit drinks.
Coffees are priced from 85 cents to $3.80 a serving.
Pastries, cakes, sandwiches, muffins and scones are also sold.
There are seats at counters along the walls.


A Rash of Injuries Shifts Burden Onto Washington
When defensive left end Dennis Byrd dislocated his right shoulder during the 18-10 loss to the Los Angeles Rams on Sunday, the already thin Jets defensive line got even thinner.
For Marvin Washington, though, the challenge thickened.
Washington, the 6-foot-6-inch, 272-pounder out of Idaho, worked out at the Jets' Hofstra training camp yesterday, a regular day off for the team.


Haitians, in March to U.N., Demand Democracy


Public &amp; Private; A Feeling Called Mama
At Children's Village, a residential treatment center for 300 kids in New York's Westchester County, there are boys who will tell you that Mama walks on water.
Could be that Mama said she was coming on visiting day and didn't show.
Could be that Mama said they'd live together soon and then disappeared.
Could be that Mama hit hard and said mean things.
Doesn't matter.
It's not Mama they're really thinking of.
It's something they can't put a name to, something like being under a warm blanket on a cold morning with sunshine coming through the blinds.
It's security and stability.
It's being happy.


AIDS-Like Illness Is Found to Be Rare
SCIENTISTS from around the world said yesterday that they had found nearly 100 cases of an AIDS-like illness in which there was no detectable evidence of the virus that causes AIDS.
But after a meeting held by the World Health Organization at which the cases were reported, the head of the agency's AIDS program, Dr.
Michael H. Merson, said such cases were rare in both industrialized and developing countries.


Early Onset Found For Panic Attacks
THOUGH usually not diagnosed until people are in their 20's, panic attacks frequently occur first in sixth- and seventh-grade children, a new study has found.
The new finding suggests the desirability of identifying children who are beginning to have the problem and helping them deal with their symptoms while they are in their early teens, rather than later in life, when the problem can become severely debilitating, experts say.


Camacho Charged With Driving Counts
HECTOR (MACHO) CAMACHO was pulled over by a police officer in Lake Placid, Fla., on Sept. 21 and charged with failure to stay within one lane of traffic on a rural highway and driving with a suspended license, according to the police.
Camacho, 30 years old, was also issued citations for possessing two driver's licenses and giving false information to obtain a driver's license.


William Douglas-Home, 80, Dies; English Writer of Stage Comedies
William Douglas-Home, a prolific English playwright of light comedy, died on Monday at his home in Winchester, England.
He was 80 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his niece, Caroline Douglas-Home.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ross Perot; Grass-Roots Drive Shows Hand of Oz
As Ross Perot awaits the word from his supporters about re-entering the Presidential race, there are increasing signs that his grass-roots organization is neither as large nor as independent as he purports it to be.
There are also signs that the support he cites may not be as strong as he maintains.
Interviews with current and former volunteers in a dozen states indicated that the grass-roots organization that Mr.
Perot said would advise him may be little more than an adjunct to his Dallas operation and that their feedback might be based on small samples of hard-core supporters.


Consumers' Use of Shopping Coupons Is Up
The weak economy is creating a nation of coupon clippers.
Bargain-hungry shoppers redeemed 4.1 billion coupons in the first six months of the year, an increase of 10 percent from a year earlier, according to NCH Promotional Services Inc., a large coupon processing firm in Chicago.
And manufacturers, in response to the demand for cost savings, issued 193 billion coupons in that period, an increase of 7 percent, according to CMS Inc., a coupon processor in Winston-Salem, N.C.


Intermetrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


France Moves to Take Bigger Part in Defining New Role for NATO
France, which has long promoted the idea of a separate European military force, suggested today that it was ready to take part more actively in NATO's efforts to find a new role for the Atlantic alliance in a post-cold-war world.
Addressing the opening session of an international strategic conference, the French Defense Minister, Pierre Joxe, said, "France must be present in decision-making and discussion forums where present-day crises are managed and where our future security is worked out."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DRUG DEALERS KIDNAPPED AND KILLED
Equipped with badges and plastic handcuffs, a gang of kidnappers posing as officers staged the arrests of five New York City drug traffickers over 18 months and held them for hundreds of thousands of dollars in ransom, law-enforcement officials said.
In one case, $650,000 in ransom was paid.
In another, the victim was killed after his family refused to pay.
And in several instances, victims were tortured with devices like staple guns.
B3.
GOING WEST FOR JOBS
Chris Rosen has a steadily growing circle of friends in Los Angeles, a city that holds little appeal for him -- or them.
But that's where many New York film technicians are migrating as a two-year slump in the movie business drags on.
After a seven-month boycott of New York by film producers that ended in May 1991, it is clear that what was once one of the city's largest industries is only a shadow of its former self.
B3.


A Crucial Linkup in the U.S. Data Highway
The keepers of the National Science Foundation's supercomputer arsenal have created a blueprint for combining their 21 machines into a continental weapon capable of attacking the most formidable scientific problems.
Equipped to tackle such grand challenges as decoding the human genome and precisely predicting when and where hurricanes might strike, the huge new computing system would be formed by electronically linking machines at the foundation's four supercomputer centers around the nation.
They would form a single "metacenter" accessible from work stations anywhere in the land.


Jumama Journal; Bedouin's World Now: House and a Pickup Truck
Dressed in a billowing white robe and carrying an old double-barreled shotgun, Mohammed Issa padded softly in bare feet through the rolling white sand dunes along the Mediterranean coast.
The 29-year-old Bedouin hunter beat small stands of wood, surrounded at the base by fishnets, with a branch, trying to scare up birds resting in the shade.


For Sears' Stores, Do-or-Die Time
While the decision of Sears, Roebuck to detach its financial services businesses is what shareholders, analysts and consultants have demanded with increasing insistence for years, it will leave the battered retail business to sink or swim.
It unravels the cozy sweater Edward R. Telling, Sears' chairman from 1978 to 1985, knit more than a decade ago to shelter the stumbling store chain, and will force Sears's merchants and store managers to face the retail world without much of the financial buttress provided by the other businesses.


3 NEWARK OFFICERS ACCUSED OF AMBUSH IN CAR-THEFT CASE
A grand jury accused three Newark police officers today of taking the law into their own hands four months ago by ambushing a teen-age car-theft suspect and trying to cover up their actions after one of them fired a shot from an illegal handgun that critically wounded the youth.
The jury charged Officer Kenneth Holloway Jr. with aggravated assault in the shooting of the teen-ager, Howard Caesar.
He and two other officers, Jose Montalvo and Gerard Piacenza, were charged with conspiracy and misconduct in filing false or misleading reports.


Yields on Deposits at Banks Have Another Down Week
Yields of bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit trended down in the week ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based interest rate publication.
Analysts at The Monitor said the pace of the decline had slowed from the previous week, but they cautioned that yields might continue to decline amid a struggling economic recovery and the possibility of another Federal Reserve move to lower interest rates.


Questions on Race
Without making a ruling or filing a lawsuit, the Department of Education has managed not only to change the way the law school at the University of California at Berkeley admits minority students, but also to cast a pall of uncertainty over all college admissions policies that have to do with race.
On Monday, the department's Office of Civil Rights announced that after a two-year investigation, the law school had voluntarily agreed to end its practice of giving special consideration to minority students by having them essentially compete only against each other, not against the general pool of applicants.


14 Injured in Brooklyn Fire


Leading Indicators Drop 0.2%
The Government's chief index for predicting the economy slipped two-tenths of 1 percent in August, suggesting to analysts that the current torpor will extend at least into early 1993.
"The economy is going nowhere," said Bruce Steinberg, an economist at Merrill Lynch in New York.
"It looks like the stagnation will persist another three to six months."


In Their Own Words
PRESIDENT BUSH
In a speech yesterday at a campaign rally in Knoxville, Tenn.
"Governor Clinton wants you to trust that the American economy is going to improve if you turn full control of your paycheck over to the crew that already runs the United States Congress. And he wants tax-and-spend Government planners, those kind of planners, to have total control over the executive branch, too.
And they tried this 12 years ago.
And we ended up with double-digit inflation.
We had interest rates sometimes as high as 18 percent.
And we had a misery index over 21 percent, unemployment and inflation added together.
And it took years to wring inflation and high interest rates out of the American economy.


Barry Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cricket's a Major Sport In Metropolitan Area
To the Editor:
A brief note to recognize the news article on cricket that appeared Sept. 13 and to encourage attention to the world's second most popular sport.
Cricket is played throughout the tri-state area and followed passionately in the ethnic press and on both Indian and Pakistani television.
A cricket column appears regularly on Sunday in Newsday and subscribers to the English cricket magazines pass around their sacred journals until they are thumbed to death.


Inquiry Into Investment In Olympia's Buildings
The Toronto Stock Exchange has begun an investigation of whether a big Canadian real estate holding company failed to disclose properly an investment in some Olympia &amp; York properties in Manhattan.
The investment, made three years ago, has only now come to light.
John Carson, the exchange's director of market integrity, said the inquiry, which should be completed within a couple of weeks, could lead to disciplinary action against Carena Developments Ltd., the core real estate holding company of the Edper Bronfman organization.


Small Garage Gives Big, Ritzy Indy-Type Racers a Run for the Money
Along Route 611 in this town a few miles north of Philadelphia is the Ritz Garage, an antique-car showroom.
A few yards behind it is another garage, one that by Indy-car standards is decidedly less ritzy.
It is the home of Derrick Walker Motorsports, a team that is battling rivals that have more than triple its budget and manpower.
But if money means so much in Indy-car racing, the Scotsman Derrick Walker and his Canadian driver, Scott Goodyear, have at least proved that with enough hard work and heady driving, it doesn't mean everything.


Editors' Note
A picture on Sept. 22 with an article about the influence of women in the Peruvian guerrilla group Shining Path, showed two women and a man in captivity with the group's leader, Abimael Guzman Reynoso.
The Peruvian Government, which released the videotape from which the photo was taken, said the three were detained in the Sept. 12 raid in which Mr.
Guzman was arrested.


CHRONICLE
How do you go about planning the celebration of a 250th birthday?
To start with, "You must have a lot of candles," DANIEL P. JORDAN, the executive director of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, said yesterday.
Mr.
Jordan is in the throes of mapping out the logistics for an 18-month-long commemoration of Jefferson's birth on April 13, 1743.
Tonight, he will discuss the plans in New York at a reception for 100 guests.
The party, which is to have a menu featuring some of Jefferson's favorite dishes, will be at the Morris-Jumel Mansion in Washington Heights.


Wine Talk
"THE reports of my death," wrote Mark Twain, "are greatly exaggerated."
The same is being said of what this column reported in August about the state of the California wine industry.
Since then, winery owners and people who track the industry closely have been writing and calling, saying, "Not me" and "not us." They are right.
And so was this column.
That's the way it is with statistics.


Woodstock at 25: Adults Take Over
For Johnny Jules, who sleeps under the stars on a sway-backed pink couch in this rural Catskills town, the site of the Woodstock Festival in 1969 is sacred ground where the seeds of peace and brotherly love were sown.
Lately, he says, this peace has been disturbed by the bickering of government leaders who see a gold mine in the nearby field that was the site of the rock concert that defined a generation for millions of Americans.


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 19 about the author William A. Swanberg and a related correction in this space last Thursday referred erroneously to the subjects of his last book, "Whitney Father, Whitney Heiress." They were William Collins Whitney, Secretary of the Navy in the first Cleveland Administration, and his daughter, Dorothy.
The book did not deal with the publisher John Hay Whitney, who in any case did not have a daughter named Dorothy.


60-Minute Gourmet
CALF'S liver has long been a delicacy in France, where the methods of preparation are endless.
In this country it has gained in popularity over the last 20 years or so, but it is still far from a staple on restaurant menus.
The assertively flavored yet delicately textured meat goes well with sauces that combine richness with a touch of acidity, like lemon or wine vinegar.
Another good source of acidity is capers.


College Plan Leads to Criminal Inquiry
An effort to reach out to nontraditional students in this tiny community of Hasidic Jews has created multimillion-dollar troubles for Rockland Community College and led to a criminal investigation into possible fraud, theft and conspiracy.
The difficulties began in a most unlikely way: the desire of this college to offer classes in Judaic studies at an unofficial off-campus branch in this incorporated village, which is home to some 600 Hasidic Jewish families who do business with the outside world but conduct the rest of their lives in virtual social isolation.


Review/Film Festival; Independence in Africa and Death in High Places
There are some remarkable similarities between "Lumumba: Death of a Prophet" and "Allah Tantou," two documentaries, each relating to the African independence movement, that the New York Film Festival is presenting today at 6:15 P.M. in Alice Tully Hall.
Each film is about an hour long.
Each tries its best to reconstruct a portrait of a heroic if shadowy figure who was executed under cloudy circumstances by political enemies many years ago.
In the absence of extensive documentary material, Raoul Peck, who made "Lumumba," and David Achkar, who created "Allah Tantou," have boldly inserted themselves into their films.
In both, the frustrating search for the truth becomes as significant as any facts they uncover.


Mozambique Peace Pact Signing Called Off
Only two days before the planned signing of a treaty to end 16 years of war in Mozambique and bring food to millions of starving people, Italian mediators called off the event today, saying the rebel leader had refused to attend.
The breakdown of the accord, relief officials said, threatens millions of Mozambicans for whom peace would have brought emergency food supplies to counter famine.


Esta Huttner, 83, Dies; Started a Foundation
Esta Brodey Huttner, a founder and longtime board member of the Karen Horney Foundation, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 83 years old.
Her family said she died of cardiopulmonary failure.


Review/Film; Mixing Fiction and Fact on Palestinian Conflict
Amos Kollek, who wrote, directed and acted in "Double Edge," a political drama set in contemporary Jerusalem, happens to be the son of Teddy Kollek, the Mayor of that strife-torn city.
The director's father also appears in the film, which opens today.
He is one of several prominent real-life figures who are interviewed by Faye Milano (Faye Dunaway), an imperiously self-assured correspondent for a newspaper called The New York Herald.
During the film, the reporter, who has a three-week assignment in the region, methodically sets about soliciting views of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict from leaders on both sides.
Some of the others who offer their assessments include Abba Eban, the former Israeli Foreign Minister; Ziad Abu Zayad, a Palestinian who is the publisher of Gesher, an Arab newspaper printed in Hebrew, and Rabbi Meir Kahane, the right-wing Israeli leader who was assassinated in New York in 1990 several weeks after the filming was completed.
Their remarks are interwoven with observations by fictional characters who range from a father-and-son team of Palestinian terrorists (Makram Khouri and Mohammad Bakri) to an Israeli military reservist (the director), who becomes the reporter's tour guide and eventually her lover.


Quiet on the Set: Costs Mire New York in a Film Slump
Chris Rosen has a steadily growing circle of friends in Los Angeles, a city that holds little appeal for him -- or them.
But that's where a number of New York film technicians are migrating as a two-year slump in the movie business drags on.
"They would have preferred to stay here," he said.
But the work has gone west, and elsewhere.


Bridge
The last deal of a match is a particularly dangerous one, and players make errors of judgment more often than they would earlier in the proceedings.
This is partly a matter of fatigue but partly the result of a feeling that it is almost over and one's teammates are waiting eagerly to compare scores.
A case in point is the Harter Cup final, played last Thursday at the Manhattan Club, at 27 West 72d Street.
This is a double knockout for players below life-master rank, and after almost a year of competition in a field of 18 teams, one team was unbeaten: Robert Stayman, Bonnie Gellas, Laura Schisgall and Stan Sterenberg, all of Manhattan, and Gloria McPike of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
With one deal remaining they trailed by 4 imps against a once-beaten team led by Anne Mittman of Manhattan.


No Headline
"God has put me here to play basketball, to do my thing on the court. So that's where I'm going to do my thing, on that court." -- MAGIC JOHNSON.  [ A1:4. ]


To Fill Its Schools, a Rural Town Opens Its Homes
In the old days in the rural West, students who lived on distant ranches sometimes boarded with a family in town during the school year, rather than ride 40 miles of dirt back roads to class.
Then the practice mostly vanished, as students in the countryside were able to zip to school on black-topped roads.
But like schools in many small towns, the Clayton district now faces a new problem, declining enrollment.
So, in the hope of surviving, school officials here have taken a page from the past: they have revived the practice of families' boarding students.
But now there is a twist: the boarders come from the city.


Barnes &amp; Noble Drops Offer
Barnes &amp; Noble Inc. announced yesterday that it had canceled its proposed plans to sell to the public 6.8 million common shares for $102 million.
Instead, the publishing company said it would sell $100 million of new equity to its principal shareholders and a private investor group.
Leonard Riggio, chairman and chief executive officer, expressed his belief that the private placement created greater values for the shareholders than a public offering could have under current market conditions.


Little Switzerland reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Winter May Kill 100,000 In Bosnia, the C.I.A. Warns
United States intelligence experts and United Nations officials are warning that winter weather could lead to well over 100,000 deaths in Bosnia and Herzegovina from hunger and exposure if the fighting continues to hamper relief efforts and assistance is not increased.
The Central Intelligence Agency has told the White House that 147,000 Bosnians could die this winter, assuming that deliveries of aid continue to be delayed and given normal weather patterns, Administration officials said.
The toll could increase substantially if the weather is worse than usual, or be reduced if the fighting lessens.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
8.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
5.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.45
5.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.72
2.73
5.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.85
2.85
5.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.88
5.86
7.21
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.33
7.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.40
8.91
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.39
6.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Deutsche Bank Names U.S. Chief
Deutsche Bank, pushing to take advantage of its financial strength and expand its American business when some other banks are licking their wounds, said yesterday that it had hired John A. Rolls to be chief executive officer of its business in North America, effective Nov. 1.
Mr.
Rolls, who is 51 years old, has never worked for a bank.
Rather, he has spent most of his career as a corporate finance officer responsible for selecting banks and arranging the best possible terms for his employer.
Since 1986 he has been chief financial officer at the United Technologies Corporation, and before that he was with the RCA Corporation and the Monsanto Company.
Though he was familiar with the Deutsche Bank name, he has never done business with it, he said.


Campaign Concerns Prompt White House To Drop Waste Plan
The White House has dropped a proposal to allow manufacturers to dispose of hazardous wastes in town dumps, senior Bush Administration officials said today, because of concern that the Bush campaign has become vulnerable to Democratic criticism on the environment.
The decision was made by the White House chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d.
Aides said he was worried about the criticism that the Administration had tilted away from environmental protection.
It struck down a proposal championed by the Council on Competitiveness, a cabinet-level group headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, which in the last 15 months has successfully advocated relaxing environmental regulations deemed to be needlessly burdensome to business.


Grilled Chicken Meets Some Fancy Greens
MOST recipes that call for grilling can be made indoors on a stove-top grill.
Broiling, when used as an alternative, does not produce the desirable flavor that comes from cooking over an open flame.
Stove-top grills are so inexpensive now that it's no great sacrifice to include one in your kitchen.
In fact, they are almost indispensable for healthful eating: grilling eliminates the fat required in cooking meat by most other methods.


Blueprint for a Wider War
Everything in the Yugoslav conflict follows from Serbia's fundamental goal of creating a larger, ethnicallly pure state.
Only counterbalancing force -- Western air power, arms and training for the Bosnians -- can halt Serbian aggression.
Only a military standoff will lead to a lasting peace, by reversing Serbian expansion.
The consequences will be much more tragic in the former Yugoslavia if the U.S. and Western Europe do not intervene militarily.
Thousands of people have already been killed, and the Yugoslav refugee tide is already causing strains in Europe.
If nothing is done, hundreds of thousands of innocent people may die, and the refugees will destabilize the Continent.


AT LUNCH WITH: Timothy S. Healy; A Priest Finds a Bully but Secular Pulpit
TO the library staff, he's Dr.
Healy; to his secretary, he's Tim.
In his Washington years, he was Father Healy, and now and then, Father Tim.
At Il Brunello, an Italian restaurant on West 56th Street he discovered and enjoys, he's simply "Buon giorno, signore."
Timothy S. Healy is the president of the New York Public Library.
He's also a priest and has been a Jesuit for half a century.
Before he took the library job in 1989, he was, for 13 years, the president of Georgetown University.


Mr. Perot: Where's the Cattle?
There was never a question about Ross Perot's appeal to millions of disenchanted Americans, or about his ability to articulate widespread frustration with economic decline and political stalemate.
The big question about him was always this: Is he fit to lead?
With Mr.
Perot flirting shamelessly with a late re-entry into the Presidential race, that question burns more brightly than ever.
Mr.
Perot would best serve the nation by not running at all.
He has no chance of winning.
And his eleventh-hour entry may only confuse an increasingly sharp battle between two candidates who, unlike him, have stayed the course.
But if Mr.
Perot goes through with the charade of honoring a "summons" from his hand-picked supporters, he'll have a final chance to display the political courage that he has conspicuously failed to show during his quixotic and self-indulgent journey.


Henry Jaffe Is Dead; TV Producer Was 85
Henry Jaffe, a former show-business lawyer who became an award-winning television producer, died on Sept. 11 at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 85 years old.
A native of New York City, Mr.
Jaffe received diplomas from Columbia University and its law school.
He was a founder of the American Guild of Musical Artists and of the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, for which he served as national counsel in its first 20 years.
He resigned in 1957.


Sports of The Times; Magic Words For Earvin: 'Go for It'
YOU could call it courage.
You could call it ego.
You could call it denial.
You could call it love.
Whatever label you want to put on it, the decision belonged to Magic Johnson, and he made it: "I'm back."
It was the right decision because the authorities say he is not harming anybody else by taking his stricken body onto the court.
It was the right decision because the evidence is that he can still compete with the best players in the world.
And it was the right decision because ultimately we are all retired for one very long time.
In the meantime, that improbable meantime, why shouldn't Earvin Johnson do what he loves best?


Foxmoor Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30


Part-Time Superstar Welcomed By Lakers
In what is literally an off-the-wall development, the Los Angeles Lakers are unretiring Magic Johnson's number, the "32" jersey that hangs from a Forum wall.
"Good thing they put it up there with Velcro," Byron Scott said today after learning that his fellow guard would be returning this season on a schedule of 50 to 60 games.


Revco D.S. Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to Aug 22


Bush to Visit Newark Union For Support
President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton will both be in New Jersey today to pick up support, financial and fraternal, for their campaigns.
Mr.
Clinton will attend a fund-raising event in Somerset, and Mr.
Bush will visit a construction union's offices in Newark in what the local's leader pictured as a prelude to an endorsement.
Richard Tissiere, business manager of Laborers Union Local 472 of the Heavy and General Construction Workers Union, said the endorsement might come during the President's scheduled hourlong visit to the local's headquarters on Raymond Boulevard but will more likely not be made until next Monday, when the 7,000-member local holds its next regular meeting.


Staurovsky Let Go by Jets
The Jason Staurovsky era as Jets place-kicker ended yesterday after only four games -- all losses -- when the Plan B free agent from the New England Patriots was waived.
In his place, the Jets signed Cary Blanchard, a free agent released Monday by the New Orleans Saints.
Staurovsky, who barely beat out Raul Allegre for the Jets job during the preseason with a perfect record on field goals and point-after attempts, missed five of his eight field goal-attempts in the regular season.
He missed two of four in the opener against Atlanta and one of two against the Rams on Sunday in Los Angeles.
Of the two out of three he missed in Pittsburgh, one was blocked.


Robert Fairburn, 81; Headed Expansion Of Match Company
Robert G. Fairburn, the retired head of the Diamond Match Company who led the expansion of the leading producer of matches into other industries, died on Saturday at the Community Hospital in Monterey, Calif.
He was 81 years old and lived in Carmel, Calif.
He died after a history of heart illness, his family said.


CMS/Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rangers Say New Lemieux Pact Won't Affect Messier
Neil Smith, the president and general manager of the Rangers, said tonight that if Mario Lemieux signs a big new contract with the Pittsburgh Penguins next week, as seems likely, it would not have any immediate effect on the Rangers' pay scale, including the salary of their best player, Mark Messier.
The Lemieux deal is rumored to be $42 million for seven years.
Messier, the highest-paid Ranger, earns $2.785 million per season, which would be less than half what Lemieux would make.


Millions Cast Votes in Angolan Election Amid Fears of a Return to Violence
Under intense international scrutiny, millions of Angolans voted today in the first broadly contested democratic elections in this war-ravaged country's history.
But as they voted in the first of two days of balloting, Angolans were surrounded by uncertainties about whether they were making a great democratic leap or were about to slip into the sort of disorder, violence and ethnic antagonisms that plagued them in 16 years of civil war.
No violence was reported today, however.


Brazil's House Impeaches Collor; Suspended, He Faces Senate Trial
President Fernando Collor de Mello was impeached today by the lower house of the Brazilian Congress, clearing the way for a trial on charges that his family and friends had accepted huge bribes on his behalf in return for Government favors.
Losing by a 441 to 38 margin in the Chamber of Deputies, the President, who in 1989 won Brazil's first presidential elections in 30 years on a clean-government platform, will be stripped of his powers for 180 days and will face a trial in the Senate.


Vogue Names New Editor
Laurie Jones, the managing editor of New York magazine for 16 years, has been named managing editor of Vogue.
She will replace Priscilla Flood, who is leaving to become managing editor of Glamour, another Conde Nast publication.
At Glamour Ms.
Flood will replace Barbara Coffey, who is retiring.


TPEX Exploration Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


College Plan Leads to Criminal Inquiry
An effort to reach out to nontraditional students in this tiny community of Hasidic Jews has created multimillion-dollar troubles for Rockland Community College and led to a criminal investigation into possible fraud, theft and conspiracy.
The difficulties began in a most unlikely way: the desire of this college to offer classes in Judaic studies at an unofficial off-campus branch in this incorporated village, which is home to some 600 Hasidic Jewish families who do business with the outside world but conduct the rest of their lives in virtual social isolation.


Saberhagen Proves He Is Ready to Deal
Bret Saberhagen will not finish the season on the disabled list.
It is an achievement of modest satisfaction for the right-hander and the Mets.
The question now is whether it is an accomplishment substantial enough to get the principals to the bargaining table during the off-season.
Saberhagen, sidelined for most of the season with tendinitis in his right index finger, is scheduled to enter the final year of his contract in 1993.
He wants to talk about an extension.
If he doesn't sign one before the start of 1993, he could well decide not to negotiate with the Mets until the end of the season, after he has filed for free agency.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
I was heading uptown on the M11 when a young fellow boarded, a baby strapped to his chest, and his son, who appeared to be no more than 3 years old, tightly holding Dad's hand.
Dad put a token in the coin box; the bus driver handed him a transfer.
The boy then extended his hand but the driver shook his head. 'No," he said gently. "You don't need one."
As the family took their seats, the boy began crying as though his heart would break.
Passengers stopped conversations in mid-sentence or looked up from their reading, watching the father as he tried to comfort his inconsolable son.


Review/Television; Case Closed A Little Too Neatly
Back for a third season, its formula more finely tuned than ever, NBC's "Law and Order" gets involved in an incendiary case tonight and then, quite uncharacteristically, does a cop-out.
Filmed in New York City, each hourlong episode in the series is just about equally divided between a police precinct, from where detectives track down the perps, and criminal court, where assistant D.A.'s prosecute them.
Most prominent in the police contingent are the detectives Phil Ceretta (Paul Sorvino), soon to be replaced by Jerry Orbach as Lennie Briscoe, and Mike Logan (Christopher Noth).
Their boss is Precinct Capt.
Donald Cragen (Dann Florek).
The Assistant D.A.'s are Ben Stone (Michael Moriarty) and Paul Robinette (Richard Brooks), overseen by District Attorney Adam Schiff (Steven Hill).


Nation Split, Havel Aspires to a New Political Life
Vaclav Havel, the once and probable future President, is like an athlete at halftime.
Having left the field in July so he would not have to preside over the breakup of Czechoslovakia into two countries, he is reflecting on the gains and losses of the first half and girding for the second.
In an interview, Mr.
Havel observed protocol by saying it was not "an absolute certainty" that he would be elected the first President of the independent Czech republic that is to come into being on Jan. 1.


SLIDE IN SHARES OF MEDICAL CARE AMERICA ENDS
Shares of Medical Care America Inc. rebounded slightly on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday after plunging a total of nearly $35 a share on Friday and Monday.
The stock of the Dallas company began to plummet last week after it said third-quarter earnings would be below estimates.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 25
Sept 18
Sept 27
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.1
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.2
Gasoline stocks
208.2
206.1
213.6
Distillate stocks
133.1
130.3
138.3
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.8
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.2
1.5
Crude stocks
324.4
326.9
339.5
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
89.5
89.3
87.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Trading a Can of Film For a Dream Come True At Independent Market
With only a half-hour to go before the screening of her film at the Independent Feature Film Market, A. G. Melkom was rapidly approaching the end of her tether.
Loaded down with fliers for the film, "Splinters," a black comedy that turns on what she calls "splintered personalities," she rode up the escalator at the Angelika Film Center in Greenwich Village for a final assault on the milling throng of buyers, agents, producers and film-festival officials.
"I should be ashamed of myself," she said, turning to a friend, "but I am way, way beyond that at this point." Fifteen minutes later, at the entrance to the screening room, she confided the hard truth about her cash flow.
"This movie was financed with credit cards, and I'm at plastic meltdown -- just like everybody else here."


Acier Leroux Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


COMPANY NEWS
FORD MOTOR CO., Dearborn, Mich., and Nissan Motor Company of Japan issued separate recalls to fix faulty brakes and seat belts on about 3,500 of their jointly built Mercury Villager and Nissan Quest mini-vans.
GRUMMAN CORP., Bethpage, L.I., has been awarded a $7.9 million contract that could be worth $220 million from the Army to make intercom systems for combat vehicles.
UNISYS CORP., Blue Bell, Pa., and California Republic Bank, Bakersfield, Calif., announced an agreement for a 10-year information systems outsourcing contract valued at $56 million.


Vivra Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Amex Planning to Enter Nontrading Businesses
After years of building up the businesses of trading in stocks and options, the American Stock Exchange is examining ways to branch into new lines like pensions and insurance.
As part of its long-term strategy, the exchange is preparing a plan that would allow it to offer insurance, pensions and other products and services at a reduced rate to its affiliated companies, potentially including both listed companies and member firms, Amex officials said yesterday.


Ousted Haitian Chief, at U.N., Denounces Vatican
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the ousted Haitian leader, denounced the Vatican at the United Nations today, calling it the only state in the world to recognize the Government that overthrew him.
In an address to the General Assembly the radical Catholic priest, deposed exactly one year ago after becoming Haiti's first freely elected President, also called for a tighter economic blockade against the Caribbean country, which has one of the lowest standards of living in the world.


Correction
In yesterday's column it should have been noted that in the diagramed position, East can defeat the contract by two tricks by returning a trump.


Navy Planning to Cancel Long-Troubled Radar System
Reversing the Navy's longstanding support, Acting Navy Secretary Sean O'Keefe will recommend that the Pentagon cancel a $2 billion electronic radar-jamming system that has failed crucial flight tests on fighter planes it is designed to protect, senior Navy officials said today.
The Pentagon has spent more than 15 years and $1.6 billion to develop the system, the Airborne Self-Protection Jammer, and has ordered 136 of the devices.
But the system, which is intended to protect carrier-based F-14's and F/A-18's, has never passed all its flight tests.


INSIDE
Niagara Falls Copter Crash
Four people died when a sightseeing ride turned into a plunge to death in front of hundreds of tourists as two helicopters collided.
Page B1.
A Winter to Fear in Bosnia
Winter could bring at least 100,000 deaths from hunger and the cold in Bosnia and Herzegovina, according to the C.I.A.
Page A13.
A Ravaged Angola Votes
Surrounded by foreign observers, millions of Angolans voted in the first broadly contested elections in the war-torn nation's history.
Page A8.
Hospital Salaries Queried
Some tax-exempt hospitals pay executives as much as $1 million a year, and the I.R.S. is curious.
Page A14.


U.S. Paging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nestor Inc. reports earnings for Year June 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Those Chicken Georges And What They Mean
In examining the Clinton campaign's developing strategy for unnerving, unsettling and eventually unhorsing George Bush, it is illuminating to consider the matter of the President and Chicken George.
For more than a week now, at his campaign appearances, Mr.
Bush has faced hecklers costumed as giant chickens, bearing signs that mock the Republican candidate for his refusals, until now, to debate Bill Clinton.


