Prime Medical Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TOKYO BID TO SEND ITS TROOPS ABROAD SUFFERS A SETBACK
In what appeared to be a major setback to its plans to send Japanese forces abroad for United Nations peacekeeping operations, the Government yielded to a compromise this weekend that would in effect create a symbolic military force but prevent it from leaving Japanese shores for years.
The compromise came in a last-ditch effort to overcome widespread objections to the plans in Parliament, which is expected to act on establishing a peacekeeping organization in the next few weeks.
The national debate over sending Japanese forces abroad for the first time since World War II grew out of international criticism during the Persian Gulf war that Japan was willing to write a check to maintain world peace, but not to put its own citizens at risk.


Alubec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dawn Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'Dancing at Lughnasa' And 'Crazy for You' Win Top Tony Awards
It was the year of the revival on Broadway as "Guys and Dolls," the cartoon-hued reprise of the legendary 1950 Frank Loesser musical about Damon Runyon's Broadway world of gamblers, gangsters and chorines, was acclaimed in its home town last night, winning four Tony Awards, including best revival of the 1991-92 Broadway season.
"Crazy for You," the high-kicking Gershwin show about a ne'er-do-well banking scion who becomes the toast of Deadrock, Nev., in the 1930's, became the toast of the Great White Way last night with three Tony Awards, including best musical of the season.


International Verifact Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ADT Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ms. MacRae, Michael Dell
Katherine Martin MacRae, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. MacRae Jr. of Washington, was married there yesterday to Michael Sean Dell, the son of Don Dell and Dorothy Dell, both of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
Robert Tate performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church, Capitol Hill.
Mrs.
Dell, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She is studying for a medical degree at Harvard University, as is her husband.
Her father is acting administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs at the Office of Management and Budget.
Her mother, Nancy K. MacRae, is deputy director of the Office of International Transportation and Trade at the Department of Transportation.
Both work in Washington.


International Movie Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
Keiko Fujii Dance Company
Alice Tully Hall
Keiko Fujii's "Kanon" is probably one of the oddest events to ever be presented at this theater.
Performed on Saturday night by the Keiko Fujii Dance Company of Osaka, Japan, the full-evening piece dealt with rebirth and redemption in choreography that was a frequently naive mix of unvarnished ballet steps and soft-edged jazz dancing, with modern and traditional Japanese dance also represented.
The performers, led by the irrepressibly spirited Miss Fujii, seemed to be professional and advanced-level students from the choreographer's Studio K school in Osaka.
All were attractive and endearingly eager, performing with a broadness that may be attributable to their work in Miss Fujii's restagings of Broadway musicals.
In the first part, called "Street Dreams," businessmen, shoppers, partygoers and students came and went, pausing as if waiting for buses, as a beggar crawled among them.
Though rejected now, the man was once popular and rich, his former fortune seemingly symbolized by a large Macy's shopping bag passed through the crowd.
His spirit leaves his body in the next part, encountering spirits from hell who crawl in and out of what looks like a red steel Jungle Gym.
The piece ends with a vision, a "new awakening" as the program notes put it, of white-clothed spirits who waft through what resembled an interpretive-dance school's version of the "Bayadere" Shades.
There were comical moments, apparently unintentional.
Given the fact that all but one of the performers were female, the street scene might have been a merrily innocent drag show.


Datamark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prime Medical Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Those Campus C.E.O.'s
Last week, the president of Yale, Benno C. Schmidt, announced he was leaving to join a telecommunications corporation.
Is this a speck in the eye of academia or just business as usual?
It may be just the latter and therein lies a problem.
College presidents are behaving like other executives.
Amid deep budget cuts at the University of California, the president, David Gardner, is retiring with a severance package approaching $1 million.
Top university presidents value prestige, perks and salaries -- the more the better.
They manage large institutions that look like other large institutions.
They face issues of product marketing, capital investment, fund raising and even parking.
A 1990 primer for college presidents counsels them: "If you have the chance to build a brand new university, you should start out with the parking system and design the buildings around it." What about the library?


Algonquin Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Polyphase Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


House for Sale in the Bronx Prompts Bias-Related Threats
A Bronx couple whose neighbors had warned them not to sell their home to blacks awoke early Saturday to the sound of a small explosion outside.
Later that morning, as they readied their tidy red house for prospective buyers, the couple spotted a warning spray-painted on the sidewalk: "No blacks."
The harassment, which the police are calling bias-related, occurred in Throgs Neck, a section where the racial mix has changed dramatically over the last decade as white families have been replaced by minorities, many Hispanic and black and most of them middle class.
06-01-92 "There is a certain point when this change starts to happen that the crazies come out of the woodwork," said Dennis deLeon, chairman of the city's Commission on Human Rights.
The incident occurred around 2 A.M. on Saturday in front of the home of Gilberto and Gladys Faria, at 259 Graff Avenue, on a block of homes owned and rented by families who are Italian, Hispanic, Irish, Arabic and Chinese.
Neighbors said that at least two black families live on the block.
Mr.
Faria, a 49-year-old social worker from Puerto Rico, said that he and his wife were startled awake by an explosion in front of their house that the police said was probably a firecracker.
They did not go outside until the morning.
A Previous Warning
"That is when I saw the sign," Mr.
Faria said, referring to the scrawled black letters on the sidewalk.
"I got scared.
"You have seen the news, what happened in Los Angeles, and I'm Hispanic with an accent. I'm a professional, but they go by the color of your skin, not your credentials."
The vandals also rammed their car into a chain-link fence and gate early Saturday morning, the couple said.
Mrs.
Faria, 55 years old, has lived at the house for 18 years, and her husband moved in 14 years ago when the couple married.
They said they never had trouble until a year and a half ago when they first tried to sell their house.
At that time, they said, someone taped a note to the front door telling them not to sell to blacks.
Two weeks ago, when the house went back on the market, two neighbors made similar remarks in person, Mrs.
Faria said.
They said that until Saturday's open house no black couples had looked at their home, though a number of the real-estate agents were black.
But they said it did not matter who wanted to buy.
"This is 1992 -- there is no need for this," said Mr.
Faria, who runs an adoption agency for black and Hispanic children.
Mr. deLeon said that today he would send investigators from the commission to the neighborhood and that they would meet with real-estate agents "to make sure that there is no discrimination against African-Americans who want to move into the area."


Amy Cantor, David Stampfer
Amy Lisa Cantor, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Cantor of Silver Spring, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to Dr.
David Stampfer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Morris Stampfer of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony at the Park Hyatt Hotel.
Mrs.
Stampfer, 25 years old, graduated from Barnard College and is studying law at Boston University.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Brownstein Zeidman &amp; Lore.


CompuTrac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Josefa Mulaire, William Tester
Josefa Mulaire, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmond P. Mulaire of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married there yesterday to William Tester, a son of Paul G. Tester of Ocala, Fla., and Delphia D. Lee of Summerfield, Fla.
The Rev.
Melissa Townsend, a Gnostic minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Mulaire, who is 34 years old and will keep her name, is an actress and a writer and illustrator of children's books.
She graduated from Bard College.
Her father is a lath worker in construction in Hastings-on-Hudson.
Her mother, Phyllis Mulaire, teaches art at the Leake and Watts School in Yonkers.


Reluctant to Use Force, U.S. Is Assessing Sanctions
Bush Administration officials expressed reluctance today to use armed force to support tough new economic sanctions against the Yugoslav Government, preferring first to assess the effects of the United Nations embargo approved on Saturday.
Washington's immediate goal, senior officials said, was to persuade the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav military to lift its blockade of Sarajevo.
For two months, the people of the besieged capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina have been trapped under daily artillery attack from ethnic Serbs in the hills.
Many badly need food and medical care.


With the Rain, Mets Get a Break From Themselves
The Mets were rained out yesterday, which means their offensive production was not much less than it has been on recent days when they have played.
The postponed game with the Atlanta Braves was rescheduled as part of a doubleheader Aug. 31.
By then, the Mets hope they will be scoring runs at a significantly greater rate than none or one a game.


Piedmont Mining Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GTech Corp. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Telephone Strike Is Averted for the Time Being


Security Tag Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING Missy's Mirage Wins Again  When the Shuvee Stakes for premier fillies was run at Belmont Park three weeks ago, Missy's Mirage outran Harbour Club and Versailles Treaty at a mile and one-sixteenth in a photo finish.
For an encore yesterday, the same fillies competed in the $200,000 Hempstead Handicap and ran one-sixteenth of a mile more in rain and mud, and the order of finish was identical: Missy's Mirage, this time by three lengths over Harbour Club, who had a neck on Versailles Treaty.
And the winner knocked three-fifths of a second off the stakes record.
It was the third straight time that Missy's Mirage had beaten Versailles Treaty, and she did it by leading from start to finish on a sloppy track.
The winner ran three-quarters of a mile in 1:084/5 , the mile in 1:333/5 and the mile and one-sixteenth in 1:47 flat, breaking the record for the race set in 1978 by Dottie's Doll and matched in 1988 by Personal Ensign.
She paid $7.60 for $2 to win and earned $120,000.
Missy's Mirage, a 4-year-old filly owned by the Middletown Stables and trained by Allen Jerkens, was ridden by Eddie Maple as she won for the fourth time in five starts this year.
Versailles Treaty, owned by Cynthia Phipps and trained by Shug McGaughey, has now lost five straight close races.
GOLF Glasson Takes Kemper by a Shot  Bill Glasson, whose nine-year career has been marred by knee and back injuries, shot a bogey-free 68 to finish with an eight-under-par 276 after four trips over the TPC at Avenel course in Potomac, Md., to win the Kemper Open.
He finished one shot better than John Daly, Ken Green, Mike Springer and Howard Twitty.
Glasson won $198,000 with his fifth victory on the tour. (AP) Mucha Gets 2d Career Victory: It was a sweet homecoming for the former Michigan State golfer, Barb Mucha, yesterday.
Mucha, fighting off a challenge by Dottie Mochrie, earned the second victory of her six-year L.P.G.A. career by capturing the Oldsmobile Classic in East Lansing, Mich., by one shot.
The 52-year-old Gant, who already was the oldest winner in any Winston Cup race, captured the 17th victory of his career and his first this season.
Fullerton State (43-16) fell into a losers' bracket game tomorrow against Florida State (49-20).
The winner of that game would face Miami on Wednesday.
Florida State stayed alive on Sunday by eliminating California, 5-4. (AP) PRO FOOTBALL  Sacramento Advances to World Bowl  Cary Blanchard kicked a 46-yard field goal with 3:54 left to give the Sacramento Surge a 17-15 home-field victory over the Barcelona Dragons in a World League semifinal playoff game.
During the Dragons' final possession, quarterback Scott Erney hit Thomas Wood for an apparent 60-yard touchdown but the play was called back for illegal motion on receiver Demetrious Davis.
The Surge (9-2) will play the Orlando Thunder on Saturday in the second World Bowl in Montreal.
The Thunder defeated Birmingham on Saturday night in the league's other playoff game. (AP)


It Takes Just 1 Hole for Douglass to Defeat Dill
In the same driving rainstorm that caused the final round of the tournament to be canceled, Dale Douglass parred the only official hole played today to defeat Terry Dill in sudden death and win the soggy Nynex Commemorative.
After persistent showers that began Saturday afternoon reduced the hilly Sleepy Hollow Country Club to a verdant chain of ever-deepening puddles, Senior PGA Tour officials decided at 11:37 A.M. to call off the final round and decide the winner through a playoff.


Nu Horizons Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Italy and Portugal Squish Way to Draw
Wet, scoreless soccer, traditionally an American nightmare and a European mainstay, transfixed nearly 40,000 fans today at the Yale Bowl.
In drenching rain and slip-sliding field conditions, 38,833 soccer-starved Northeasterners voiced their noisy dedication to the sport while watching Italy tie Portugal, 0-0.


Jewish Group Aims at the Klan, Its Weapon the Answering Machine
The Jewish Defense Organization, a small Jewish militant group, is waging a war against the Klu Klux Klan with the help of a modern-day convenience -- the answering machine.
Angry Klan members, who say their right to privacy is being violated, are crying foul and plan to mount a counterattack with a recorded message of their own.
And in the middle, an apparent casualty of the J.D.O.'s attack, is Donald Mehrer, a truck driver from Deer Park, L.I., who says he is not a member of the Klan but has received dozens of threatening phone calls from across the country since he was identified as a Klansman on the organization's answering machine.


International Innopac reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Granite Broadcasting Corp., New York, said that because of market conditions, it was withdrawing its registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for an offering of $100 million in senior debentures due in 2002.
Common  *
Frame Technology Corp., San Jose, Calif., a manufacturer of document- publishing and distribution software, filed for a public offering of 2.1 million common shares through Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.


Algonquin Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Harris Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ted Turner Addresses 1,137 Lehigh Graduates
Lehigh University held its 124th commencement yesterday at Stabler Athletic and Convocation Center in Bethlehem, Pa., awarding bachelor and graduate degrees to 1,137 students from the university's four colleges.
Ted Turner, chairman and president of Turner Broadcasting System, was the commencement speaker and received an honorary doctor of law degree.


Salvatori Opthalmics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BF Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Scottish Heritable reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coke Move In Europe
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it planned to invest nearly $1 billion in Central and Eastern Europe by the end of 1995.
The company made the disclosure in conjunction with the opening of a soft-drink bottling plant in Gdynia, Poland.
Most of the investments were previously announced, including plans to spend $450 million in the eastern part of Germany.
But Coke, based in Atlanta, said yesterday that it planned to nearly double its investment in Poland, to $200 million.


Intensity Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Purchasing Managers' Report May Personal Income April Construction Spending April  Tuesday


V Band Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rymac Mortgage Investment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bio-Vascular Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Abrams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Electronic Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Meridian Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ICC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thomas Nelson reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Electro Brain International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Courier Is Too Much, Too Soon for Medvedev
Before the thunderstorms crashed their way back into contention at the French Open this afternoon, the event's defending champion and current king of the tennis mountain, Jim Courier, took the time to show Andrei Medvedev, last year's junior champion, just how he feels about protecting the adult version of the honor.
Fierce.
Later, after the 17-year-old qualifier from Ukraine had dusted himself off from a 6-1, 6-4, 6-2 reminder of the very real pecking order in the profession he has decided to crack, Medvedev revealed just how Courier made him feel in front of 4,500 sympathetic viewers on Court One.


ICC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ross Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Bio-Vascular Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Stocks Lower in Japan
Stocks were lower on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended the day down 343.64 points, or 1.87 percent, to 18,004.11.
At midday, the Nikkei was up 110.80 points.On Friday, the index gained 416.50 points, or 2.3 percent, propelling the Nikkei back over the 18,000 level.


Reviews/Music; Mining the Prototype Of Dysfunctional Families
There were two distinct ways to experience Strauss's "Elektra" on Friday night in the Gaillard Municipal Auditorium here.
The first was to attend to the provocations of the German director Gunter Kramer, whose 1990 production was recreated for Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston by Uwe Hergenroder.


Question Box BYL&gt;By RAY CORIO
N.B.A. Player-Coaches
Q.
How many coaches of an N.B.A. champion also played for an N.B.A. champion?
A.
Only 10 coaches fill this bill, including one named Phil and three named Bill.
The Phil is Phil Jackson, who cracked this circle last season when he coached the Chicago Bulls to their first National Basketball Association title.
Jackson also earned a championship ring as a player with the New York Knicks in 1973.
The Bills are Russell, Sharman and Cunningham, all members of the Basketball Hall of Fame.
The following is a list of each coach, with the team or teams he helped carry to the crown as a player and the ones he took to a title as a coach, plus the title years in parentheses: [ SEE GRAPHIC ]
No coach has been on more than two different teams as champions.
Four of the 10 coaches -- Sharman, Costello, Holzman and Jackson -- managed the feat of coaching a team to the title that was different from the one for which they played.
Russell, as usual, had all the angles covered.
He was a champion with Boston 10 times, the first eight as a player under Coach Red Auerbach and the last two as a player under Coach Bill Russell.
Sweeps in Hockey
Q.
Both the Chicago Blackhawks and the Pittsburgh Penguins reached the Stanley Cup championship round this season coming off four-game sweeps of their opponents in the semifinal round.
Was that a first in the National Hockey League?
A.
It was a second in the 75-year history of a league that for many years (1943-1966) consisted of just six teams and used only two rounds to crown a playoff champion.
The only other time two teams played for the Stanley Cup following sweeps in the preceding round was in 1972, when the New York Rangers and Boston Bruins got to the final that way.
The Rangers eliminated the Blackhawks in four straight during the semifinals and the Bruins did likewise to the St.
Louis Blues.
In the showdown series, the Bruins prevailed in six games, capturing the first two games at Boston Garden, as well as games 4 and 6 at Madison Square Garden.
On that Boston squad, coached by Tom Johnson, were such marquee names as Bobby Orr, Phil Esposito, Johnny Bucyk, Wayne Cashman and Derek Sanderson.
In the Ranger lineup, coached by Emile Francis, were players like Vic Hadfield, Jean Ratelle, Rod Gilbert, Brad Park and Ed Giacomin.
Boston has not won a Stanley Cup since.
The Rangers have not gotten that close since. 400 Home Runs
Q.
This season, Eddie Murray of the Mets became the 24th major league player to achieve 400 home runs in a career.
Have any of the players who have hit 400 or more home runs in their careers failed to hit 30 in a season?
A.
All 24 players who have cleared fences and the 400-homer barrier made it over the 30-homer season mark at least once in their careers.
One player, Al Kaline, showed the most warning-track power when it came to these accomplishments.
Kaline, an outfielder who spent his entire 22-year career with the Detroit Tigers, homered 399 times in the big leagues.
His highest season total was 29, reached in 1962 and 1966.
But Kaline hardly fell short when it was his turn up for election to the Baseball Hall of Fame, which is often considered something of an intentional pass for 400-homer hitters.
Kaline cleared that hurdle on his first swing, in 1980.
Runner Hit by Throw
Q.
On a single to right field with a runner on first base, what's the reasoning behind charging an outfielder with an error when he makes a perfect throw to third base, but the ball happens to hit the sliding runner, who scrambles up and scores as the ball bounces away?
A.
Since every base advanced must be accounted for in the box score, an error is given to the outfielder because his throw that was on the money turned out to be on the runner, too, and that's the main reason the runner got to get to home plate.
Had the outfielder thrown the ball home instead of to third, there would have been no unlucky bounce off the runner, and thus no advance and no error.
But there would have been no end to the criticism from the outfielder's steamed-up manager for not making an attempt to throw the runner out at third base.
One other consideration: Failure to charge an error on the play would result in the pitcher being charged with an earned run allowed, something he really would not deserve to be saddled with since his pitching did not lead to the score.
In that sense, the outfielder's fielding average is lowered so that his teammate's earned run average is not raised.


Supradur Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Helmstar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sabine Royalty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Business Not as Usual for Coaches and Their Leaders
The College Football Association elected to punt today.
The end of its 16th annual meeting left the organization of 67 major-college programs in a period of retrenchment, with the realization that it must quickly conceive an offense that can operate with a stiff political wind in its face.
Confronted with continuing financial burdens, an aggressive reform movement of university presidents and suddenly intense interest in gender equity within college athletic programs, the often controversial and usually loud three-day session concluded as quietly as it began.


Victoria Creations Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Storage Equities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lavinia F. Russ, 87, A Children's Author
Lavinia Faxon Russ, who took up writing at the age of 57 and published eight books for adults and children, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Russ died of pneumonia, her family said.


Westmin Resources Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


UltraPac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Chateau Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Perfumania Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Licon International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Jockey's 9 Winners Are Hard to Beat
The athlete of the month last month had to be jockey RICHARD VASQUEZ.
All he did was ride 9 winners in 13 races on Memorial Day at the Brown County Fairgrounds in Aberdeen, S.D.
According to the Guinness Book of World Records, that is a world record.
CHRIS ANTLEY once rode nine winners in one day but not at the same track.
He had four at Aqueduct the afternoon of Oct. 31, 1987, and five that night at the Meadowlands.


Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Choice Drug Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


PHH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Nancy Dingott, Michael Girardi
Dr.
Nancy Lynn Dingott and Dr.
Michael Girardi, interns at Yale-New Haven Hospital, were married yesterday in White Plains.
Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Hotel.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Dingott of White Plains.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, and she and her husband received their M.D. degrees from Yale University.
Her father is the president of the Bryson Manufacturing Company, a maker of jeans in Bryson City, N.C.
Her mother, Doris Dingott, is a vice president of Diamond Lease (USA), a finance company in Greenwich, Conn.


Interpoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Agency-Client Study Shows A Marriage on the Rocks
ONE of the most-talked-about topics in advertising is the state of the relationships between agencies and their clients.
And an annual survey on the subject found that agencies might think about subscribing to The Ladies' Home Journal to study its monthly installments of "Can This Marriage Be Saved?"
A preview of the 1992 Salz Survey of Advertiser-Agency Relations showed some surprising disparities in attitudes between parties that are ostensibly partners.


SMT Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; In All Corners, Volunteers for Perot Set Up Camp
Cole Kleitsch rummaged through his files.
He was at his desk in the back room of his light-flooded Hallmark card shop in a strip shopping mall here.
He had a file for his bank papers, a file for his taxes and, the one he was hunting for, a file for Ross Perot.
The chatty, 30-year-old Mr.
Kleitsch said he had never been a political agitator.
"I never before saw a political candidate whom I would lift a finger for," he said.
But two months ago, he volunteered to work as one of the foot soldiers in the New Jersey campaign to elect Mr.
Perot President.
Now there is no slipping out of the Hallmark shop with a birthday or get-well card without also getting an earful about Ross Perot.


Robern Apparel Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Cistron Biotechnology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Smithfield Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Union Tells Of Warnings To Drivers
More than a quarter of the drivers who returned to work on Friday after a job dispute with a wholesale newspaper distributor received letters on Saturday warning that they would be dismissed if their job performance did not improve, union officials said.
Representatives of the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers' Union said 21 of the 69 drivers who worked Friday at two distribution operations owned by Arthur E. Imperatore were reprimanded for working too slowly and talking too much while on the job.


Repligen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stacey Senter, A. M. Goldbaum
Stacey Tara Senter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart Senter of Old Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Dr.
Andrew Mark Goldbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold K. Goldbaum of New York.
Rabbi Barry Dov Lerner performed the ceremony at the Plaza hotel.
Mrs.
Goldbaum, 25 years old, is an account executive at Donna Karan Inc., the clothing company in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of the Automatic Group, a home-improvement concern in Hempstead, L.I.
Her mother, Donna Senter, is an art consultant in Old Westbury.


Lawson Mardon reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Keds Honors Good Deeds
An apparel campaign is taking a tack not often seen in fashion advertising, featuring people who celebrate others rather than themselves.
The initial print advertisements for the new Keds Apparel Company carry the theme "We like feeling good, looking good and doing good." The ads, created in-house for two Keds Apparel lines, Keds Weekend Clothes and Keds Sport, present women involved with charities and public-interest groups like Habitat for Humanity International.


Los Angeles Votes on Lenient Verdict
Some young defendants in her juvenile courtroom are excited to recognize her from the television news; one even asked for her autograph.
But more often, Judge Joyce A. Karlin gets death threats.
It was her decision to grant probation to a Korean grocer who killed a black girl last year that helped plant the seeds of the racial anger that exploded into rioting a month ago.
And for that one decision -- her first on the bench -- Judge Karlin is in danger of losing her job on the Los Angeles County Superior Court in Tuesday's election, in the most highly publicized judicial race in California since 1986.


Security Tag Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BF Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Intensity Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week: MONDAY
Cincinnati Bell Inc  Harnischfeger Inds Inc  Meredith Corp  Zurn Inds Inc  TUESDAY


San Diego Batters Cardinals Pitching
Padres 10, Cardinals 0
ST. LOUIS, May 31 (AP) -- The San Diego Padres finally unloaded on St. Louis pitching.
"You don't know whether the pitcher had a bad day or what, it happened so quick," Darrin Jackson said after homering and driving in four runs in his first two times at bat today in a 10-0 rout of the Cardinals.


Sports of The Times; Here's a Soda for Buck Leonard
WILLIE MAYS was at the next table but the line of people waiting for 84-year-old Buck Leonard's autograph was just as long.
Sitting in a wheelchair, holding a blue felt pen in his left hand, Leonard was slowly but clearly signing his name on baseballs, photos and bats while wearing a baseball cap that not enough people ever saw: black with a gray "G" on it.


Energy Conversion Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


V Band Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Arts Invade Rio for Earth Summit
While diplomats and politicians are decidedly mixed in their views on Rio's Earth Summit, the global conference on ecology that starts here on Wednesday, artists are embracing the occasion with an outpouring of creativity.
No fewer than 183 artistic events are to be held in June, filling 71 theaters, galleries, museums and open spaces.
"It was a spontaneous explosion," said Lucia Gouvea Vieira, the Brazilian Government's cultural coordinator for the Earth Summit.
"We had to sort through 364 proposals. One jeweler said he worked with 'endangered rocks' and asked for a space."


Italy at Risk to Be Titled Sick Man of New Europe
For decades, the politics of this land have been laughed off by many outsiders and insiders as somewhere between comic opera and soap, in any event a sideshow to what was really happening: a burgeoning economy and the accumulation of wealth that made this country the fifth richest in the industrialized world.
This year, as Italy faces a watershed in its dealings with Europe that challenges the very basics of the way the country itself is run, something has changed.
Midway through the final 12 months leading up to the start of European integration, many Italians are beginning to sense that the markers are being called in.
The years of pork-barrel politics, economists argue, were not so much a sideshow as a tragedy that many sought to hide or ignore.


Salvatori Opthalmics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Winners Circle Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Nu Horizons Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


GW Utilities Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Boston Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


GTech Corp. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Boston Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Simula Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deborah Markowitz, Eric Silverman
Dr.
Deborah Markowitz, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Markowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Eric Silverman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ashley Silverman of Congers, N.Y., were married yesterday at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y., by Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler.


Experience Is Key for U.S. Women
Is it the shoes?
Can't be.
American women playing professional basketball do not have contracts with shoe manufacturers.
Is it to promote goodwill and global expansion of a burgeoning enterprise like the National Basketball Association?
Not really.
American women have no league at home to sell and must go to Europe and Japan to pursue their careers.


CompuTrac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Groupe Forex reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rio's New Day in Sun Leaves Laplander Limp
Sitting in the shade of an Amazon Indian long house here, a Norwegian Laplander perspired profusely in a tropical tunic that his mother had specially tailored for his journey to the Earth Summit.
"The heat here is tremendous for Arctic people," the Laplander, Leif Halonen, gasped as Rio's autumn temperature crept toward 93 degrees.


International Verifact Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PHH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CHRONICLE
E.
J.
KAHN Jr.  sees little remarkable about the fact that his writings have been published in the New Yorker in every decade since the 1930's, making this the seventh decade in which he has appeared in the magazine.
"That is not so many years," he said the other day by telephone from his home in Truro, Mass.
"There were several of us in our seventh decade of writing for the New Yorker, BRENDAN GILL, for example, EMILY HAHN and E. B. White, I think."


Czar Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Groupe Forex reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Toromont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


General Parcel Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Movie Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater
Metropolitan Opera House
Different dancers bring different approaches to the same roles in ballet.
And that was the fascination -- along with the premiere of an impressive pas de deux -- of two performances of a typically eclectic program presented on Wednesday afternoon and evening.
In the role debut as the Transgressor in Antony Tudor's "Undertow" in the afternoon, Keith Roberts created a character totally unlike that played by Johan Renvall in the evening.
Both were troubled, and both were murderers.
But there the resemblance ended.
Mr.
Roberts's haunting portrayal had none of the heroic, mythic proportions Mr.
Renvall gave the role.
Instead, Mr.
Roberts allowed the young murderer one moment of raw though muted emotion at the start, when his parents push this hungry baby away from his mother's breast.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.68 percent; it was 3.82 percent on a six-month bill.


Property Capital Trust reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pittsburgh Strike Transforming News
Two weeks into a strike by a union representing 600 drivers and their supervisors, Pittsburgh's two daily newspapers are devising alternative ways to get the news to their readers.
The Pittsburgh Press and The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette have not published since mid-May, when the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local 211 struck the Pittsburgh Press Company, which had proposed eliminating 75 percent of the union's jobs.
The company is the publisher of the afternoon Press, and it prints and distributes the separately owned morning Post-Gazette under a joint operating agreement.


Preferred Homecare of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Spar Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Money and Other Excuses Hinder Inner-City Growth
"THEY haven't been off the boat a year before they open up their own place," Coconut, a sidewalk savant in Spike Lee's film "Do the Right Thing," says as he surveys a grocery owned by Korean immigrants.
"They already have got a place in our neighborhood -- a good business occupying a building that had been boarded up for longer than I care to remember."
"It's got to be because we are black," M. L., another character in the film, says.
"There ain't no other explanation."


Dawn Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gille Ann Rabbin, Jeffrey M. Birnbaum
Gille Ann Rabbin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Murvin Rabbin of Belle Harbor, Queens, was married yesterday in New York to Jeffrey M. Birnbaum, a son of Melvin Birnbaum of Fountain Valley, Calif., and Roberta A. Morrison of Jericho, L.I.
Rabbi Jacob Reiner performed the ceremony at the Plaza Hotel.


Review/Television; 'The 10 O'Clock News' Gives a Nod to Its Past
If "60 Minutes," "Nightline" and "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" can publicly celebrate their anniversaries, why not "The 10 O'Clock News"?
Television rivals the Pentagon for bursts of self-admiration, and tonight at 9 on Channel 5, the nightly news program that has been serving or exploiting the New York area for 25 years spends an hour pinning medals on itself.
"25 on 5," narrated by John Roland and Cora-Ann Mihalik, the anchors of the newscast, is an inexpensive piece of promotion, made up mostly of old clips.
The producers of "The 10 O'Clock News" -- probably most famous for bringing show-business personalities and hopefuls on to declare: "It's 10 P.M. Do you know where your children are?" -- take credit for putting forth an "intense," "gritty," "in-your-face" newscast that challenged the establishment or even waged guerrilla war on it.


Smithfield Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


M. S. Ravenholt, 71; Asian Affairs Expert
Marjorie Severyns Ravenholt, an expert on Asia for government, news and non-profit organizations, died on Monday at the Swedish Hospital in Seattle.
She was 71 years old.
She died of complications after surgery for lung cancer, said her husband, Albert.
The couple lived in Seattle and in Manila.


Repligen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sarah Kinney, G. Contomichalos
Sarah Hart Kinney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert H. Kinney of Washington, was married yesterday in New York to Gerassimo Contomichalos, the son of Dimitri G. Contomichalos and Mrs.
George Arachovitis, both of Athens.
The Rev.
John Davis performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.
Mrs.
Contomichalos is an assistant vice president of Christie's in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is an investor.


Bronze Medal Winner, Gold Medal Idea
Peter Westbrook was always a sucker for a sad story.
A homeless man once said he needed shoes.
Westbrook asked him what size and bought him a pair.
Others simply asked him for money.
Rather than hand over cash, Westbrook paid for a sandwich or dinner.
The trouble was, his altruism was diffracted, and he never really knew how much good it was doing, which led to confusion.
"I always wanted to give something back," he said.
"I just didn't know how."


Dinkins's Trip Off to Profitable Start
Taking a break before the serious work of drumming up business in Europe for New York, Mayor David N. Dinkins was making his way today through the bustling Petticoat Lane Market when business came up to him.
As the Mayor bought nine souvenir T-shirts for his two grandchildren, Ian Gordon, the manager of the market, approached him and said he was interested in opening a similar street fair in lower Manhattan.
Without missing a beat, Mr.
Dinkins waved to his recently appointed Deputy Mayor for Economic Development, Barry F. Sullivan, and shouted: "Barry, we got a customer!"


World Economies


Gabrielle Zaklad, Richard Berger
Gabrielle Zaklad, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rafael Zaklad of New York, was married there yesterday to Richard Berger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Berger of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Room.
Mrs.
Berger, 23 years old, is a freelance writer on theater and business.
She and her husband graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is a senior vice president of Mark Asset Management, a New York investment concern.
Her mother, Dale Greenwald Zaklad, is a vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.


Interpoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


G.O.P. Gives Its Support To D'Amato
New York State's Republican Party nominated Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato for a third term by acclamation at its convention yesterday, even as a former state party chairman warned delegates that the anti-abortion position Mr.
D'Amato has long backed had put the party dangerously out of step with New York voters.
To the cheers of supporters wearing red, white and blue boaters at the Women's National Republican Club in Manhattan, Mr.
D'Amato promised to "stand up for the little guy" in a feisty 15-minute speech that amounted to an impromptu summary of his 11 years in office and a pledge to fight on.


SMT Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ruling in Canadian Olympia Case
The judge presiding over the largest corporate restructuring in Canada's history has struck middle ground in a dispute between Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. and its creditors over the use of rental income from court-protected real estate.
The compromise by Justice Robert Blair of the Ontario Court General Division related to a complaint by some lenders that Olympia's cash flow should not be used to pay the costs of restructuring the bankrupt company or the company's own overhead.
Restructuring costs include fees paid to lawyers and financial advisers.
Overhead consists of day-to-day business expenses like salaries of Olympia employees.


Robern Apparel Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Financier Sentenced in Brazilian Scandal
A Brazilian court has sentenced a former financier, Naji Nahas, to four years in prison on his conviction on charges that he caused the worst crisis in the history of Brazil's stock exchanges.
Mr.
Nahas was convicted last week of breaking the "popular economy" law in connection with a stock-manipulation scandal.
The crisis forced the authorities to close Brazil's stock and options markets for a day and created a crisis of confidence among investors.


Going Out a Winner at William Paterson
RALPH PERDOMO, of West New York, ended his scholastic baseball career in style last weekend.
In his last time at bat for William Paterson College, Perdomo stepped to the plate in the ninth inning and hit a three-run home run to lift the New Jersey school past California-Lutheran, 3-1, and to its first N.C.A.A.
Division III championship.


UltraPac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Cistron Biotechnology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Benguet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ellen J. Weinberg And Gad J. Cohen
Ellen Joy Weinberg, the daughter of Norbert and Lea Weinberg of Wynnewood, Pa., was married yesterday in Philadelphia to Gad Jacques Cohen, a son of Raphael and Georgette Cohen of Montreal.
Rabbi Albert Benhaim performed the ceremony at Glen Foerd on the Delaware, a house museum.
Mrs.
Cohen, 28 years old, graduated cum laude from Temple University.
She is the assistant marketing manager for fragrances in New York at Guerlain Inc., the French cosmetics company.
Mr.
Cohen, 28, graduated from McGill University, form which he received a law degree.
He is an associate at the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.


Central Sprinkler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Perfumania Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Licon International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sabine Royalty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Harris Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Orthofix International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quotation of the Day
"Where is the real net to catch people in our society? Because the one they're using is full of holes." -- RENEE REEVES, 39, a single mother homeless for a second time.  [ B4:2 ]


High Profile on Environment For Brazilian Pulp Company
As the slogan "sustainable development" floated over advance meetings last week for the Earth Summit here, Erling S. Lorentzen, a Norwegian industrialist and environmental pioneer in Brazil, seemed to give the words concrete form.
Mr.
Lorentzen is chairman of a wood pulp company, Aracruz Celulose S.A., which last week became Brazil's first company to list its shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
In three days, investors bought the entire issue of 10 million American depository shares, valued at $132.5 million.


Orthofix International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Supradur Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Abrams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Music; Songs in the Classical Arab Tradition
For Sabah Fakhri the concert he sang on Friday night at Town Hall was a short one, only two and a half hours long instead of five hours or more.
But there was ample opportunity to savor the passion and subtleties of Mr.
Fakhri's performance and of the classical Arab traditions he maintains.
It was a concert of vividly expressive singing and protean interplay among Mr.
Fakhri, a seven-man ensemble and three backup singers.
Mr.
Fakhri was born in Aleppo, Syria, and has studied and performed music from across the Arab world; he has become one of the leading Arab classical singers.
His specialty is the classical muwashshah, a Moorish-derived song based on Arabic poetry dealing with love and philosophical themes, from a centuries-old Andalusian tradition that continues in Aleppo and elsewhere.


Electro Brain International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Met-Pro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Infodata Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ross Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Violence Spreads in Iran as the Poor Are Evicted
Thousands of protesters angered over a land dispute rioted on Saturday in Meshed, one of Iran's biggest cities, setting fire to cars and municipal buildings as the police surrendered their weapons to the crowd.
There were no official reports of casualties, but residents in Meshed said as many as six people were believed killed.
A doctor said hundreds of people had suffered minor injuries as "the night sky was covered with flames" and anarchy spread across much of the city of 2.5 million, 440 miles east of Teheran.
The authorities rounded up hundreds of people and sealed off affected areas of the city today.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Races Primaries for Cranston's Seat Expose Rifts in California Parties' Ideologies; Democrats Attack One Another After Some Shift Views
The push and pull of Barbara Boxer's Senate campaign is a template for this election season, when women and other political outsiders and are "in" and lawmakers who can't balance their checkbooks are "out."
Representative Boxer fits into both categories.
And therein lies both her strength and weakness in the election here Tuesday, when four Senate primaries are simultaneously being contested, this one a three-way race, also involving Lieut.
Gov.
Leo McCarthy and Representative Mel Levine, to pick a Democrat to run for the seat vacated by the retiring Alan Cranston.


Home Intensive Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rymac Mortgage Investment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fiscal Hurdle for City Hall: Pay Talks
Despite an agreement on Saturday between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council on the shape of a $29.5 billion budget, City Hall still faces a final fiscal hurdle: reaching an agreement with the municipal labor unions on pay raises.
City officials and labor leaders will sit down this week to begin a new round of contract negotiations, and union officials say they will demand a share of the city's budget surplus for their members, who are working without contracts and have not had raises for more than a year.


TENS OF THOUSANDS CALL FOR REMOVAL OF SERBIA'S LEADER
Tens of thousands of demonstrators crowded downtown streets today calling for the resignation of Serbia's President as the first effects of United Nations sanctions were being felt.
The President, Slobodan Milosevic, criticized the sanctions imposed on Saturday, saying Serbia was not responsible for the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continued today.


Bridge
The final of the prestigious Reisinger Knockout Team Championship began yesterday with teams headed by Mel Colchamiro of Bellmore, L.I., and George Tornay of Manhattan in opposition.
After 16 deals of a scheduled 64, the Colchamiro team led Tornay's team by 22 imps.
In one semifinal Tornay, teamed with Saul Bronstein of Manhattan and Debbie Zuckerberg of Flushing, Queens, and Phillip Martin of Bronxville, N.Y., established a big lead in the first quarter and held on to win by 43 against Andy Goodman of San Francisco, Paul Soloway of Mill Creek, Wash., Richard Schwartz of Floral Park, L.I., and Drew Casen of Delray Beach, Fla.


Met-Pro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Dance; Young Feet Following Moody Hearts
The annual Senior Dance Concert of the Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, presented on Saturday afternoon in the school's handsome theater, was a long program full of long dances performed by increasingly less focused young dancers.
The opening work, Michelle Benash's new "Enigma of Desire," juxtaposed a group of columnar ballet dancers and a group of easier jazz dancers, with six flirtatious women in summer dresses skittering through for good measure.
The point of the piece seemed to be its sweetly eloquent score, created by Michael Leonhart, a prize-winning student trumpeter and composer who wandered in and out of the dance to evocative effect.


Lasertechnics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Shifra Malina, David Waxman
Shifra Nitza Malina, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Malina of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to David Waxman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Akiva Waxman of Kew Gardens Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Jonathan Rosenblatt performed the ceremony at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
Ms.
Malina, 23 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and is a law student at Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Malina &amp; Wolson.
Her mother, Lenore Malina, is an artist.


When Apartment Door Leads Back to the Shelter
Three years ago, Orlando and Noelia Torres, who had spent nearly five years sleeping under stairwells, on the subway, in homeless shelters and in welfare hotels, finally made it into a city-run apartment in Harlem that they could call their own.
Three weeks ago, on a rainy day when chunks of plaster rained down from the damp walls onto their heads, the Torreses, fed up with the deterioration, left the only home they had ever known together.
With three small children in tow, Mr.
Torres, who is 28 and legally blind, and Mrs.
Torres, who is 22 and pregnant, reported to the nearest emergency center for homeless families.
They were back where they had started.


American Eagle Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  SERBS SEEK LEADER'S OUSTER  Thousands of protesters in Belgrade called for the resignation of their President as Serbia began to feel the effects of United Nations sanctions.
But President Milosevic insisted that Serbia was not responsible for the fighting that led to world condemnation of his Government.
A1  VOW OF VENGEANCE IN SARAVEVO  In their vows to keep fighting, avenge lost comrades and capture Sarajevo, Serbian fighters offer little hope that they will yield any time soon to international pressure.
A1  Bush Administration officials express reluctance to use force.
A8


Roman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Basic Petroleum International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thomas Nelson reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Eagle Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Great Lakes Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lasertechnics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fortune Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Delphi Information reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


This Year's Model at Georgetown
Until he reached the 10th grade, Othella Harrington entertained the notion of pursuing two careers: one in music, specializing in trumpet, the other in athletics, specializing in basketball.
As he became more skilled in each discipline, however, a conflict developed and finally Harrington's band instructor at Murrah High School told him that he had to make a choice.


CHRONICLE
CBS News has signed Gen.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF, commander of the Allied forces in the Persian Gulf war, to a three-year agreement to host a series of news documentaries and specials.
ERIC OBER, president of CBS News, made the announcement Friday at the 38th annual CBS affiliates meeting at the Waldorf- Astoria Hotel in Manhattan.
General Schwarzkopf has already been involved in the current CBS World War II series that includes "The Year of the Generals," to be broadcast on Thursday, the 50th anniversary of the Battle of Midway.


It's So Long, Sports Scene. Hello, World.
BILL MAZER, a broadcaster, reminded listeners of his 17 years in Buffalo so often that he earned the sobriquet Buffalo Bill from his New York peers.
This endearing soul had been a part of the sports scene in New York since 1964, ubiquitous in recent years as an interviewer on a two-hour lunchtime show on WFAN from inside the front window of MICKEY MANTLE's restaurant on Central Park South; as a nightly sports anchor on Channel 5, and as the host of Sports Extra, the long-running Sunday night television show.


Where the Draft Goes for Its Talent Search
There will not be many, if any, players from the Northeast selected today in the first round of the major league baseball annual draft.
As usual, the cream of the crop comes from the South and the West Coast.
And there is no BILL SWIFT out there, like there was in 1984.
Swift, one of 15 children in a South Portland, Me., family, was the second player to be drafted that year, by the Seattle Mariners, after a spectacular college career at Maine.


Garan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Duramed Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Study Says Drug Ads In Medical Journals Frequently Mislead
Advertisements in medical journals are often misleading about the safety and effectiveness of new drugs, a study being reported today says.
The advertisements are a prime source of information for doctors about the dozens of new drugs that are marketed annually, and the study said misinformation could lead to the prescribing of inappropriate drugs.
The advertisements are also a major source of revenue for medical journals, producing millions of dollars each year.


Roper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Gerber Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Basic Petroleum International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Menopause: A Normal, Natural Part of Life
To the Editor:
I have just finished "Aging Baby Boomers Take Fresh Look at a Milestone" (front page, May 17), the first of your two articles on menopause, and I am disturbed by its tone.
Menopause is not something women need be afraid of.
It is a perfectly normal and natural part of life: like puberty, like childbirth.
Are women afraid of those?
No, generally they look forward to them.
The vast majority of women have moderate physical symptoms during menopause that are not particularly unsettling.


Affiliates Criticize CBS Plan on Fees
Television stations affiliated with CBS said yesterday that the network's proposed changes in its financial relationship with local stations could cause them to drop some programming and, in extreme cases, to consider abandoning CBS altogether.
In a shift from its longstanding policy, CBS told its affiliates on Saturday that it would begin charging fees for some programs, with the net effect of reducing the compensation the network pays to local stations.


Ex-Official Sentenced
A former Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy has been sentenced to six months in prison for accepting gifts from consultants to military contractors in exchange for classified military procurement documents.
Federal District Judge Claude M. Hilton said on Friday that the former official, James E. Gaines, 64 years old, of Seattle, could serve his sentence in a community home.
The judge rejected Mr.
Gaines's request to serve the time at his own home.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Press; Hollywood Still Directs Its Coverage
This town's journalists are in an uproar.
"Outrage," "blackmail," "the final insult" -- these are some of their milder comments about the latest attempts by movie star handlers to control them.
At issue is nothing less than the spoken words of Tom Cruise.
In Hollywood, Mr.
Cruise's spoken words are viewed as significant, even if they're usually not.


Wedco Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


GW Utilities Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Czar Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Polk Audio Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Datamark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; Can a Baby-Making Venture Deliver?
Think of it as "Brave New World" meets Wall Street.
A company that was among the first to offer test-tube babies to Americans now feels confident enough to go public.
But some investors are not sure whether IVF America Inc. can deliver on its ambitious growth plans and become the McDonald's of the baby-making business.


One Day, the Best Hot Dogs in Hanoi
WHEN a group of young soldiers raised a makeshift banner 25 years ago at an antiwar demonstration in New York City -- "Vietnam Veterans Against the War," it read -- they tapped the anarchic energy of other bitter veterans, energy they channeled for the first time into a coherent national lobbying and protest movement.
Yesterday, 17 years after that war ended, about 50 members of the group, which is still active, gathered in the pews of St.
Paul's Chapel in lower Manhattan to mark their anniversary by trading ideas on where to apply that energy now.
Their discussion gave a glimpse into the maturation of both the antiwar movement and the balding or ponytailed and generally paunchy vets themselves.


BF Realty Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alubec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


United Education &amp; Software reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Garan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Surge Is Building At 'CBS Evening News'
CBS executives boldly predicted last year that the network would return to leadership in prime time -- and then fulfilled that prediction.
So far, no CBS executive has been bold enough to predict a similar comeback for its evening newscast.
But citing some initial success with its plan for the newscast to reach the same adult viewers who watch its entertainment shows, the network is pointing to a favorable trend.


Fortune Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sudan Presses Its Campaign to Impose Islamic Law on Non-Muslims
The military Government is moving to transform the Sudan, where one-third of the people are not Muslims, into a nation dedicated to the spread of Islamic militancy in Africa and the Middle East.
"This Government has a very clear vision of where it wants to go," said a senior Western diplomat, "and the mission it has embarked upon includes the imposition of Arabic and Islam throughout the country, including the south, and the subversion of the secular Arab and African governments in the region."


Southern California Water Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Strike Threat in South Africa
Accusing the President of trying to keep white minority domination intact, the African National Congress resolved to paralyze South Africa with strikes and boycotts.
Page A3.
Dinkins and School Spending
Mayor Dinkins and the City Council have told the Board of Education to improve its system for keeping track of spending or risk losing $29 million provided in the new budget.
Page B1.
A Judge on Trial
Are judges becoming vulnerable to retribution for unpopular decisions?
A Los Angeles County Superior Court election suggests yes.
Page A13.


BRE Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Hart Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Infodata Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Race Against Time And Atlantic's Waters
A never-ending fascination among adventurers to find a faster way across the Atlantic Ocean has lured an Italian group into trying for the powerboat speed record.
And in this case, a special trophy is apt to sweeten the plot.
The effort, spearheaded by the Yacht Club Costa Smeralda of Sardinia and its chairman, the Aga Khan, plans to send a team trans-Atlantic this week in a new, $50 million custom-built powerboat.


Review/Music; 20th Century Attacks 19th at an Outdoor Festival
Far apart in spirit but united by a common enemy, Schoenberg and Stravinsky refought the 20th century's desperate war against the 19th on Friday night.
"Pierrot Lunaire" attacks the language of Romanticism; "L'Histoire du Soldat" undermines its habitat.
Members of the Los Angeles Philharmonic led by Pierre Boulez played the two pieces on the rough outdoor stage of this valley town outside Ventura.
That after 75 years or so both composers sounded so vital, so combat ready, should bring the listener comfort but discouragement as well.
"Pierrot" -- in Phyllis Bryn-Julson's subtly calculated depiction -- erases the line between singing and speech, creating a metaphor in music for the madness and corruption of Albert Giraud's 21 poems.
The Stravinsky, designed as a road show for small-town audiences, moves the idea of musical stage a few feet off its foundations.
Part pantomime, part concert and part storytelling in the prebook-publishing tradition, "L'Histoire" is perhaps opera without the singing.
Defiantly unmonumental, it is a masterpiece of our time.


On the Edge of No Return, Seles Storms Back to Gain
Just when she seemed on the verge of falling through the trap door set by Akiko Kijimuta of Japan, the two-time defending French Open champion instead closed the door on a challenger who, with her naturally black hair and unnaturally double-fisted groundstrokes, looked suspiciously like her.
Monica Seles squinted across the net at her mirror image, felt insulted by the challenge and squelched it.


BF Realty Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tony Awards Presented


Despite the Rain, Thousands Walk to Raise Funds for AIDS


Daniels Is a Fan Favorite in L.I. Debut
Just three minutes into the opening quarter, the crowd began calling out for Swee'Pea.
"Put Swee'Pea into the game!"
"C'mon, Lloyd, get in there, baby!"
After all, many of the 1,000 or so fans who jammed the bleachers of the Westbury High School Gymnasium for tonight's United States Basketball League game between the Long Island Surf and Philadelphia Spirit, won by Philadelphia, 101-96, had come solely for the purpose of watching Lloyd (Swee'Pea) Daniels of the hometown Surf splash his considerable talents.


In Sarajevo, Anger and Grief Amid Ruins
When the Serbian Orthodox priests lifted the top off Predrag Marjanovic's coffin for his family's last farewells today, his grandmother leaned over, moved the black scarf from his face and kissed him.
"Your brothers who survive you will avenge you!" she said, her anguished voice rising above the wailing of the dead man's mother and sister.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  THE HOMELESS ON A HOUSING-GO-ROUND
Every month 150 homeless families leave temporary shelters to settle into homes that the city calls permanent.
But also every month, about 75 families, because of personal problems or problems with city-owned apartments, move out of subsidized housing and back onto the streets, which is to say back into the city's bureaucratic shelter system.
As a result, the city has to settle a number of homeless families twice, which some critics see as a staggering waste of money and time, if not a fundamental indictment of the homeless program.
A1.
BANKING AGAINST URBAN CRISIS
Community Capital Bank in Brooklyn is one of three banks in the nation chartered specifically to invest in reviving depressed neighborhoods.
Since it began 18 months ago, it has nearly tripled its assets, to $18 million, granted $3 million in loans or letters of credit and committed another $1.5 million to more than two dozen borrowers who might have been rejected by other banks.
Metro Matters.
B2.
A MAYOR ABROAD


Lawson Mardon reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Pop; Ageless Persona and Voice
Blossom Dearie, who has returned to the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street) for an open-ended engagement after a three-year hiatus, is about as close as a popular singer can get to seeming like a fixed star in a changing universe.
Miss Dearie, who is somewhere in her 60's, exudes the vitality and mischievous spirit of an ageless flapper.
Her singing, in a light, almost wispy voice, is also ageless, at once girlish and grandmotherly.
The essence of Miss Dearie's artistry lies in her impeccable sense of balance.
The whispery texture of a voice that can seem about to disappear like a feather in the wind is countered by a rugged sense of swing that gives everything she does a solid jazz foundation.
It is augmented by lilting pianism that at moments becomes almost chunky in its richness.
Just as her voice seems about to evaporate into a vapor trail at the end of the phrase, she spins out a long final note in a delicately shaded vibrato.
Maintaining perfect enunciation, Miss Dearie also never loses her storytelling sense.


Dr. Stromswold, Jacob Feldman
Karin Stromswold, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Stromswold of Nashua, N.H., was married yesterday in Boston to Jacob Feldman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin Feldman of New York.
Rabbi Murray Levine performed the ceremony at the Lenox Hotel.
Dr.
Stromswold, who is keeping her name, graduated from Harvard University and its medical school and received a doctorate in cognitive science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a postdoctoral fellow in neurology at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior electrical engineer at Sanders Associates, a defense contractor in Nashua.


Fire Trucks Collide On Lower East Side
Two fire trucks on the way to the same fire on the Lower East Side of Manhattan collided yesterday afternoon, injuring 11 firefighters and two bystanders, a spokesman for the Fire Department said.
All of the injured were taken to hospitals, and all, except for one firefighter, who is being held for observation at Bellevue Hospital, were released.
A Bellevue spokesman would not specify the fireman's injuries last night but said his condition was stable.


Sarah J. Cohen, M. L. Grossbard
Sarah Jane Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Cohen of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Laurence Grossbard, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lionel Grossbard of Ridgewood, N.J.
Rabbi Hyman Krantz performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
Mrs.
Grossbard, 25 years old, graduated from Harvard University and expects to receive a master's degree in physical chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology later this month.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.
Her mother, Evelyn Streit Cohen, is a marriage counselor in New York.


Video Display Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Review/Cabaret; Gripes About New York City Mesh With 1935 Lyricism
Midway in their perky new cabaret show, the musical comedy duo of Bill Daugherty and Robin Field perform a seamless meshing of the 1935 standard "Stairway to the Stars" with "N.Y.C.," from the Broadway musical "Annie." As Mr.
Daugherty spins out the dreamy lyric for "Stairway" in a soaring Irish tenor, Mr.
Field counters with "N.Y.C's" list of gripes about New York, and these night-and-day visions of city life pull against each other in an exhilarating tug of war.
The number is the high point of the duo's new act, "Daugherty and Field Happen to Like New York," which plays through Saturday at Club 53, a new 170-seat cabaret in the New York Hilton Hotel, Avenue of the Americas at 53d Street.
The comfortably appointed club, on the hotel's ground floor, looks like a Hollywood stage set for a contemporary nightclub.
It has unimpeded sight lines from three levels, good sound and a cozy ambiance.


Books of The Times; Satire and Sentiment In New York's Fast Life
Brightness Falls  By Jay McInerney  416 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
It is the spring of 1987 at the opening of Jay McInerney's piquant new novel, "Brightness Falls." Russell (Crash) Calloway and Corrine Makepeace are "savvy pioneers of the matrimonial state" trying to carve out careers in New York City, he as an editor at a book publishing house, she as a neophyte stockbroker.
"The electronic buzz of fast money hummed beneath the wired streets, affecting all the inhabitants, making some of them crazy with lust and ambition, others angrily impoverished, and making the comfortable majority feel poorer. Late at night, Russell or Corrine would sometimes hear that buzz -- in between the sirens and the alarms and the car horns -- worrying vaguely, clinging to the very edge of the credit limits on their charge cards."


LNH REIT reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mannville Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alco Health Distribution Corp., 7.5 million common shares, 6 million in the U.S.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham.


Jobs Outlook Turns Brighter
A quarter of the nation's companies plan to hire new workers this summer, painting a rosy employment picture similar to that of 1983, when a solid recovery rescued the country from recession, according to a quarterly hiring survey released today by Manpower Inc.
The prospective gains in employment were the strongest since the aborted recovery of the second half of 1991, and this time pointed to a sustainable economic upturn, said Mitchell Fromstein, the president of the temporary hiring concern based in Milwaukee.


Oil-Dri Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


BMTC Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Victoria Creations Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Making the Most of a Wet Situation


BRE Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Violence Roils Rwanda's Embryo Democracy
The challenges of fighting an ethnically based civil war and introducing multi-party democracy have thrown this Central African nation into upheaval, its worst since independence from Belgium 31 years ago, political leaders and diplomats here say.
Clashes between followers of rival political parties in Kigali, the capital, resulted in five deaths on Thursday, local journalists said.
They said the victims appeared to have been pushed out windows or beaten to death.
On Friday, a policeman shot a bystander to death during a blockade by angry taxi drivers, witnesses said.


Polk Audio Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Health Threat Exists Below Pollution Standard
To the Editor:
You are to be commended for the new pollution index now published on your weather page.
It's especially important for the public to be aware of air quality at this time of year, as the season for high ozone levels is almost upon us.
You should be aware, however, that the index as it stands does not reflect the full extent of the health threat from air pollution.
A wealth of recent research suggests that pollution has harmful effects at levels now considered safe under Federal law.


Property Capital Trust reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Wellington Leisure Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


NII Norsat International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Central Sprinkler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Electronic Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Storage Equities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Roper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Autrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Simula Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Video Display Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Great Lakes Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Penguins Spoil Chelios's Punch Line
Chicago's Chris Chelios said he wasn't really that angry or out of control, he was simply punching Larry Murphy in the head several times so that the referee would blow his whistle and stop play and prevent the Pittsburgh Penguins from scoring an empty-net goal.
"I've done that before and it has worked," Chelios said of his strategy in the last minute of Game 3 Saturday night.
"I just used whatever judgment I thought was best, but I guess I made a mistake."


Bulb Lighted by Radio Waves May Last for Up to 14 Years
In what appears to be a significant advance in the technology of efficient lighting, a bulb will be introduced today that uses a high-frequency radio signal instead of a filament to produce light.
The new bulb is more cost effective than existing types and will last 14 years if lighted 4 hours a day, which is typical household use, electrical engineers say.


Black Cable Channel's Wild Ride
When BET Holdings Inc., the cable-television company whose core business is Black Entertainment Television, went public last fall, the stock took off like a rocket.
And little wonder.
BET had lots of cachet as the first publicly traded black-owned company on the New York Stock Exchange, and as the purest-play stock in the fast-growing cable programming business.
The service's programming was distinctive, with black-oriented music videos, talk shows, comedy and news.


Miscellany
*
Harrison, Star, Wiener &amp; Beitler, New York, formed an independent health-care public relations agency, headed by Sydney Ann Neuhaus, as senior vice president and director of public relations.
She had been a vice president at Medicus Intercon Public Relations, New York.


No New Taxes in Budget Plan But Some Service Cutbacks
The $29.5 billion spending plan on which Mayor David N. Dinkins and City Council leaders agreed Saturday bears a very close resemblance to the budget that the Mayor proposed a month ago.
Compared with the city's current budget, there are no new taxes, but there are some service cuts, including fewer jail beds, a reduction in pothole surveillance teams and deferred sewer repairs.


Israel Remembers War, and Its Spoils
Israelis today celebrated 25 years of full control over this city with dances and parades and declarations by their political leaders that no Middle East peace process will alter Jerusalem's status as Israel's unified and eternal capital.
"Jerusalem is not a subject for bargaining," Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said at a ceremony affirming Israel's claim to permanent sovereignty over the city.


Scottish Heritable reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Attention Italian Shoppers: Find Your Bargains Here; For These New York Visitors, 'Buy American' Ranks With Major Tourist Attractions
It was Alberto Frambrosi's first visit to the United States, and the tourist from Milan knew exactly where to find the real America.
It had nothing to do with the Empire State Building or the Statue of Liberty or anything else New Yorkers might expect.
Mr.
Frambrosi landed at Kennedy International Airport, dumped his luggage at his hotel in midtown Manhattan, and hurried to Curacao Export Ltd., a small and bustling store, four flights above West 57th Street off Fifth Avenue, that is a mecca for Europeans, especially Italians.
Here, in abundance, were the American products Mr.
Frambrosi and his friends covet -- Timberland shoes, Swatch watches, Levi's jeans, Sony Walkmans -- and pay dearly for at home.


Winners Circle Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


ADT Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


How Gain (Partisan) Became Loss (Universal)
In Albany, a dream of Democratic dominion led legislators to seek gold in Washington.
The fear of political extinction led Republican members of Congress to ship piles of cash to their country cousins.
After two expensive years of fund-raising and lobbying, politicians in both cities may be wiser, but no closer to their goals.
The outpouring was first encouraged by New York State Democratic party leaders, who saw the elections two years ago as a rare opportunity to take control of the State Senate to go along with their majority in the Assembly and win a lock on Congressional redistricting, since it is the Legislature that controls the district lines.


LNH REIT reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater  Metropolitan Opera House
Some dances have no power because they make no sense.
Other dances make no sense (or very little) and still have power.
A work of the latter sort is Mats Ek's "Grass," which American Ballet Theater presented in its American premiere on Thursday night.
"Grass," which was created for the Royal Swedish Ballet in 1987, is a dramatic duet to pieces for two pianos by Rachmaninoff.
It is no ordinary pas de deux.
Mr.
Ek is no ordinary choreographer.
In the past, he has been fond of ballets of social commentary, and he once staged an iconoclastic "Giselle" in which the heroine was sent to an insane asylum.


Committee to Consider Ziegler's Status
A five-member committee of National Hockey League governors has been appointed to consider the replacement of John Ziegler as league president, an office he has held since 1977.
On the committee are Ed Snider, owner of the Philadelphia Flyers; Marcel Aubut, owner of the Quebec Nordiques; Bruce McNall, owner of the Los Angeles Kings; Mike Ilitch, owner of the Detroit Red Wings, and Dick Patrick, president of the Washington Capitals.


Elissa Vendig, Douglas Mellinger
Elissa Hope Vendig, a daughter of Rochelle Rosen of Boca Raton, Fla., and Steven H. Vendig of New York, was married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y., to Douglas Keith Mellinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome D. Mellinger of Millwood, N.Y.
Rabbi Paul Siegel performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila.
Mrs.
Mellinger, 26 years old, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is an editor in equity research at First Boston Corporation in New York.
Her father is the president of SHV Enterprises, an investment bank in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate broker for Remax in Boca Raton, as is the bride's stepfather, Albert Rosen.
Her stepmother, Maureen Vendig of New York, is a designer for Bartcrest, a kitchen manufacturer in New York.


Jennifer Gates, John P. Gourary
Jennifer Amira Gates, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Gates of Salt Lake City, was married yesterday in New York to John Peter Gourary, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Gourary of New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the Grolier Club.
Mrs.
Gourary, 25 years old, is studying for a master's degree in anthropology at New York University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a hydrologist with the United States Geological Survey in Salt Lake City, where her mother, Connee Gates, is the media specialist at Butler Elementary School.


Forget Peoria. It's Now: 'Will It Play in Tulsa?'
Blame it on the musical "Oklahoma!," John Steinbeck's "Grapes of Wrath" and the oil business.
The nation's image of Tulsa, complains Rusty Linker of the Metropolitan Tulsa Chamber of Commerce, remains one of amiable cowpokes, oil rigs and parched plains.
It scarcely seems fair.
Tulsa, with a population of 367,000, is a tree-lined city with twice the average rainfall of San Francisco.
The local economy is more dependent on high-technology services like the computer center that handles reservations for American Airlines than on oil.
The only cowboys in town are the dress-up urban variety.


United Education &amp; Software reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Home Intensive Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Helmstar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Delphi Information reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brian S. Gorin And Tina Choe
Kyuryoun Tina Choe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kwan Hi Choe of Seoul, South Korea, was married yesterday to Brian Scott Gorin, the son of Michael Gorin of Nissequogue, L.I., and the late Gail Gorin.
Rabbi Robert Rothman performed the ceremony at Le Chateau Restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Gorin, 27 years old, is known as Tina.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University, as did her husband.
Her father is an executive vice president of the Goldstar Company, the electronics manufacturer in Seoul.
Her mother, Jean M. Choe, is an elementary-school teacher in Seoul.


Duramed Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stifel Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Stage Has Been Set For Drexler's Rise
This could be Clyde Drexler's finest moment, a time in his life when everything evolves in slow motion, where he is the central character in a play that unfolds in seven parts, right there on national television, in prime time, in front of Michael Jordan.
It could be. But it probably won't.


International Recovery Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Craftmatic/Contour Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Helene Wexler And Steve Gold
Helene Shelly Wexler, a daughter of Pearl Wexler of Pompano Beach, Fla., and the late Eugene Wexler, was married yesterday to Steve Gold, a son of Emanuel and Ruth Gold of South Fallsburg, N.Y.
Rabbi Irving Goodman performed the ceremony at Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.


Review/Dance; A Festival By Any Other Name
The New York City Ballet's resolute refusal to call its Diamond Project a festival suggests that the 11 premieres in this choreographic showcase should be judged on their own merits.
The format's potential pitfall is that it sets up comparisons between choreographers of different experience and talent.
Happily, by the third program on Friday night, followed by Saturday's matinee, at the New York State Theater, the concept had paid off through variety in the new works of considerable originality.


TCG International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fisher Business Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


U.S. Team Earns Passport To a Higher Playing Level
It did not take long for the new American players to get acquainted.
Midway through the second half of a game Saturday night, the United States showed more speed and experience and go-forward enthusiasm than it has shown in this generation, as it came from behind to beat Ireland, 3-1.
Three mainstays of the 1990 World Cup team -- Marcel Balboa, Tab Ramos and John Harkes -- all scored for the United States after Mick McCarthy scored a header past a hesitant Tony Meola in the 51st minute.


Wedco Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


MedSonic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article on May 25 about four United Nations agencies considering offers to move out of New York City misstated the full name of UNICEF.
It is the United Nations Children's Fund.


NII Norsat International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


China Is Accused of Torturing 3 Who Defaced Mao Portrait
Among those who received the harshest punishments in connection with the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement were three men who shocked the nation by hurling paint at the huge portrait of Mao Zedong that overlooks Tiananmen Square.
The authorities promptly replaced the portrait with an identical one, and the men were largely forgotten.
There was no major outcry in the summer of 1989 when a Beijing court sentenced the men to prison terms of 16 years, 20 years and life.


Israeli Attacks in Lebanon
Israeli planes and helicopters attacked suspected bases of Iranian-backed guerrillas in eastern and southern Lebanon today, wounding three people, the police said.
Security officials said four planes attacked a Party of God training camp in Janta, in the Bekaa region.
Israeli helicopter gunships later fired rockets at houses in southern Lebanon that were said to belong to suspected Party of God officials.


Benguet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nutrition Management Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Notebook; Campaigning on Sundays Brings Out a Different Bill Clinton
Bill Clinton likes to campaign in black churches so much that it occasionally seems that he is toying with a calling more spiritual than political.
Some call these little talks sermons.
And when Mr.
Clinton weaves scriptural references into his standard campaign speech on Sunday mornings, some members of the press corps have a different name for the Arkansas Governor: Reverend Bill.


Wall Street Opposing Bond Rules
Nervous about the impact of the scandal at Salomon Brothers, the large Wall Street institutions that control the Government securities market have been intensively lobbying Congress as it shapes new controls on the $2.3 trillion market that finances the nation's public debt.
With strong bipartisan support, a bill that would impose regulations on the government securities market is widely expected to clear an important hurdle on Tuesday: approval by the House Energy and Commerce Committee.


At Poverty Conference, Gloom and Dashed Hope
Robert Lampman, the intellectual architect of the war on poverty, stepped to the lectern and reported the good news: poverty has all but vanished, the economy is booming and wages are soaring for those at the bottom.
Then the 71-year-old economist delivered the punch line.
"Not!" he said.


Britain Unveils Monument to 'Bomber' Harris


Royal Oak Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Paloma Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Khrushchev's Son to Speak
The role of Jews in Soviet culture, with special attention to film and theater, will be discussed by critics and directors from Russia and the United States in a four-day symposium.
Sergei N. Khrushchev, the son of Nikita S. Khrushchev, will be among the speakers.
The symposium, called "Lights, Camera, Glasnost: Jewish Impact on Soviet Film and Theater," will be at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67 Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719, tonight, Wednesday, Thursday and June 10.
Film showings, including archival material from the 1920's and 30's and recent documentaries about anti-Semitism, will be at 6:30 P.M.
Panel discussions will be at 8 P.M.


Oil-Dri Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


BMTC Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Choice Drug Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


In Ryan vs. Ryan, Youth Takes a Bow
By rights, 15-year-old WENDY RYAN should have been embarrassed.
There she was in Central Park on Saturday, a tall, slender picture of athletic perfection, a high school freshman with an eye already on a college volleyball scholarship, no less, having to admit that her own 43-year-old mother, RUTH, had beaten her by almost six minutes in the Advil Mini Marathon.
What made the athletic teen-ager's loss seem all the more embarrassing was that Wendy, who finished the 6.2-mile course in 1 hour 36 seconds, had been responsible for getting her mother to take up running in the first place.


Quanex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater
Metropolitan Opera House
"The Sleeping Beauty" has returned to American Ballet Theater's repertory in a grandly scaled production.
Kenneth MacMillan's staging of this masterpiece, originally choreographed by Marius Petipa in 1890, makes the work more than a display of fine classical dancing.
The action always emphasizes the struggle between good and evil and the awakening of love.
What makes the production less than a pure delight are the ponderous settings by Nicholas Georgiadis that smother, rather than decorate, the stage.
Fortunately, on Friday night and Saturday afternoon, much of the dancing soared.
Watching two casts also revealed how differently the ballet's leading roles can be interpreted.


Polyphase Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Port-au-Prince Journal; A Settlement in Haiti? 'Mr. America' Is in the Way
When Haiti's military-backed Government published a new law calling for the formation of a "national consensus" Government on Friday, one name seemed to be on everyone's lips as the man most likely to be named to the powerful job of Prime Minister.
Squeezed badly by an international embargo, increasingly racked by violence, and scorned by an outside world that has not forgiven the overthrow of the country's first democratically elected Government last September, Haiti's army is now widely believed to be leaning heavily in favor of installing Marc L. Bazin as head of the Government.


Dinkins Uses School Money In Board Push
Escalating the fight over the school budget, Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council have told the Board of Education to improve its system for keeping track of spending if it wants to keep the additional $29 million in school operating funds contained in a new citywide budget agreement.
But Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez fired back yesterday, defending the board's accounting and reporting practices and declaring that the amount restored for schools in the $29.5 billion budget was simply not enough.


International Innopac reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wrong Choice for Kamieniecki
The first curveball to B. J. Surhoff in the ninth inning nicked the inside corner today so Scott Kamieniecki thirsted to throw one more.
He wanted to spot this curve low and away.
Maybe Surhoff would tap it into the ground for an out and send the game to extra innings, he thought.
Maybe not was more like it.
Kamieniecki threw the fateful curveball, but it never strayed out of the strike zone as he hoped it would.
Surhoff hammered it to center field for a single, Greg Vaughn rushed home from second base with the decisive run and the Brewers edged the Yankees, 2-1, at County Stadium.


James Gibson, 90, Former Judge On New York's High Court, Dies
James Gibson, who had served on New York State's highest court and wrote the decision that upheld the constitutionality of the phrase "under God" in the Pledge of Allegiance, died on Friday at the Glens Falls Hospital in Glens Falls, N.Y.
He was 90 years old and had lived in Hudson Falls, N.Y.
The cause of death was not known, his family said.


BioWhittaker Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Autrex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fisher Business Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


TCG International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Karen Goldman, Efrem M. Grail
Karen Sue Goldman and Efrem M. Grail were married yesterday in Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Devorah Jacobson officiated at the LaMont Restaurant.
The bride is a daughter of Alex and Adele Goldman of Pittsburgh.
The bridegroom is a son of Fred Grail of Columbus, Ohio., and the late Anita R. Grail.


Southern California Water Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Recovery Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stifel Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Riots' Victims Begin Getting $638 Million in Aid
A month after rioting swept the nation's second-largest city, financial aid promised by the Government is beginning to reach those who lost jobs, homes and businesses.
Recipients say they are surprised and delighted to get the money this quickly.
But some community leaders and local officials say thousands of people are still going hungry or homeless because of the riots, and they have called on Federal agencies to do more to make people aware of the programs and help them apply.


Wellington Leisure Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Buttrey Food &amp; Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Gerber Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Caitlin A. Kelly, Dr. Robert D. Roy
Caitlin Aline Kelly, the daughter of Cynthia von Rhau of Gibsons, British Columbia, and Ronald Kelly of Toronto, was married yesterday in Cold Spring, N.Y., to Dr.
Robert Douglas Roy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Roy of Oldsmar, Fla.
The Rev.
Nancy Bowen Martell performed the Unitarian ceremony at Our Lady of Restoration Chapel.
Ms.
Kelly, 34 years old, who is keeping her name, was until recently a senior editor at World Press Review, a monthly magazine.
She is now a freelance writer in Tarrytown, N.Y., and an adjunct professor of journalism at the New York University School of Continuing Education.
She graduated from the University of Toronto.
Her father, a retired film maker, is a painter in Toronto.
Her stepmother, Sondra Kelly of Toronto, is an editor for a Canadian television series.


Chateau Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Roman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Toromont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Piedmont Mining Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chicago Pitchers Can't Get Jays to Knuckle Under
Blue Jays 3, White Sox 2
TORONTO, May 31 (AP) -- For eight innings, the Toronto Blue Jays were lunging at 50-mile-an-hour knuckleballs, managing only two infield singles off Charlie Hough.
When Bobby Thigpen was summoned to pitch the ninth and preserve a 2-1 lead, their eyes lit up.
"This club definitely likes the hard stuff better," Dave Winfield said after his home run sparked a two-run rally that lifted Toronto to a 3-2 victory today and sent the Chicago White Sox to their sixth straight loss.


Craftmatic/Contour Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MedSonic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Novelist Descends Into the Drug Culture And Seeks a Parable
Richard Price was in a McDonald's in Washington Heights, looking out the window at a teen-age drug dealer, when the idea for his tremendously ambitious new novel, "Clockers" (Houghton Mifflin), began to take shape.
He noticed another teen-ager, this one working behind the counter in the restaurant.
And he wondered: "Where does this kid making $4.50 an hour get the strength to come here day after day when he can see another kid making $300 a day selling dope out of his socks?" He wasn't sure what the answer was.
"So I did what you do when you don't know," the 42-year-old Mr.
Price recalled.
"You ask."


Hart Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Royal Oak Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Senate Race Primaries for Cranston's Seat Expose Rifts in California Parties' Ideologies; Republicans View Contest for Heart of Their Party
An election year challenge sure to stump even the most astute Republicans in this state: Name one issue on which the party's two main contenders for a six-year Senate term agree.
Give up? So do the candidates themselves.


Paloma Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A light bulb will be introduced today that uses a high-frequency radio signal instead of a filament to produce light.
The new bulb is more cost effective than existing bulbs and will last 14 years if lighted 4 hours a day, electrical engineers say.  [ Page A1. ]
Wall Street has been intensively lobbying the members of Congress who are shaping new controls on the Government securities market in the wake of the Salomon Brothers bidding scandal.
A bill that would impose new regulations is expected to gain the approval of the House Energy and Commerce Committee this week.
Credit Markets.  [ D1. ]


Review/Music; Coal Miners On the Pain Of Laboring In the Earth
The Rabbit Ridge Pea Pickers, an old-timey string band from Cleveland, Va., have never recorded an album, and before their performance at the Carnegie Hall Folk Festival in Weill Recital Hall on Friday night they'd never played outside their native Southern turf.
Composed of three brothers, a nephew and a friend of the family, the Pea Pickers are all coal miners and sons of coal miners; they play music not as a profession, but at workers' rallies, local competitions and on picket lines.
Their bluegrass-inflected mountain music, performed on mandolin, fiddle, banjo, acoustic guitar and slap bass, is as old as coal mining itself, but the Pea Pickers played it as though it were as relevant and vibrant today as it was more than 100 years ago.
In both the songs and the between-song dialogue, the Pea Pickers focused on the plight of coal miners.
The lyrics, sung by the banjo player Burl Rhea, described bad conditions inside the mines and the effect it has on the human spirit.
"Ain't gonna run no coal," he sang in a tune about a 1978 workers' strike.
The music was ragged, raw and prickly with plucked strings and sawing fiddle; Mr.
Rhea's voice was a lonesome, clotted wail, and he explained that his life in the mines had taken its toll on his lungs.
There was nothing intellectual about the Pea Pickers' approach, nothing studied; they treated their music not as a tradition to be preserved, but as an oral communication of their life stories.


Mannville Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Energy Conversion Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Buttrey Food &amp; Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Robert J. Kane, 81, Ex-Olympic Official And Aide at Cornell
Robert J. Kane, a former president of the United States Olympic Committee and a longtime director of athletics at Cornell University, died yesterday at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 81 years old.
He died of heart and respiratory failure after a long illness.


Quanex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Preferred Homecare of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wide Awake Journal; Ghost Town for Sale: Elves Included
No one has lived in this town for many years, except, of course, for the Tommyknockers, the mischievous elves that miners swore they heard, and sometimes even glimpsed, especially after a drink or two.
But the Tommyknockers might soon have company. Wide Awake is up for sale.





General Parcel Service reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Meridian Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trainer Is Looking Like a Million Dollars
Shelley Riley stands in Barn 3 at Belmont Park early in the morning of Belmont Week feeding a carrot to her horse, Casual Lies, who gnaws it cheerfully and asks for more.
Barn 3 is next to Cottage 3, where Woody Stephens lives and works when he is at the track.
It's also where he called the shots during the 1980's for one of the great feats in thoroughbred racing: winning the Belmont Stakes five years in a row.
To Shelley Riley, it's the longest of long shots that she is standing there sharing some history.
And maybe, before the week is out, making some history: No woman has ever trained a horse that won any of the races in the Triple Crown.


Fitness for Over-40 and Corporate Crowds
Speaking of NOLAN RYAN, the American Physical Therapy Association has the right spokesman -- Ryan -- to extoll the merits of exercise and conditioning for people over 40.
There is a free booklet on do's and don't's, "Fitness: A Way of Life," available by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to Fitness: APTA, Box 37527, Washington. . . .
Look out Thursday evening in Central Park for about 10,000 runners competing in the Chemical Corporate Challenge.
It is a scored series of 3.5-mile runs for employees of corporations and businesses who take the event seriously.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Electorate; Chasing Votes From Big Cities To the Suburbs
Probably no one is more surprised at David A. Roberti's election campaign through the suburban tracts of the San Fernando Valley than the veteran Democratic state Senator himself.
Long a leading liberal in the California political firmament, Senator Roberti now boasts of his backing of three new bills in the Legislature to toughen penalties for looting and arson, and he eagerly poses with police officers.
After 26 years in the Legislature, Mr.
Roberti finds himself struggling for political survival against a Republican neophyte in a special election on Tuesday, which also happens to be primary day in California and five other states.


Miss Verona, Thomas Grimaldi
Ann Marie Verona and Thomas Anthony Grimaldi were married yesterday at the First Lutheran Church in Clifton, N.J.
The Rev.
Earl Modean performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Grimaldi, who is 32 years old and a graduate of Seton Hall University, is a child-care specialist in the Essex County Reach program in Newark.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John Verona of North Arlington, N.J.


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Agnico-Eagle Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mandela Group Plans Mass Disruptions
The African National Congress, angry over what it views as foot-dragging by the white minority Government in negotiations, resolved today to paralyze South Africa with strikes, boycotts and demonstrations to force swifter progress toward majority rule.
The plan, approved as the congress concluded a conference on its future policies, threatens coordinated and sustained protests on an unprecedented scale unless the Government agrees by the end of June to an interim government and an elected assembly to draft a new constitution.


Nutrition Management Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Westmin Resources Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Price Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Parcells to Undergo Heart-Bypass Surgery
Bill Parcells will undergo heart-bypass surgery today at Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia to remedy a blockage in a coronary artery.
The former Giants coach, who is currently a football analyst for NBC-TV, recently underwent two angioplasties and one atherectomy to clear the blockage.


Accountant Faces Charges
The Securities and Exchange Commission said today that it had charged a former employee of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, with obtaining loans from a New Jersey bank while auditing its books.
The loans, worth hundreds of thousands of dollars, violated accounting requirements that auditors be independent of the companies they examine, the commission said.


Corrections
An entry in the Benefits column of Styles of The Times on Sunday headed "Guggenheim in SoHo," about an event to be held from 6 to 9 P.M. tomorrow for Learning Through Art, at the Tony Shafrazi Gallery, 130 Prince Street near West Broadway, carried an incorrect telephone number.
The correct number is (212) 831-7044.
Another entry in the column, headed "TriBeCa Synagogue Concert," misidentified a group performing at 7 tonight at the Civic Center Synagogue, 49 White Street.
It is Steve Reich and Musicians, not the Kronos Quartet.


Public Storage Properties VII reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


From the Bad Boys to a Bad Team
The Minnesota Timberwolves need help.
And they can only hope that JACK McCLOSKEY will provide it.
McCloskey, who was previously general manager of the Detroit Pistons, took on the same job yesterday with Minnesota, which had the National Basketball Association's worst record this season.


Nassau Sees Mortgage-Recording Tax as Solution to Its Money Problem
After treading softly for months out of a fear of an anti-tax backlash, county legislators from both parties are coming together on a Nassau County financial bailout plan that includes as its centerpiece a $40 million annual tax increase.
"The time has come to put political posturing aside," said Joseph N. Mondello, the presiding supervisor from the Town of Hempstead and the Republican county chairman, as he announced his support for a county mortgage-recording tax that would be one of the highest in the state.


PerfectData Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Miller Drops Bid for Spot on Team
A knee injury has forced former the Olympian CHERYL MILLER to withdraw from consideration for a spot on the women's 1992 United States Olympic basketball team.
Miller, who withdrew yesterday, had been named one of 18 finalists for the squad on Sunday.
The 12-member team and three alternates will be announced June 12. (AP)


New York Court Adds Tangle to Congressional Redistricting
Adding a new twist to the tangle of Congressional redistricting in New York, a panel appointed by a state court today released a plan that would provide substantially more protection for most incumbents than a competing plan proposed last week in a Federal court.
The state plan would create one new open seat with a majority of Hispanic voters, in contrast to the two such seats in the Federal plan.
And except for two districts pitting incumbent Democrats and Republicans against one another, it would give most of New York's Congressional Representatives relatively safe seats in which to run this fall.


Geraldine Delaney Harris; Dancer, 67
Geraldine Delaney Harris, a dancer and singer who appeared in several Broadway musicals in the 1950's, died on Friday at her home in Pomona, N.Y.
She was 67 years old.
She died after a short illness, her family said.


Review/Television; Pilot Error? A Widow Won't Accept the Verdict
Keeping an eye on corporate pressures or assorted moral and political crusades, television entertainment is not especially fond of controversial subjects.
Abortion, of course, heads the no-no list these days.
Is it at all possible anymore for a based-on-fact television movie to tackle something other than dramatizations of grisly crimes?
Supported not by advertisers but by subscribers, pay cable periodically says yes.
The latest example: Home Box Office's "Afterburn," an "HBO Original Movie" that can be seen tonight at 8.
This Steve Tisch production wastes no time with puny targets.
The villains of this piece are the General Dynamics Corporation, a major military contractor, and the United States Air Force.
At question is the F-16 fighter.
In 1982, Ted Harduvel was killed in South Korea when an F-16 crashed on a routine mission, according to the film.
The official Air Force explanation was pilot error.
Janet Harduvel, Ted's widow, would have none of that.
She was convinced that something had to be wrong with the plane and she set out, almost singlehandedly, to discover the truth.
Her story was eventually picked up by CBS's "60 Minutes."


A Schoolboy Shortstop Gets a Bronx Invitation
Derek Jeter has spent 12 summers visiting his grandparents in West Milford, N.J., and journeying to the Bronx to root for the Yankees.
Today, Jeter moved closer to playing at Yankee Stadium someday because the Yankees selected the high school shortstop with the sixth overall pick in the amateur baseball draft.
Jeter was born in West Milford, moved to Kalamazoo, Mich. when he was 5, but his interest in the Yankees never dwindled and his baseball talents flourished.


High School Too Violent, Teachers Say At a Rally
Outraged over the beating of a social studies teacher in his classroom last week, teachers at Adlai E. Stevenson High School in the east Bronx rallied yesterday against what they called dangerous conditions at the school.
Hours after roughly 100 teachers marched in front of the school in Unionport, a student was arrested in the beating.
The student, Cliford Chambers, 17 years old, was charged with assaulting the teacher, David Gurowsky, in his fourth-floor classroom on Wednesday.
The student was one of two who punched the teacher and kicked him in his head, union officials said.


A Collision on Clay: Agassi to Face Sampras
Andre Agassi treads the clay of Roland Garros with a special insouciance: After sticking around long enough to be the French Open's runner-up for the last two years, he believes he has good reason for feeling arrogant here.
And after six months of wishy-washy results and quavery motivation, arrogance is not only a prized possession for Agassi, but a timely one.
"I feel extremely confident, like I'm unbeatable at times," said Agassi, who played that way today as he finished off Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 6-1, 6-3, 7-5, completing a match suspended on Sunday by showers.


Fantasies and Practicalities to Lift Fashion's Mood; The Lure of Leather's Symbolism
"Everybody's coming back to leather," Jeanette Nostra said.
"It makes being in business exciting." For 10 years she and her husband, Carl Katz, have been running Siena, a division of the G III Apparel Group, which specializes in leather fashions.
They've watched the ups and downs in demand and are happy to be in one of the ups.
"Leather is a status symbol at different levels," Ms.
Nostra continued.
"Fine book bindings and Hermes handbags are on one level. The high- school student who buys a leather jacket because it's sexy is seeking another kind of status. The woman who can't afford to buy a new car opts for a leather jacket."


Dutiful Capriati Ousts an Old Friend
Jennifer Capriati and Mary Pierce, the most famous daddy's girls in women's tennis now that Steffi Graf has become her own person, glared at each other across the net.
Capriati shook her ponytail menacingly; Pierce whipped her python-sized blonde braid in reply.
Capriati adjusted her signature-line Diadora skirt.
Pierce smoothed the sleeve of her off-the-rack Ellesse shirt.


Burt Supree Memorial
A memorial service for Burt Supree, a senior editor and dance reviewer at The Village Voice, will be held at 3 P.M. tomorrow at St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street.
Mr.
Supree died of a heart attack on May 1 at age 51.
Partipants in the service are to include the choreographers Remy Charlip, Marta Renzi and Ulysses Dove, and such friends and colleagues as June Ekman, Deborah Jowitt, Dan Hurlin and M. C. Richards.
Tributes from the audience will be welcomed.
There will be a potluck dinner after the service with food provided by those who attend.
Both the service and the dinner are free and open to the public.
Information: 691-6500.


Officer Convicted of Rape
A New York City police officer was convicted yesterday in State Supreme Court in the Bronx on charges of rape, sodomy and sex abuse in an incident in Pelham Bay Park last year, the police said.
The officer, Kevin Burke, 32 years old, had picked up a woman in an area frequented by prostitutes and driven her to the park just after midnight on Jan. 31, 1991, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
Another officer patrolling the park saw Officer Burke and the woman, who was naked, blindfolded and had her hands tied, Sergeant Mohrmann said.
Officer Burke was suspended last night, she said.


Bio-Logic Systems reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Archer Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Far West Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Sensor Can Track Fetal Heart At Home
FETUSES with dangerously kinked umbilical cords or other concealed abnormalities may soon be diagnosed using a technology originally devised to test aircraft performance.
At a meeting here of the Acoustical Society of America, Dr.
Allan J. Zuckerwar of the space agency's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Va., reported that he and Dr.
Donald Baker of Spokane, Wash., had developed a fetal heart monitor simple enough for patients to use.


Programs to Hold a Child's Interest
IN educational software, as in teaching, the key to success is seizing the student's interest and holding it.
The software programs listed here include some that are cited frequently by parents and educators as superior in getting and holding a child's attention, and a few new programs that I think are superior.
Not all of the programs are conventional education programs, in the sense of teaching reading, writing and arithmetic, but they do provide a framework in which learning can occur.


DSP Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Patterns
Lagerfeld Even Busier
"All I need is a pencil," Karl Lagerfeld said yesterday in announcing, as expected, that he would become the designer for Chloe, a French fashion house, in addition to his already considerable responsibilities.
He currently designs the Chanel ready-to-wear and couture collections, the Fendi fur and clothing collections, Karl Lagerfeld for women and a men's wear line for Hartmarx.


Review/Theater; Four One-Acts on the Ways Life Can Go Wrong
In Lise Erlich's monodrama, "Jenny Keeps Talking," the title character is on the firing line.
A tough-minded newspaper columnist, she is a victim of a change of management.
In common with Willy Russell's "Shirley Valentine," but without Shirley's congeniality, she is sitting in a room talking to a wall of silence.
As articulately portrayed by Leslie Ayvazian, Jenny remains assertive even as she is fearful about her future.
Unlike the other three one-acts in Series C of the ensemble Studio Theater's Marathon, "Jenny" has insights as well as aspirations.
The preceding plays, each by an experienced dramatist, follow an obvious course to a predictable conclusion.


Gamma Biologicals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Tangled 2-Year Inquiry Yields Few Answers in Boston Art Theft
More than two years after the biggest and most brazen art theft in history -- in which a dozen masterpieces worth an estimated $150 million to $200 million were stolen from the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston -- the works are still missing, and no arrests have been made.
Officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which has had as many as 40 agents at a time trying to solve the case, will speak only guardedly about its continuing inquiry, although it is now known that the F.B.I. has at least one intriguing suspect.


Owners Take Leash And Make It Longer
Rosa Wilson was filled with pride yesterday when the Wilson family of Bamberg, S.C., learned that son Preston was a first-round choice of the Mets in the baseball draft of high school and college players.
She was even prouder that "my baby," an outfielder and pitcher and the president of the Ehrhardt High School student body, will graduate Thursday with a 4.0 grade average.
But there was one aspect of this week's major developments in the life of her son and Mookie Wilson's adopted son that did not please Rosa Wilson: the new rule that extends a club's rights to a drafted player from one year to as long as five years.


Beach Time in a Lab; Studying Storm Waves and Erosion
The towering waves sped toward the shore, turning white as they rose and fell with a crash, scouring away sand on New Jersey's newest beach.
The pounding, accompanied by the familiar roar of a storm surge, continued until a voice said, "O.K., Wayne, that's enough." Wayne Clark turned toward his computer keyboard, tapped a couple of keys and the "ocean" subsided.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  Oklahoma Eliminates Wichita State  Home runs by Rich Hills and Jason Evers led Oklahoma to an 8-4 victory over second-ranked Wichita State last night in Omaha, sending the Shockers to their earliest exit in the College World Series.
Wichita State (56-11), the runner-up last year to Louisiana State, lost to Pepperdine on Saturday in the double-elimination tournament.
The school had finished third or higher in four previous C.W.S. appearances.
Oklahoma (43-23), ranked seventh and 10th in two national polls, already has one loss in the series.
The Sooners will play Texas (47-16), which lost by 7-0 to Pepperdine (46-11-1) last night, to determine who will play Pepperdine on Thursday. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  The Best of Times in the 3,000 and the 400  Dieter Bauman of Germany and Charity Opara of Nigeria both had world-best times for 1992 at an International Amateur Athletic Federation meet in Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, yesterday.
Baumann was clocked in 7 minutes 43.19 seconds to win the 3,000 meters ahead of Andrei Tikhonov of Russia, timed in 7:44.54.
Opara took the women's 400 meters in 49:86 seconds, followed by the Russian athletes Olga Nazarova (50.38) and Elena Rutsina (51.57).
Opara, who also set an African record, was the first African woman to go under 50 seconds.
Michael Johnson won the 400 in 44.36 seconds, beating his fellow American Roger Black (45.08).
Linford Christie of Britain set a new European best this year by winning the 100 meters in 10.17, beating the previous time of Austrian Andreas Berger (10.22).
Dennis Mitchell of the United States was second in 10.27.
Natalya Grigorieva of Ukraine established another European best by winning the women's 100-meter hurdles in 12.77 seconds. (AP)


Review/Dance; Chance Takes a Turn in New City Ballet Works
The New York City Ballet's Diamond Project ended over the weekend with the showcase event's final three premieres.
These were Bart Cook's "Flotezart," Alexandre Proia's "Refractions" and Toni Pimble's "Two's Company."
Injuries to some of the dancers affected two of the works in different ways.
Mr.
Cook's ballet was barely under way Saturday afternoon at the New York State Theater when Jennifer Tinsley, a young member of the corps, sprained her ankle and limped out.
That left four women in one unit facing five in another.
Sunday night's performance gave the true picture when Isabel Kimmel stepped into Miss Tinsley's role.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  JAPAN'S BANKS PULL BACK
Japan's big commercial banks, after a decade of rapid growth, have stepped on the brakes.
Their global expansion has been hobbled by a problem that was considered an affliction of the West: billions of dollars in bad loans.
A1  BUSH OFFERS PLAN FOR FORESTS
With the Earth Summit opening on Wednesday in Rio de Janeiro, President Bush sought to counter criticism of his environmental record, introducing programs to conserve forests and combat global warming.
His action and remarks reflected a continuing Administration struggle over environmental politics.
A1
E.P.A. chief: "This must be a very hard Administration to read." A11
Brazilians are casting the U.S. as environmental villain.  A10  THE DEIFICATION OF MAO
Fifteen years after his death, Mao has scored an achievement more remarkable than his founding and dominance of a Communist China: He has become a god.
A1  BEARING THE BRUNT OF DISCONTENT
Having survived the winter and the first phase of disruptive economic change, Russia is preparing to undertake a far more ambitious second phase.
On the firing line will be Yegor T. Gaidar.
A8  WAR AS AN URBAN NIGHTMARE
Sarajevo's disaster evokes a frequent comparison -- to Beirut.
The depth of misery is astonishing for a conflict that began only in April.
A major European city with a population of 560,000 before the fighting has in effect become a jungle.
A3  MILLIONS FOR OFFENSE
The House Intelligence Committee reportedly approved $40 million in covert aid to help overthrow Saddam Hussein, more than double the current $15 million budget.A3  ARAFAT HAS BLOOD-CLOT SURGERY
Yasir Arafat, who suffered head injuries in a plane crash in April, underwent surgery in Jordan to remove a blood clot caused by the crash.
The P.L.O. leader was said to be in good condition.
A5  WAR ON THE SMUGGLERS, TOO
Trying to reduce the flow of cocaine through Central America and the Caribbean, the Bush Administration is planning to expand anti-smuggling operations in several countries.
A7  Final arguments began in Israel in the Demjanjuk trial.
A6  National A12-19  A BLOW TO 'STAR WARS'
The Pentagon's top program analyst says a $35 billion "Star Wars" plan calls for a rushed deployment that threatens expensive and crippling problems.
The criticism could jeopardize a Congressional coalition that last year endorsed the building of limited missile defenses.
A1  A HOBBLED CLINTON
Bill Clinton hoped to sprint to the final steps to the Democratic nomination, but given the situation in California on the eve of its primary, he is likely to have to slog through.
A1  RULING IN EMBRYO DISPUTE
In a dispute involving the question of when life begins, the Tennessee Supreme Court ruled that a man could prevent his ex-wife from having implanted in herself or donating to others embryos that had been fertilized in petri dishes before their divorce and then frozen for later use.
A1  STATES LOSE ON AIRLINE ADS
States may not regulate airline fare advertising, the Supreme Court ruled.
State attorneys general wanted to set guidelines that they said were broader than Federal regulation they regarded as lax.
A1  ACCORD ON WASTE SETTLEMENT
A Federal judge accepted a plea agreement between the Justice Department and the company that ran the Rocky Flats nuclear plant in which the company, Rockwell International, pleaded guilty to mishandling hazardous wastes and agreed to pay $18.5 million in fines.
A12  NEW FACES, NEW TENSION
Record retirements in the House will shake up important committees and, as a result, probably relations between Congress and the White House, assuming President Bush is re-elected.
A12  OWNING THE AMERICAN DREAM
Most Americans believe that a house with a yard is the best place to live, a survey shows.
In addition, they are willing to make large sacrifices to achieve that dream, with blacks more prepared than whites to make such sacrifices.
A12  A STRONG PUSH FOR PHILATELY
In an effort to balance its budget, the Postal Service is vigorously trying to sell stamps to people who won't put them on letters.
A16  THE SEASON ENDS, GRIMLY
For Democrats and Republicans and their leading Presidential candidates, the end of the primary season and the advent of their conventions should be a time of joy.
This year it clearly is not.
Political Week.
A18  VOTE?
WHO ME AND WHY?
Interviews with newly eligible New Jersey voters -- the young and those who have just become citizens -- show that many have an aversion to voting that goes beyond indifference and verges on distaste.
A19  ANOTHER WALLACE CAMPAIGN
George Wallace Jr. knows his name carries a weight in Alabama matched by none other.
But he has tried to carve his own niche in state politics.
Now State Treasurer, he is running for a House seat.
A19  Jerry Brown makes it clear he has no plans to just fade away.
A18  Further dispute on Ross Perot's effort to leave the Navy.
A18  Metropolitan Digest, B1 BLEAK YOUTH JOB OUTLOOK
In the first three months of the year, only slightly more than 1 in 10 New York City teen-agers had a job.
The employment market for youths is the worst in memory and the worst among major cities in the nation.
Labor experts say the situation shows few signs of improving.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  In the deepest seas, marine biologists seek a riot of life.
C1  Meteorites in Antarctica yield clues about the early solar system.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  An endowment grant winner helps two losers.
C13  Broadway assesses the Tonys.
C13  Gardner Museum theft remains a mystery after two years.
C13  Theater: One-act marathon.
C15  Fashion Page B7  Obituaries B8  Sports B9-16  Baseball: Mets rout Giants.
B9  Yanks top Rangers.
B11  Football: Parcells to have heart surgery.
B15  Hockey: Penguins capture cup.
B9  Bowman's year with Penguins.
B12  Tennis: Agassi and Sampras set for showdown.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Japan's military allergy.
N.Y. rediscovers the U.N.
Military prejudice's cost.
Topics: Calling Mr.
Michel.
Letters A20  Russell Baker: That Ma's a killer.
A21  A. M. Rosenthal: The Israeli error.A21  Cokie Roberts: When Perot says "goofy," voters say amen.
A21


W.T.A. Unhappy About Tape Delay
With several of the top-seeded men eliminated from the French Open, it is not far-fetched to suggest that the women's final on Saturday may wind up as a bigger showcase than the men's final on Sunday.
But as usual, the women will play on tape delay at 3 P.M. and the men will play live at 9 A.M.


N.A.A.C.P. Withdrawal May Unravel Yonkers Housing Plan
A compromise agreement to desegregate housing in Yonkers was severely threatened today as the Yonkers branch of the N.A.A.C.P. and a City Council member announced seperately that they had withdrawn their support.
Whether the announcements could kill the plan was unclear today, as city officials struggled to remain optimistic that the disagreements could be resolved.
One official involved in the negotiations, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said he believed the position of the N.A.A.C.P. might be a negotiating stance to win more concessions from the city.


Bridge
After a week of effort, the Reisinger Knockout Team Championship was won on Sunday by Mel Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I., Keith Garber of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Ira Herman and R. Jay Becker, both of Manhattan.
In the 56-deal final at the League Club at 4 East 80th Street in Manhattan, they took an early lead and held on to win by 24 imps.
Their opponents, George Tornay and Saul Bronstein, both of Manhattan, Phillip Martin of Bronxville, N.Y., and Debbie Zuckerberg of Flushing, Queens, charged in the last quarter of play but fell short.
The Reisinger Flight B title was won by Andrea and Alan Hayman, Janos Racz and Ruth Bishop, all of Manhattan, and Lawrence Beznicki of Rego Park, Queens.


Vincent Gives Houston a Chewing Out
Baseball Commissioner FAY VINCENT scolded the city of Houston yesterday, suggesting during a luncheon speech that Astros fans should focus on helping JOHN McMULLEN sell the team rather than making the owner the target of their anger.
"By demeaning John and failing to support the team, I wonder if the people of Houston have not made the sale more difficult," Vincent said.


Piquet Begins First Lap of a New Life
NELSON PIQUET left an Indianapolis hospital yesterday, vowing that the crash that ended his bid to run in auto racing's top event would be his last accident.


Impact Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trail Blazers Hold Off On Big Celebration
Perhaps because they've been to the National Basketball Association finals before -- and because it's the Chicago Bulls who are now standing squarely between them and a title -- the Portland Trail Blazers were not a picture of euphoria last Thursday night in Salt Lake City.
Rather, they were subdued after beating the Utah Jazz to win the Western Conference title.
"There was a lot less celebrating," said Clyde Drexler, the Blazers' captain and spokesman.
"We know what it takes to get to the finals, and we know that it's not over yet. We don't want to be just happy getting there. We want to win it."


Public Storage Properties X reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chess
Everything looked good for Larry Christiansen after seven rounds of the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt-Mephisto Tournament, which began in Munich in early May; the 35-year-old American grandmaster had the lead.
He had won this illustrious event last year, so a double victory was not improbable.
But he suffered his first loss in Round 8 to Jonathan Speelman of England, thus letting Boris Gelfand of Russia and a former Russian, Mikhail Gurevich, now of Belgium, pass him.
With three rounds to go, Christiansen needs a half-point to overtake them.


Chavez Best 'Pounder' Among Current Stars
Julio Cesar Chavez is a fighter who combines sound technical skills with the psyche of an unrelenting warrior.
If you sign to fight Julio, you better make sure your Blue Cross is paid up, because he means to do damage.
A year ago, in a list of the 10 best pound-for-pound fighters, attention was paid here to those sterling qualities: Chavez, the World Boxing Council super lightweight champion, was named the the best all-round pug.


Public Storage Properties XI reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Diving for Diversion; Albany Considers a Shipwreck Park
Forget the hot dogs, rolls and charcoal.
The new state park proposed by the Town of East Hampton is going to be 20 feet below the surface of Fort Pond Bay.
If approved, the park would be New York's first underwater state park, and the main attraction would be the H.M.S.
Culloden, a 74-gun frigate that sank more than 200 years ago and is one of the oldest known shipwrecks in the vicinity of Montauk Point.


Varsity Spirit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





United Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Books of The Times; Mayhem Envelops a Normal Life
Meeting Evil  By Thomas Berger  220 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


After 5 Years of Use, Doubt Still Clouds Leading AIDS Drug
THE AIDS drug AZT has been on the market for five years, but experts are still debating just how useful it really is and what stage in the course of the disease is the best time to take it.
Those uncertainties are also making it harder to assess new drugs like DDC and DDI, for which AZT is the standard of comparison.
The question boils down to whether small transient increases in the white blood cell count, as occur with AZT, or azidothymidine, are a good predictor of a longer, or even a better, life.
Many researchers say they are not so sure, and the Food and Drug Administration is convening an advisory committee of outside experts to debate the question on Thursday.


Custom Chrome Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Drunken Drivers Face Stricter Sanctions
Suffolk County's District Attorney declared war on drunken drivers yesterday, imposing what he called the toughest regulations in the state to deal with the state's highest rate of alcohol-related highway fatalities -- 430 in the last five years -- and a soaring death rate for 1992.
In a broad attack on the problem, the prosecutor, James M. Catterson Jr., said that starting Aug. 1 repeat offenders and drivers who are severely drunk would have operators' licenses and registration tags seized upon arrest "as evidence in their cases," barring further legal driving until their cases are cleared.


Q&amp;A
Sexing a Dinosaur
Q.
How do you tell the sex of a fossilized dinosaur?
A.
"No one can do it yet," said Jack Horner, a paleontologist at the Museum of the Rockies in Bozeman, Mont.


American Medical Alert reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Milk the Cows. Do the Arithmetic. Sell the Farm.
Cows are George and Gloria Wilber's life.
From dawn to midnight, much of their daily routine is crowded with the care and feeding of their 60 Brown Swiss cows.
There are cows all over their house, too, painted on the flour canisters and dangling in stained glass from window frames.
"You should see our Christmas tree," said their 16-year-old daughter, Katie.
The Wilbers are the last dairy farmers in this northwestern Connecticut town, where a generation ago there were more than a dozen.
Soon the Wilbers will be gone, too; after five money-losing years, they are trying to sell their herd.


Runs, Glorious Runs! Mets Hit a Gusher
Shea Stadium was not a place for earplugs last night.
The sounds were too good, too loud, too many.
Among the acoustical highlights:
*The sound of Bobby Bonilla's bat on the baseball in the second inning, a definitive crack that produced a grand slam for the Mets and a trip around the bases for Bonilla that was about as spiritually satisfying as could be imagined.


Midtown Crime Reported Down Sharply
Major crime in midtown Manhattan fell sharply in the first four months of this year, continuing a major decline in crime in the area in recent years, a ranking police official told business leaders yesterday.
The official, Assistant Chief Charles G. Reuther, and other officials attributed the decline in large measure to the presence of more police officers on patrol, augmented by an increase in private security guards hired by business groups.


Bob Evans Farms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Man Is Sentenced for Threatening Witt
A judge in Santa Ana, Calif., yesterday sentenced HARRY VELTMAN 3d, to 37 months in a psychiatric facility for sending threatening letters and nude photos of himself to KATARINA WITT, the former figure skater who won two Olympic gold medals.
Weltman, 47, of Westminster, Calif., was also ordered to serve three years probation, to avoid contacting Witt and to participate in a counseling program after his release.
In sentencing Veltman, United States District Judge GARY TAYLOR said he felt compelled to take into account the defendant's psychiatric problems.
Officials have said Veltman was diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic, but a United States magistrate found Veltman competent to stand trial.


Fantasies and Practicalities to Lift Fashion's Mood; Two Lights in the Dark
Two trends that may lift the gloom that has enveloped the fashion industry since the onset of the recession are cheering both retailers and manufacturers.
One is the revival of leather as an important fashion material; this development is credited to Karl Lagerfeld of Chanel, who gave the motorcycle jacket renewed status by showing it with evening fashions and practically everything else.
The second, the elaborately colored and densely patterned silk blouse, is associated with Gianni Versace of Italy.
Starting with the multiple colors and somewhat barbaric designs of Emilio Pucci, he went on to create richly baroque effects.


Endowment Winner Is Making Donations To 2 Who Lost Grants
Jon Robin Baitz, the 30-year-old playwright, has accepted a grant of $15,000 from the National Endowment for the Arts and announced yesterday that he would in turn make two donations equaling that amount to two institutions denied $10,000 endowment grants on May 12 by the agency's acting director, Dr.
Anne-Imelda Radice.
Mr.
Baitz said he would give $7,500 each to the List Visual Arts Center at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and to the Anderson Gallery at Virginia Commonwealth University.
Dr.
Radice vetoed grants for them despite the recommendations by the endowment's 26-member advisory panel, the National Council on the Arts.
She said both exhibitions contained sexually explicit material.


Review/Music; The Little Orchestra That Could
The future of the New York Chamber Symphony of the 92d Street Y has been the subject of much speculation during the last season.
Debates have been mounted within the Y itself about the extent of its commitment to art music.
Budget problems have been cited.
And next season, the number of concerts in the orchestra's subscription series is decreasing from eight pairs to six.
But this season's last concert, on Sunday afternoon, made a convincing case for the role this small orchestra plays in New York musical life.
Gerard Schwarz, the orchestra's music director, has not made technical polish one of his primary goals; the ensemble work sometimes had rough edges and the tone often tended to be harsh.
He has also not tried to make the group a sort of Y Philharmonic; it is too short a trip to Lincoln Center to hear the real thing.


Macintosh Via Mail Delivers On Color
THERE were two surprisingly large boxes and a small one.
Even after one has grown a bit blase, the arrival of a new computer brings a slight thrill of anticipation.
The birth of a fifth child may not be accompanied by the same hoopla as the first, but neither is it humdrum.
The boxes were big because of the padding -- paper, plastic and foam.
It took about two hours, with several breaks, to set up the new machine.
Most of the effort was for unpacking.


Stanley Cup Again Belongs to the Penguins
Hockey's longest season, and one of its most troubled ones, ended tonight when the Pittsburgh Penguins defeated the Chicago Blackhawks, 6-5, in a wild finale to clinch the Stanley Cup with a four-game sweep of the final round.
It was the second consecutive National Hockey League championship for Pittsburgh, which didn't win any in the first 23 years of the franchise.
It was the first sweep in the final series since 1988, when Edmonton beat Boston in a series that lasted five games because one game ended in a tie after a power failure.


Wilson's Adopted Son Is Drafted First by Mets
A clear consensus is what an organization hopes for when its turn to draft turns up.
Total unanimity is a wonder.
The Mets yesterday experienced that wonder with their first pick in the first round of the 1992 free-agent draft.
In a selection that was a personal delight and an exercise in unbounded optimism, they took Preston Wilson, the 17-year-old adopted son of Mookie Wilson, as the ninth pick over all.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  FEW JOBS FOR TEEN-AGERS
The job market for New York City teen-agers is the worst in memory and the worst among major cities in the United States, government labor experts and business executives say.
Analysts attribute the erosion in youth employment to cutbacks in entry-level jobs and new competition from immigrant workers.
"This economy has been bad for everyone, and teen-agers are at the bottom," said Eli Ginzberg, a labor economist at Columbia University.
A1.
TEACHERS PROTEST A BEATING
Outraged over the beating of a social studies teacher in his classroom, teachers at Adlai E. Stevenson High School in the east Bronx rallied against what they called dangerous conditions at the school.
The teachers have asked their union to authorize a strike if safety does not improve.
Shortly after the protest, a student was charged in the assault.
B3.
CRIME FALLS IN MIDTOWN
Major crime in midtown Manhattan fell sharply in the first four months of this year, continuing a major decline in the area over the last several years, a ranking police official told business leaders.
The drop was attributed to the presence of more police officers on patrol, augmented by an increase in private security guards hired by business groups.
B3.
REGION  PRIMARY SEASON ENDS QUIETLY
New Jersey's Presidential primary season ended fittingly -- with a rally on the State House steps for Paul Tsongas, who retired from the campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination several weeks ago.
President Bush did not visit New Jersey during his campaign.
The Democratic front-runner, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, visited two New Jersey schools but avoided reporters over the last two weeks.
A19.
Many new voters won't vote.
A19.
A TAX PROPOSAL IN NASSAU
After treading lightly for months out of fear of an anti-tax backlash, Nassau County legislators are coming together on a financial bailout plan that includes a $40 million annual tax increase.
"The time has come to put political posturing aside," said Joseph N. Mondello, the Republican county chairman, as he announced his support for a county mortgage-recording tax that would be one of the highest in the state.
B4.
FIGHTING DRUNKEN DRIVING
Suffolk County's District Attorney declared war on drunken drivers, imposing what he called the toughest regulations in the state to deal with the state's highest rate of alcohol-related highway fatalities.
Starting Aug. 1 repeat offenders and drivers who are severely drunk would have operators' licenses and registration tags seized upon arrest "as evidence in their cases," barring further legal driving until their cases are cleared.
And under a proposed law, their cars, too, could be seized.
B4.
A PARK WITH A DIFFERENCE
Forget the hot dogs, rolls and charcoal.
The new state park proposed by the Town of East Hampton, L.I., is going to be 20 feet below the surface of Fort Pond Bay.
It would be New York's first underwater state park, and the main attraction would a sunken British frigate.
B6.
Trouble for Yonkers housing plan.
B4.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B6  Chronicle B6


Fantasies and Practicalities to Lift Fashion's Mood; Prints Turn Up in Surprising Places
"I've always loved prints," said Jerri Sherman, glancing around her showroom, which was filled with them.
Mostly they were in blouses: fresh roses with gold braid, animal portraits in six different panels and a design suggesting Toulouse-Lautrec.
"Some people are afraid of prints," she said, "but I love them. I consider them wearable art."


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press on Sunday about China's refusal to readmit Dai Qing, an exiled dissident, misstated her reasons for wishing to return.
She said that to allay the Chinese Government's suspicion that she was timing the trip to coincide with the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989, she was willing to delay her visit until after June 4, the anniversary.
She did not say she hoped to be in China for the anniversary.


Preserved in Ice, Meteorites Yield Rich History
LIKE bottles washed up from the cosmic sea, meteorites bring to Earth tantalizing scraps of information about the early solar system, the composition of the Moon and Mars, the nature of stardust, and even, perhaps, the possibility of extraterrestrial life.
But meteoritic information is written in a complex code that touches off as many debates as it settles.
In a new round of debate, two scientists report evidence from Antarctica that a spray of meteorites struck Earth about 300,000 years ago after an asteroid broke up.
Their conclusion reopens one of the more contentious issues in planetary science: whether or not meteorites found in Antarctica are somehow different from meteorites found elsewhere.
If so, a peculiar group of Antarctic meteorites may have something important to say about how the solar system environment has changed over the passing millennia.


In Dark Seas, Biologists Sight A Riot of Life
DEEP in the ocean, where only the faintest glimmers of light penetrate the frigid waters, there lives a creature that for more than a century has eluded the most diligent scientific pursuers, even though it is believed to be as large as a city bus.
One of the earliest records of the monster, a giant squid, dates to the 1870's when a group of Newfoundland fisherman presented a tentacle, "the horn of a big squid," to the Rev.
Dr.
Moses Harvey, a biologist from St.
John's, Newfoundland, who developed a keen interest in the giants.
The "horn," actually the tip of a giant tentacle, had been hacked off the squid with an axe in a battle in which the fishermen were trying to pull it up and the creature seemed to be pulling them down.


From the Books to the Basketballs


Bronx School, Tired of Low Expectations, Has Everyone Taking Japanese
When President Jimmy Carter made his famous journey to the South Bronx and looked out over a desolate wasteland, one of the few buildings standing around him was Herman Ridder Junior High School.
Its academic prospects were just as bleak as the neighborhood's.
Today, the neighborhood is showing sure signs of life, with suburban-style ranch homes sprouting in the rubble.
And so is Ridder, where students who might once have been destined for average or slow classes are studying the formidable language of Japanese.


Communications Cable reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Inside View: Ex-Boss Tells of a Crime Family and Its Blunders
Organized crime may not always be as organized as movies and novels have fashioned it for the popular imgination.
Surprisingly often, some of the best of the nation's worst criminals can be, well, downright blundering.


By Design; Eye of the Tiger, Owl, Zebra . . .
The shape is not important.
They can be square, round, oval, oblong, cat-eyed, large or small.
But what eyeglasses should be right now is patterned like a beast from the jungle.
This season, the animal-print mania has left its tracks on every kind of fashion.
And glasses have not escaped.


White's Two Homers Give Jays a Big Lift
Blue Jays 5, Twins 3
MINNEAPOLIS, June 1 (AP) -- Devon White hit two homers -- the second an inside-the-park shot in the 10th inning -- to lead the Toronto Blue Jays past the Minnesota Twins, 5-3, in a matchup of division leaders.
White's line drive to left-center skipped past diving left fielder Shane Mack and over center fielder Kirby Puckett and bounced to the wall.
Puckett retrieved the ball, but Greg Gagne's relay was not nearly in time.
White Sox 5, Royals 3
KANSAS CITY, Mo. (AP) -- Matt Merullo singled in the tie-breaking run and Alex Fernandez survived a shaky start to pitch Chicago to a rain-soaked victory over Kansas City, snapping the White Sox's losing streak at six games.
Fernandez (3-5), who had lost three successive decisions, gave up four hits and three runs in the first inning but allowed only three hits the rest of the way en route to his second complete game of the season.
He struck out seven and walked two.
Brewers 6, Tigers 2
MILWAUKEE (AP) -- Scott Fletcher started a four-run rally with a two-out run-scoring single in the seventh inning as Milwaukee beat Detroit.
Athletics 10, Red Sox 7
OAKLAND, Calif. (AP) -- Mark McGwire hit his 19th home run and Terry Steinbach hit a sixth-inning homer to snap a tie as Oakland defeated Boston.
Steinbach, who had three hits and three r.b.i., led off the sixth by hitting his fourth homer of the season off Danny Darwin (2-2), breaking a 4-4 tie.
The A's won for only the second time in seven games on the current homestand.


Consolidation HCI Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; In China, Softening the Hard Line
The television producer Irv Drasnin and his film crew spent seven weeks in China last winter, trying, under the eye of an official escort, to find out what has been happening since the Government crackdown on political dissent in June 1989.
Tonight's enterprising report, "China After Tiananmen," at 8 on Channels 13 and 49, focuses on the confrontation between political orthodoxy and economic innovation.
The freshest material comes in interviews with a new generation of entrepreneurs: a 29-year-old Xian man who runs a school for fashion models, the manager of a computer company in China's silicon valley, the owner of a high-fashion store in Beijing, the head of a private company in a special economic zone on China's southern coast, a trainer of Avon saleswomen in Guangzhou, which is also known as Canton.
Everywhere Mr.
Drasnin finds a vigorous commercial spirit, tolerated and even encouraged by the state because it seems to be working.


Review/Dance; At Doris Humphrey Tribute, The Drama Is in the Motion
It is not enough to want to honor a great choreographer.
Dancers must know how to bring that choreographer's creations alive.
Otherwise, their productions will be not revivals, but exhumations.
The Dance Gallery, a group directed by Mino Nicolas, annually offers tributes to Doris Humphrey, a pioneer of modern dance.
Mr.
Nicolas's intentions are admirable.
But his program on Saturday night at the Harry de Jur Playhouse of the Henry Street Settlement was more exasperating than inspiring.


Unions Ease Overhead At Javits Center Shows
When Lloyd R. Reeder arrived to exhibit his company's lighting fixtures at a recent trade show in the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, he braced himself for clashes with workers over union rules, high costs and bribe demands.
Mr.
Reeder recalled that at two previous shows in the hall, on the West Side, he was forced to pay carpenters $200 to install a prefabricated booth that he could quickly assemble by himself without a tool.
An electrician charged him $70 to plug in a lamp and when it came time to leave, teamsters and other workers demanded payments of $50 to retrieve his packing crates.


Quotation of the Day
"I simply will not be complicit with faux-moralist sharpies of the right nor with psychosexual hysterics in the cultural sacking of this country." -- JON ROBIN BAITZ, the playwright, making a donation for two art exhibitions that were denied grants by the National Endowment for the Arts.  [ C13:1 ]


Cauthen Rides Again at Belmont
STEVE CAUTHEN will return to the scene of his Triple Crown triumph Saturday when he rides the French-trained Cristofori in the Belmont Stakes.
Cauthen rode Affirmed to victory in the 1978 Belmont, completing the colt's Triple Crown sweep.
The Kentucky native then moved to England, where he has been based ever since.


Learning That History Is Not So Long Ago
TO some of today's younger generation, history is last fall.
Ancient history is Cyndi Lauper.
And pre-history is that time when the world looked black and white and everyone walked a little too quickly, like Charlie Chaplin.
Historic stuff can be pretty boring and irrelevant to young people who know everything about life before taking a driver's test.
The trick for a ninth-grade history teacher like Aminah Carroll at St.
Mary's High School here is to bring history alive with a real voice, with real words and real emotions that might speak to some of this morning's problems.
Then history becomes people, not dates.


Morrie Elis, 84, Expert In Tournament Bridge
Morrie Elis, one of America's foremost bridge players, died on Sunday at his home in Lauderhill, Fla.
He was 84 years old.
He died after a series of heart problems, said his daughter, Judith Tucker of Manhattan.


Need a Lift? Try Henry
A new star has charged onto the weight-lifting scene in MARK HENRY, a 370-pound stomping, snorting super-heavyweight, whose dramatic performance over the weekend in Peoria, Ill., earned him a spot on the United States Olympic weight-lifting team.


CHRONICLE
It sounds suspiciously like the pilot for a television sitcom: White House correspondent weds rival network's Washington bureau chief.
But no, it will be real life on Saturday afternoon when BARBARA COHEN, who heads the CBS News Washington bureau, and JOHN COCHRAN, the chief White House correspondent for NBC News, are married at Christ Episcopal Church in Georgetown.


Toll Brothers reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Pine Bluff's Chances May Go to the Stretch
For a horse who won the Preakness two weeks ago and who has a major chance to win $1.3 million in prize and bonus money in the Belmont Stakes this week, Pine Bluff is going about his business quietly and almost obscurely these days at Belmont Park.
He is a big, handsome colt named for a city in Arkansas, he has won 6 of his 12 races and finished in the money 9 times, he has banked more than $1.1 million.
He's the club pro.
But his trainer doesn't even think he will be the favorite on Saturday when the Triple Crown series comes to an end.


Telxon Corp.(X) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Penguins Win 2d Straight Cup in 4-Game Sweep


Corrections
The Pop Life column on Wednesday misidentified the label of Lou Reed's recent album "Magic and Loss." It is Sire, not RCA.


Public Storage Properties VI reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Michael Talbot, Writer, 38
Michael Talbot, a writer who specialized in paranormal phenomena, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 38 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of chronic lymphocystic leukemia, said his mother, Nancy Neve of Grand Rapids, Mich.


S. A. Stoudemire, 89, A Scholar of Spanish
Sterling A. Stoudemire, a scholar of Spanish, died Tuesday at the University of North Carolina Hospital in Chapel Hill.
He was 89 years old and lived in Chapel Hill.
Dr. Stoudemire died of heart failure, a university spokeswoman said.


Broadway Assesses Tonys' Meaning
On the day after the Tony Awards, everyone is always a winner.
Or so, traditionally, everyone must claim.
This year, it may just be true for more shows than in many a season.
Instead of the usual sweep by one or two powerhouse productions, there was an even-handed scattering of awards among the major contenders during the 46th annual Antoinette Perry Awards on Sunday night.
"There was an equitable distribution," said Ron Silver -- a fitting choice of adjective from the president of the Actors' Equity Association.
"The awards were so unusually balanced," he said with a laugh.
"It's so unlike show business."


This Promotion Turned Out to Be Just Another Train Ride


It Was 25 Years Ago Today . . .


Comptek Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trees Aren't a 'Magic Answer' on Warming
INCREASED growth of trees in forests is not likely to stem rising levels of carbon dioxide, one of the heat-trapping gases associated with global warming, several studies have found.
Previous studies indicated that some trees could respond to increased levels of carbon dioxide by taking it up and growing substantially.
That offered hope that the world's forests might act as a sink for the CO2 released into the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels.
Scientists have warned that increases in carbon dioxide and the other heat-trapping gases could lead to a rise in global temperatures with potentially devastating effects on ecosystems.


Duty Free International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Eshed Robotec Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Westerbeke Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Sports of The Times; Silas Was No Stereotype
THE question was asked of Paul Silas: "Could you jump?" Silas is a former rebounding ace in the National Basketball Association and a black man.
"No, not really," he replied.
"I could never really just sky -- not like a Billy Cunningham, or a Dave Cowens."
And then this black man who couldn't jump laughed, laughed at himself and laughed because of course the examples he used indicated that at least some white men can jump, despite the title of a current feature film, and despite such contemporary white skyers as Dan Majerle and Rex Chapman.


Architects Rediscover the Best City Planners: Citizens
BORROWING the methods of social science, a school of architects and urban planners is going beyond bricks and mortar to incorporate the often-ignored needs and preferences of those who will use public projects in their design.
That common-sense approach is taken for granted when people build for themselves, and it enjoyed a short-lived prominence in the urban planning of the 1960's and 1970's.
But social scientists say it is rare in the inner city.


Yankees And Nokes Splash by Rangers
There were puddles in the infield, puddles in the outfield and enough soaked uniforms at Arlington Stadium tonight to keep the Maytag man busy until next week.
So why were they still playing baseball?
With $5 million-a-year players like Ruben Sierra and Danny Tartabull gingerly trotting through the outfield, it was a valid question.
But they plodded and plopped through nine innings, and two rain delays that lasted 82 minutes, before the Yankees claimed a 7-1 victory over the Rangers.


Neilson Gets a Job Boost
The job security of Ranger Coach Roger Neilson, still not assured past the National Hockey League entry draft later this month, has received a boost from the Pittsburgh Penguins.
According to Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, the Penguins' playoff success since they eliminated the Rangers in the Patrick Division finals two weeks ago has raised Neilson's still-shaky stock.


CHRONICLE
For the last four years, MATILDA R. CUOMO has served as mentor to 14-year-old SOUHELLY DELGADO, an eighth grader at the Philip Livingston Middle School in Albany.
"She is my little best friend," the Governor's wife said yesterday, "and I am hers. When I don't see her, I miss her."
Tomorrow evening, Mrs.
Cuomo will be one of seven people honored by the One to One Partnership at a dinner-dance for 1,200 at the 69th Regiment Armory, Lexington Avenue and 26th Street.
The national organization, now in 13 cities, recruits mentors through corporations, universities and hospitals to help at-risk children.


'Family Business' to Close
"A Small Family Business," a comedy by Alan Ayckbourn, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Music Box Theater, 239 West 45th Street.
The play, which was directed by Lynne Meadow, will have run for 31 previews and 48 regular performances.


As Forests Fall, Environmental Movement Rises in Brazil
A TELEVISION announcement here features a lithe, bikinied beauty sunning herself on a crowded beach.
She carelessly throws a piece of trash on the sand and suddenly transforms into a bikinied pig.
The message, which is the work of a private group, the Blue Wave Foundation, is one sign of the growing concern about the environment in Brazil.
As in many third world countries, conservation and environmental awareness have little history here.
But in recent years, an impressive domestic environmental movement has taken root.


New York's Teen-Agers Face Worst Job Market in Decades
The job market for New York City teen-agers is the worst in memory and shows few signs of immediate improvement, government labor experts and business executives say.
Across the nation, the percentage of young people who have jobs has fallen sharply during the recession.
But the problem is most acute, the experts say, in New York, where only slightly more than 1 in 10 youths is working.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Europe's environmental debate misstated the number of gallons in a barrel of oil.
It is 42, not 55.


Bank Wants Olympia to Repay Loan
As some bankers and analysts had predicted, the United States arm of Olympia &amp; York is being threatened by a recalcitrant bank creditor that is demanding payment of its loan, bankers and real estate executives said yesterday.
Svenska Handelsbanken, a leading Swedish bank, has demanded that Olympia &amp; York's main American subsidiary prepay an unsecured line of credit of $10 million to $15 million on which the company is now technically in default.
The bank filed a summons and complaint on Thursday seeking to force Olympia to prepay the loan, which is due in January 1993.
Olympia said yesterday that it intended to fight the lawsuit.


CHRONICLE
There seems to be no end to the unsual alliances being forged these days in Washington, not all them romantic.
Now, from the sphere of philanthropy comes word that RICHARD M. NIXON and WALTER F. MONDALE are joining forces.
Former President Nixon is honorary chairman of the Fund for Democracy and Development, of which former Vice President Mondale (not Mr. Nixon's, of course) is co-chairman, along with John W. Kluge.


Standard Brands Paint reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


National Environmental Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Former Tampa Bay Player Is a Suicide
The former Tampa Bay cornerback BOBBY FUTRELL killed himself at his Tampa, Fla., home after a quarrel with his wife, a Hillsborough County Sheriff's spokesman said.
Futrell, 29, had an argument with his wife, PATRICIA, on Sunday, said the spokesman, JACK ESPINOSA.


Space Junk May Alter NASA Plan For Station
A GROWING jumble of space junk could force NASA to wrap critical parts of its 350-foot space station in heavy shielding to protect the crew and equipment, a trade publication reported yesterday.
Such shielding would probably raise the cost of the space station Freedom, which is to be assembled piecemeal beginning in 1995 or 1996 and to be permanently manned by the turn of the century.
Its construction cost is estimated at $30 billion to $40 billion.


Timminco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Toxic Cleanup Tool
Scientists have found a way to use old crab shells to clean up toxic waste efficiently and inexpensively.
Researchers at Oregon State University have devised a method for making tiny magnetized beads out of a derivative of chitin, the hard, flaky material that forms a crab or lobster's shell.
The "chitosan" beads are very porous and specifically soak up heavy metals, a common toxin in contaminated water.


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


INSIDE
Settlement in Waste Case
A Federal judge accepted a plea agreement in which the manager of a Federal nuclear plant agreed to pay $18 million in fines.
Page A12.
Reforming Russia, With Grit
Politicians who thought they could take advantage of the youth and inexperience of Russia's economic chief have had a rude awakening.
Page A8.
Feeding the Hand That Feeds
On interlocking corporate boards, top executives -- in their role as outside directors -- often wind up setting each other's pay.
Page D1.
A Playwright's Grants
Jon Robin Baitz accepted $15,000 from the National Endowment for the Arts, then announced gifts to two institutions denied support.
Page C13.


Council Approves $29.5 Billion Budget
The City Council ratified a $29.5 billion budget for New York City early this morning that adds $88 million for schools, police, parks, highway cleaning, cultural institutions and city colleges to the spending plan proposed last month by Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The budget, which is for the fiscal year that begins July 1, follows an agreement on Saturday between the Mayor and the Council leadership.
Additions to the budget will be paid for by higher tax-revenue estimates and other service reductions, mainly in the form of across-the-board administrative cuts at city agencies.


Retro Look Comes to Coaching
Imagine Earl Weaver or Tom Landry returning to baseball or football to lead a team to a championship this year.
That's what it was like for Scotty Bowman when his Pittsburgh Penguins hoisted the Stanley Cup tonight.
Like Weaver and Landry, Bowman was the dominant coach in his profession in the 1970's.
Like his counterparts, Bowman seemed to lose his touch in the 1980's.
He gradually withdrew from the front lines before the memory of his best years could be tainted by lesser impressions formed afterward.


Dodgers Get to .500 At Expense of Pirates
Dodgers 8, Pirates 6
PITTSBURGH, June 1 (AP) -- Mitch Webster hit a three-run pinch-hit homer in the sixth inning tonight as the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 8-6, and extended their winning streak to six games.
Los Angeles, which has won 12 of 15, reached .500 at 23-23, the first time the Dodgers haven't had a losing record this season since they were 9-9 on April 25.
Pittsburgh lost for the 13th time in 16 games.


Metropolitan Diary
PLACE: The financial district in Manhattan.
Dramatis personae: Two well-dressed middle-aged businessmen and Christopher Popajohn, who overhears their conversation.
Businessman 1: How are the kids?
Businessman 2: Terrific! The lawyer just turned 6, and the doctor's 4 months.
. . .


Accounts
*
Pearle Inc., Dallas, to GSD &amp; M Advertising, Austin, Tex., for broadcasting and national print media planning and buying on its estimated $42 million account, previously handled by two planning and buying services.
GSD &amp; M was named Pearle's agency for creative and other assignments in March.
Marc Advertising, Pittsburgh, continues to handle Pearle's local print cooperative media buying. *
Vittorio Ricci, New York, to McCabe &amp; Co., New York, for advertising and marketing for the shoe company's contemporary women's footwear line, previously handled by Wills &amp; Evans, New York.
Other finalists participating in a review, and billings, were not disclosed.


Al Salaam Journal; Sudan Gives Its Refugees a Desert to Contemplate
His tattered clothes whipped by a fierce wind that raced across the flat desert, Kuol Ador stood next to his small burlap-covered hut and squinted to avoid the particles of sand.
"This is the end for me," he said, pausing as a deep tubercular cough shook his gaunt frame.
"I have done the best I can for my family. A man reaches a point where he cannot go on."


Economic Furor Growing in Russia
A decision by Russia to pay Government workers by printing more money, coupled with a shuffling of ministers, has brought sharp domestic questioning about President Boris N. Yeltsin's commitment to austerity measures in the transition to a market economy.
The recent Russian moves have also generated concerns at the International Monetary Fund, according to international monetary officials.
They said that an I.M.F. team had just returned to the fund's headquarters in Washington from a visit to Moscow and was evaluating the latest Yeltsin Government actions.


Devouring History
Despite United Nations sanctions and large protests not just in the West but in Serbia -- the Balkan crisis seems destined to spread southward, to the geographical heart of greater Serbia, the very places that drive the emotions not just of the regime in Belgrade but also of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
While U.S. and European officials rightly criticize the atavism of President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, his actions in Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia have a historical logic that seem now about to carry through in Kosovo and Macedonia.
Mr.
Milosevic's attack on Slovenia last year was meant to bully the Croats into submission without actually invading Croatia.
When that failed, he gave up on Slovenia -- which has no Serb population anyway -- and invaded Croatia's ethnic-Serb enclaves.
The U.N. brokered cease-fire played into his hands, giving him control of most of what he had won in Croatia while freeing his army to move south toward Bosnia.


Bush Seeks Trade Benefits for China
The White House announced today that it planned to extend preferential trade benefits to China for another year, arguing that it was the best way to support economic and political reform in the world's most populous country.
The announcement immediately drew protests from Democrats on Capitol Hill, who argued that the President's policy of "constructive engagement" with China had produced no tangible results.
In fact, they said, China has engaged in increasingly provocative acts -- including the underground testing of a large nuclear bomb, harassment of American reporters, denial of visas to the Chairmen of the Senate Intelligence and Foreign Relations Committees and a failure to make any significant improvement in human rights.


Milken Defends His Legacy
Michael R. Milken took the stand yesterday as a witness for the prosecution in a fraud case against a long-time aide.
But what he really did was issue a quiet, defiant defense of the legacy of Michael Milken -- a man often cast as the symbolic villain of the past decade.
Mr.
Milken's testimony, which began with a cursory 20 minutes on Monday afternoon, marked the first time he has appeared or spoken in public since he was sentenced in November 1990 to a 10-year prison term after he pleaded guilty to six counts of fraud.


60-Minute Gourmet
MUCH of the fun in being a cook is adding your own accent to codified dishes.
This is really the first step toward creating recipes that are entirely your own.
Home cooks with a basic knowledge of ingredients and flavor affinities can take almost any dish and modify it to suit their own tastes.
I recently took the classic Russian recipe beef stroganoff and made it with ground beef.
Stroganoff actually has a French connection going back to the 19th century.
Aristocratic Russians of the time had commercial and cultural connections with France, and many upper-class Russians employed French cooks, who were always looking for ways to give French dishes a Russian twist.


Not-Guilty Plea Entered By Teen-Ager in Shooting
After her arrest two weeks ago, authorities portrayed Amy Fisher as a lovesick teen-ager who shot her boyfriend's wife in a jealous frenzy.
But today, at her arraignment, a prosecutor presented a far different picture, calling her a prostitute who had studied her victim since August and plotted her murder.
The 17-year-old high school senior from Bellmore, her face hidden behind her auburn hair as she entered and left the courthouse, whispered her not-guilty pleas to assault and weapons charges, which were added to the original charge of attempted murder in the May 19 shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco outside the woman's home in Massapequa Park.


Franz Rupp, Accompanist, Is Dead at 91
Franz Rupp, a pianist who was best known for his performances and recordings with the violinist Fritz Kreisler, the cellist Emanuel Feuermann and the contralto Marian Anderson, died last Wednesday at the Cabrini Hospice.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, said his wife, Sylvia.


Travel Agents Say Low Air Fares Will Hurt Them Later
As customers continued to jam airlines' ticket offices and switchboards yesterday, hoping to buy half-price tickets on domestic flights before the sale ends on Friday, many travel agents sharply criticized some of the effects of the new fares.
Because travel agents write about 85 percent of domestic airline tickets, the carriers were taking that criticism seriously -- so seriously that two carriers, Delta Air Lines and later American Airlines acted to address the agents' principal complaint.
The airlines told them that they need not refund portions of their commissions on tickets reissued at the lower fares.
Last night other carriers were still studying the move.


Karl-Erik Welin, 58, Composer and Pianist
Karl-Erik Welin, a Swedish composer, pianist and organist, was found dead at his home on the Spanish island of Mallorca on Sunday, his 58th birthday.
Reports in the Swedish press did not list the cause of death.


Bridge
One of the most remarkable turnabouts in New York tournament history occurred Sunday in the semifinal stage of the Grand National Teams.
In play at the League Club, 4 East 80th Street, David and Lisa Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Bob and Jill Blanchard of Manhattan trailed by 29 imps into the final quarter of the match.
In 14 deals they then gained 53 imps to win by 24 against a star-studded foursome: Zia Mahmood, Jim Cayne, Michael Rosenberg and Alan Sontag, all of Manhattan.
The diagramed deal, the second of the final surge by the Berkowitz team, had a paradoxical element.
At both tables South chose to overcall one heart with two diamonds, rather than use a Michaels cue-bid to show length in spades and a minor suit.
As the sequel showed, that action might have worked out better.
The Fatal Preference
The moment of truth arrived when Zia bid four spades on the second round and his partner, Rosenberg, had to decide what to do when West doubled.
He knew that his partner held more diamonds than spades, and gave preference to five diamonds.
David Berkowitz as East doubled, and his partner, Lev, led a heart, forcing a ruff.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
New York City Board of Elections, New York, to Mezzina/Brown Inc., New York, for a pro bono broadcast and print campaign to promote voter registration and participation in the 1992 primary and general elections.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  TRYING AGAIN ON AIDS POLICY
A week after a vote to stress abstinence in AIDS education bitterly divided the Board of Education, board members who supported the policy have decided to back off and come up with a compromise plan.
The changes being discussed would still require teachers to emphasize abstinence as the most effective way to avoid AIDS, but not in every lesson taught or every pamphlet distributed.
B3.
A WORD FROM THE WHITE HOUSE
The Bush Administration denounced the Mayors of New York City and Washington for allowing drug addicts to receive clean hypodermic needles under experimental programs intended to curb the spread of AIDS.
B3.
THE FUTURE OF THE DAILY NEWS
A Canadian publisher who is seeking to buy The Daily News in New York said that the paper's unions should give him concessions because they are less painful than extinction.
B3.
NEW SAFETY PLAN FOR SCHOOL
A new security agreement calling for increased hallway patrols and other measures was approved by teachers at Adlai E. Stevenson High School in the Bronx.
Teachers had been threatening to strike if nothing was done to improve security conditions at the school, where a teacher was beaten twice last week by the same student.
B3.
REGION  NEW BUDGET GAP IN NEW JERSEY
New Jersey's Treasurer announced a new $450 million hole in the budget.
On top of other recent revenue losses, that leaves state leaders with the task of finding almost $1.7 billion in the 28 days before a new budget must be in place.
The latest bad news came when the Federal Government did not come through with $450 million in anticipated Medicaid payments.
A1.
MYSTERY IN AU PAIR CASE
At the opening of the trial of the Swiss au pair charged with burning to death the baby in her care, the central question of the case remained unanswered.
Why would she have done it?
The prosecutor said he had no answer, but told jurors that should not dissuade them from voting to convict her.
B5 CAR DEALER PLEADS NOT GUILTY
John McNamara, the Long Island car dealer accused of defrauding General Motors of more than $400 million, pleaded not guilty to Federal racketeering and fraud charges.
B5.
A NEW VIEW OF A SHOOTING SUSPECT
After her arrest two weeks ago, authorities portrayed Amy Fisher as a lovesick teen-ager who shot her boyfriend's wife in a jealous frenzy.
But today, at her arraignment, a prosecutor called her a prostitute who had studied her victim since August and plotted her murder.
"To call her a 17-year-old girl who lives at home and goes to high school is as accurate as calling John Gotti a businessman who lives in New York," he said.
B5.
RADAR GUNS BANNED IN CONNECTICUT
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed legislation today making Connecticut the first state in the nation to ban the use of hand-held radar guns, which police unions believe can cause cancer after long-term use.
Medical studies have found no link between the radar guns and cancer.
B5.
About New York by Douglas Martin B3  Chronicle B6


Economic Scene; Producer-Friendly Oil Conservation
NOW that Saddam Hussein has been shoved back within his own borders and the pragmatists in Teheran are oozing moderation, is Saudi Arabia once again summoning the courage to flex its formidable energy muscles?
That was certainly the spin the kingdom's leaders wished to put on their decision last week to side with the price hawks in OPEC.
And while there is widespread feeling that the Saudis are bluffing, it raises anew the question of how far oil-importing nations should go along to get along.


Another Recovery Forecast, This One a Quarter Delayed
LIKE the station master who keeps reassuring impatient passengers that yes, indeed, the train is coming, a leading advertising industry forecaster said yesterday that domestic ad spending was beginning its much-anticipated recovery, albeit at a slower pace than had been hoped.
"I am convinced the economic recovery is on its way," Robert J. Coen, senior vice president and director of forecasting at McCann-Erickson U.S.A., said during a presentation in Manhattan.
"Unfortunately, its arrival is about a quarter delayed."


Hand Injuries In Workplace Ignite Battle
In a decision that creates a forum for the legal battle over one of the nation's fastest growing workplace disabilities, a Federal judge in Brooklyn agreed yesterday to combine 44 hand-injury suits into one consolidated case.
Such hand injuries -- which are known as repetitive stress injuries and which medical experts say can be caused by the routine use of computers, supermarket checkout scanners and other mechanical and electrical devices -- have spawned hundreds of individual lawsuits across the country in recent years.


Gap in Budget For New Jersey Grows Sharply
State Treasurer Samuel F. Crane announced a new $450 million hole in the state budget today.
On top of other recent revenue losses, that means state leaders have to find $1.7 billion in the 28 days before a new budget must be in place.
Today's news, described as potentially "catastrophic" by Gov.
Jim Florio, exposes the Democratic Governor to renewed charges that his administration's budget projections have been ill founded.
And it puts Republican legislators in the position of having to defend their vote two weeks ago to roll back the New Jersey sales tax to 6 percent from 7 percent, cutting revenues by $608 million.
The lower tax is to take effect on July 1, when the state's new budget year begins.
The State Constitution requires that New Jersey begin and end each year with a balanced budget.


University of Texas Prices Offering
The University of Texas Board of Regents yesterday tentatively priced $197.6 million in tax-exempt permanent refunding revenue bonds to yield a maximum 6.5 percent for an issue due in 2013.
The underwriter was J. P. Morgan Securities.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities are priced to yield from 5 percent in 1996 to 5.95 percent in 2002.
The issue due in 2008 has a yield of 6.4 percent.


Distributors Make a Deal
Cardinal Distribution Inc. said yesterday that it had entered into an agreement to acquire the wholesale drug business of Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc. for between $166.5 million and $181.5 million in Cardinal stock.
Cardinal will assume $70 million in long-term debt as part of the deal.


Poison Ivy Protection
The 80 million or so Americans who are allergic to poison ivy may soon have a way of preventing the miserable rash short of having to watch their step.
After 20 years of work, scientists at the University of Mississippi have developed a vaccine against urushiol, the chemical culprit in the poison ivy plant.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  Cal State-Fullerton and Texas Survive  Mike Parisi and Paco Chavez combined on a four-hit shutout as Cal State-Fullerton beat Florida State, 6-0, at the College World Series yesterday in Omaha.
Last night, Texas eliminated Oklahoma, winning by 8-5.
Parisi (5-1), a freshman, gave up only two hits in six innings, and no Seminole got past second base until Chavez allowed a pair of singles to start the seventh.
Phil Nevin, picked first over all by the Houston Astros in Monday's major league draft, drove in the only run Cal State-Fullerton needed, with a single in the first inning.
Chris Roberts (8-4), the No. 18 pick in the first round, by the Mets, took the loss for Florida State (49-21), which was eliminated.
The Titans (44-16) will play top-ranked Miami (55-8) this evening.
In the second game, Brooks Kieschnick got the Longhorns started with a homer, then singled in an insurance run.
Texas (48-16) had much success with the Sooners this season, beating them all five times they met.
Kieschnick, the designated hitter-pitcher who earlier was named Division I player of the year by the American Baseball Coaches Association, hit his second homer of the series -- and his 10th of the season -- in the first inning.
Texas (48-16) advanced to a semifinal game with third-ranked Pepperdine (46-11-1) tomorrow. (AP) CYCLING  Indurain Widens His Lead in Italy  Miguel Indurain of Spain widened his overall lead in the Tour of Italy yesterday with a fifth-place finish in the 10th stage.
Luis Herrera of Colombia won the stage, highlighted by a climb up a 1,670-meter mountain in the Apennines.
Herrera went across the finish line in Terminillo, Italy, first in a close race with Flavio Giupponi of Italy and Andrew Hampsten of the United States, who were second and third.
Indurain has a lead of 1 minute 56 seconds over Claudio Chiappucci of Italy.
Franco Chioccioli, the defending Tour of Italy champion, is third, 5:56 behind Indurain.
Hampsten, winner of this race five years ago, moved to sixth, 2:42 minutes behind the overall leader. (AP)


Quotation of the Day
"We've been playing in the big leagues for a while now. But this is the first time we've swept a series, and it shows how powerful the sentiment for change is in this country, especially among women but right across the board as well." -- JANE DANOWITZ of the Women's Campaign Fund, hailing the results in two Senate primaries in California.  [ A1:3. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; Abortion-Rights Positions Favored in Both Parties
In an expression of attitudes that could affect both parties in November, the preponderance of Democratic and Republican voters in primaries today said their party platforms should favor keeping abortion legal or take no stand on the issue.
In surveys of voters at their polling places in California and New Jersey, about 6 in 10 Democrats and more than 4 in 10 Republicans said their parties should back legal abortions.
About a sixth of the Democrats and a third or fewer of the Republicans said they wanted their party to oppose legalized abortion.
At least 2 of 10 voters in each party said they did not want their party to take any official position on abortion.
In Ohio, 4 in 10 Democrats wanted their party to support abortion rights, 2 in 10 want the party to oppose it and a third want it to take no stand on the issue.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  UNDERCURRENTS OF RIO'S OPENING
News analysis: The Earth Summit gets under way today in Rio de Janeiro, bringing together thousands of delegates from more than 170 countries, as well as great numbers of environmental advocates and journalists.
The conference has already become mired in suspicion between rich and poor nations.
A1
Rio's vendors are trading in the spiritual and the practical.
A12  DANES REJECT EUROPEAN TREATY
Danish referendum voters narrowly rejected the European union treaty, throwing into confusion the community's plans to build political and monetary unity on the foundation of economic strength.
A3  YELTSIN'S HONEYMOON SEEMS OVER
A decision by Russia to pay Government workers by printing more money, coupled with a shuffling of ministers, has brought sharp domestic questioning of President Yeltsin's commitment to austerity measures in the transition to a private-enterprise economy.
A11  DE KLERK AND MOSCOW
Another cold-war assumption has crumbled with the visit to Russia by President de Klerk of South Africa.
He made it there before Nelson Mandela, whose African National Congress has had strong support in Moscow for many years.
A3
Pretoria accused of manipulating interim report on townships.
A5  CHINA'S TRADE BENEFITS EXTENDED
The White House said it plans to extend preferential trade benefits to China for another year, arguing that it was the best way to support economic and political reform.
The announcement drew strenuous protest from Democrats in Congress.
A13
Chinese defector tells of underground rights network.  A13  ONLY THE BEGINNING?
The former head of an Italian-conrolled bank pleaded guilty in Atlanta to conspiring to lend $5 billion to Iraq, ending a chapter in a case that has become so politically explosive that a Federal judge said a special prosecutor might be required.
A7  PREMIER CHOSEN IN HAITI
Haiti's military-backed Government named a conservative new Prime Minister.
Marc Bazin, a former World Bank official and businessman, would head a consensus cabinet under a plan backed by the army and by many politicians.
A9  A SERBIAN BRIGADE
Serbian recruits -- a motley group of taxi drivers, mechanics, cooks, salesmen, engineers and company directors -- are fighting to control a road to Sarajevo.
A10  Al Salaam Journal: A desert for Sudan refugees to contemplate.
A4  Czechoslovak elections may turn on the intensity of nationalism.
A6  National A14-18  MUDDLED ENDING TO PRIMARY RACE
Governor Clinton won the delegates he needed to lock up the Democratic Presidential nomination in a final flurry of primary voting in six states.
But both parties ended the long season of primary elections in the shadow of Ross Perot.
A1
A New Jersey survey found large defections to Perot.  A18
Frank Pallone was nominated in a new New Jersey district.  A18
On the Trail: Perot may spend even more than $100 million.  A18
Polls found most voters opposing an anti-abortion stand.
A17  NEW EVIDENCE OF A NEW VOTER
News analysis: In California, Ohio and New Jersey, a trio of pivotal states, the voters again shouted their dissatisfaction.
A1  2 CALIFORNIA WOMEN SEEM TO GAIN
A survey of Democratic voters in California suggested that Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer had both won nomination to the United States Senate.
A1  BUDGET AMENDMENT IS FALTERING
Prospects for a constitutional amendment that would require a balanced Federal budget dimmed dramatically when Senator Byrd, a veteran vote counter and master of Senate procedure, predicted that it would be killed.
A1  NAVY WIDENS SEX-INQUIRY ACTION
The Navy ordered disciplinary proceedings against more than 60 officers suspected of either failing to put an end to sexual harassment at a convention of aviators or refusing to cooperate in the resulting investigations.
A15  ISOLATION AND DISTRUST
In Memphis, a city of song and sorrow, young blacks feel increasingly isolated from the American mainstream by poverty, unemployment and racism.
And their suspicion and cynicism have a hard edge.
A14  AFTER THE RIOTS
Nearly a third of the people who were arrested for looting during the riots in Los Angeles are being released because of the difficulty of identifying them.
A14
The Administration expanded its enterprise-zone plan.
A18  Fire killed 10 residents of a Detroit boarding house.
A15  Hurt by scandal, the United Way of America plans a staff cut.
A14  The Hubble telescope took detailed pictures of star clusters.
A15  Education Page B7  As presidents quit, elite universities question what makes a leader.
After years of neglect, Harvard is revitalizing Afro-American Studies.
Campus Journal: Texas Southern's debate team brings prestige.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 NEW JERSEY BUDGET GAP
New Jersey Treasurer Samuel F. Crane announced a new $450 million hole in the state budget today.
On top of other recent revenue losses, that leaves state leaders with the task of finding $1.7 billion in 28 days.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-13  Some chefs quitting the cities.
C1  Breakfast with August Wilson.
C1  A new breed of cheeses.
C1  Wine Talk C12  Health Page C14  Toilet plunger is model for device being tested to restart hearts.
Arts/Entertainment C15-20  If Hitler had won.
C17  Director accuses movie studio of stealing from book.
C17  Music: Avant-garde turns the tables on Beethoven.
C17  Word and Image: Summer as a new season for television.
C17  Obituaries A19  Antoni Zygmund, a mathematician.
Sports B8-12  Baseball: Mets top Giants again.
B9  Rangers trounce Yanks.
B11  Basketball: Duckworth a key Blazer.
B9  Column: Vecsey on Bonilla and fans.
B9  Tennis: Seles ousts Capriati.
B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  The no-party system.
End redistricting bickering.
SAC stands down.
Topics: Fighting for fairness.
Letters A20  Anna Quindlen: Waiting for Perot.
A21  Vaclav Havel: Rio and the new millennium.
A21  Robert D. Kaplan: Devouring history.
A21


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; New Jersey Voters Decide 13 Races for the House
Representative Frank Pallone Jr. of Long Branch showed remarkable resiliency today in winning the Democratic nomination in New Jersey's Sixth Congressional District.
The reason is that Mr.
Pallone, who has represented the Third District along the state's north shore in Monmouth and Ocean Counties for two terms, was pushed into unfamiliar territory by the state's recent Congressional redistricting.


CHRONICLE
Six years ago, LIONEL RICHIE walked off the stage of the Academy Awards ceremony, Oscar in hand for his song "Say You, Say Me," and, except for a few concerts here and there, headed back to his hometown of Tuskegee, Ala.
Now, the winner of five Grammy awards, who has sold 25 million records, has ended what he described as a self-imposed exile.
The singer-songwriter is concluding a five-city European tour that began last month, and on Friday he will give a single performance at the Ritz, the club at 254 West 54th Street in Manhattan.
In addition, he has released an album, "Back to Front," that is a retrospective of his greatest hits and includes three new songs.


Personal Health
TOO often travel with small children seems to be an accident or illness waiting to happen.
It could be something exotic, like eating a leaf from a poisonous plant.
It could be mundane but potentially serious, like a dog bite, a fall from a boat or an ear infection.
Or it could be something that might even be trivial if it happened at home, like sunburn.


Spring Springs Back


Tuning In to the World, via Shortwave
LIKE many Americans, Bruce Kampe tuned his shortwave radio to stations in the Middle East during the Persian Gulf war, catching a broadcast one night on the Voice of Israel.
"It was during the Scud attacks on Israel," recalled Mr.
Kampe, an audiovisual technician at the University of Hartford, "and I was listening while the rockets were coming in. It was so real it made my skin crawl."


Case Not Closed Yet; Yonkers Housing Plan in Jeopardy
Yonkers has long struggled with the question of desegregation.
But today was a study in the continuing contradictions produced by the effort to have people who are poor and people who are better off, black people and white people, live in all parts of this city on the Hudson River.
On the one hand, there was a step forward on the path to desegregation.
Today, a few tenants of public housing picked up keys to move into new homes here, homes that take them from their high-rise public housing projects to a suburban neighborhood of tidy town houses.


End the Bickering on Redistricting
The clock is running out on Congressional redistricting in New York.
With the State Legislature still deadlocked, two courts are moving to impose new Congressional lines on the state and the U.S.
Supreme Court might have to step in.
Legislative leaders could still draw the lines themselves.
Instead they continue to bicker.
This time it's Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, Democrat of Queens, who's refusing to cooperate with his Republican counterpart.
The Senate majority leader, Ralph Marino, after months of obstructing a compromise, said yesterday he liked the latest plan -- proposed by consultants to a state court.
Instead of welcoming the change, Mr.
Weprin implied that Mr.
Marino was bluffing.


Afro-American Studies Get New Life at Harvard
Since it was founded amid the political protests of the late 1960's, the Afro-American studies department at Harvard has struggled.
Professors elsewhere in the university criticized the new department's scholarly work as mediocre.
Some said the department was run by radical black students.
And students and professors in Afro-American studies felt Harvard neglected them.
By the 1990-1991 academic year, the department seemed on the verge of collapse.
Only one tenured professor remained, and Harvard students majoring in Afro-American studies found themselves in the unfamiliar position of having to go to Tufts University or Boston University to take required courses.


Connecticut Is First State to Bar Hand-Held Radar Guns
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed legislation today making Connecticut the first state in the nation to ban the use of hand-held radar guns, which police unions believe can cause cancer after long-term use.
Radar guns, a familiar fixture since the 1950's on rural back roads and super highway speed traps, will still be allowed if mounted outside police cars, and Mr.
Weicker said other speed-detecting technologies, using lasers, would also be substituted to enforce speed limits.


TV Networks Look At Summer and See A Whole New Season
With more than a dozen new television series scheduled for runs in June, July and August, summer is no longer the dry season for television.
But fewer repeats and more new shows don't necessarily mean more good entertainment this summer.
Think back to last year.
The new shows then included efforts that are now obscure, like "Morton and Hayes" on CBS, "The Man in the Family" on ABC and "The Ultimate Challenge" on Fox.


Raymond DuBois, 76, Retired Rear Admiral
Rear Adm.
Raymond F. DuBois, retired, a highly decorated submarine officer in World War II, died last Thursday at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center in Maryland.
He was 76 years old and lived in McLean, Va.
His family said he died of a cerebral hemorrhage.
Admiral DuBois was born in Naugatuck, Conn., and graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1938.
He served on the battleship Tennessee before attending submarine school in New London, Conn.


South African's Russia Visit Irks Some Old Kremlin Allies
Another cold-war assumption about the way of the world has softly crumbled here with a state visit by President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa.
He made it to Moscow even before Nelson Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress, which Moscow has long supported.
South Africa and the Soviet Union were two promontories over one of the cold war world's greatest rifts.
Moscow openly backed Mr.
Mandela and the then-outlawed African National Congress, while Pretoria, despite its apartheid system of strict racial segregation, sought American and Western aid for its fierce anti-Communism.


Rodgers Leaving Hospital Today
California Angels Manager BUCK RODGERS, injured when the team's bus crashed May 21 on the New Jersey Turnpike, will be released from a hospital in Anaheim, Calif., today, the team announced yesterday.
Rodgers suffered elbow and knee fractures in the accident and underwent six hours of surgery to repair the damage.
He is not expected to rejoin the team for at least two or three months, a team spokesman said. (AP)


COMPANY NEWS: Look for the Jeep Label; Getting Into Japan Via the Closet Door
Lee A. Iacocca, the chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, has said loudly and often that the auto maker is largely shut out from Japan, where it sells fewer than 2,000 Jeeps a year.
Now the company is trying a new strategy to increase sales there.
Under a licensing agreement that Chrysler just signed with J. Osawa &amp; Company, the Japanese will soon be able to fill their dressers and closets with Jeep-brand shirts, pajamas, socks, handkerchiefs, caps, belts, shoes, watches and luggage.


School Board May Alter Sexual Abstinence Policy
A week after a 4-to-3 vote to stress sexual abstinence in AIDS education bitterly divided New York City's Board of Education, board members who supported the policy have decided to back off and come up with a compromise plan.
The details of the substitute policy have not been set.
The changes being discussed would still require teachers to emphasize sexual abstinence as the most effective way to avoid AIDS, but not in every lesson taught or every pamphlet distributed, as the initial resolution requires.


Topics of The Times; A Man Who Fought for Fairness
Philip Stern, a wealthy philanthropist and author who died this week at the age of 66, made a career of aiding the poor and powerless and challenging the status quo.
And he broke new ground in exposing the corrupt system of campaign financing that permits wealthy individuals and corporations to win tax loopholes and other special favors from Congress.
In 1962, when it was hardly fashionable to be raising the issue, Mr.
Stern was writing about the evils of special interest campaign money and the need for public financing of Federal elections -- similar to the system enacted 12 years later for Presidential campaigns in response to the Watergate scandal.


Losing to the Rhythm Of Leary's Pounding
One night after the Yankees were concerned with rain falling on their heads, they had new concerns tonight: Two baseballs sailed over their outfielders' heads and a third whizzed between two players' gloves.
They would have preferred more rain.
Tim Leary was the victim of the Rangers' 8-2 victory at Arlington Stadium.
Along with Don Mattingly, Leary botched a double-play ball that could have prevented Texas from scoring four runs in the first inning, and he allowed a two-run homer to Juan Gonzalez and Dean Palmer's three-run blast.
But Leary and Mattingly pointed to their miscommunication in the first as the reason for the loss.
Ball of Confusion
The Yankees were leading, 2-0, and Texas had the bases loaded when Kevin Reimer rapped a grounder down the first-base line to Mattingly.
It had the potential to be a 3-6-3 double play, but horror struck the Yankees when Mike Gallego's return throw to first zipped past the bag and caromed off the Texas dugout to let two runs score.
Both Mattingly and Leary were standing near the base, but neither reached out to catch the ball.


Telescope Gives Details of Star Clusters' Birth
The Hubble Space Telescope has taken detailed pictures of giant clusters of new stars being created in the tumultuous collision of two galaxies, astronomers announced today.
Images of the core of an odd galaxy called Arp 220 show that the area is producing tens of thousands of stars, including giants ones that regularly explode as supernovas, researchers said at a National Aeronautics and Space Administration briefing.


Cutting Cholesterol
There is good news for people who seek the cholesterol-lowering benefits of red wine but would rather not consume the alcohol: grape juice works, too.
Dr.
Leroy Creasy, a specialist in fruit cultivation at the New York State College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at Cornell University, who last year identified resveratrol as the beneficial chemical in red wine, has now found it in all 18 of the grape-juice samples he tested.


Danes Reject European Union Treaty by Slim Margin
Danish voters narrowly rejected the treaty on European union in a referendum today, throwing into confusion the European Community's plans to build political and monetary unity on the foundations of its economic strength as the world's most powerful trading bloc.
Asked to vote a simple "yes" or "no" to the treaty on monetary and political union that European leaders agreed to in Maastricht, the Netherlands, last December, 50.7 percent of the Danish voters cast "no" ballots, and 49.3 percent voted "yes."


Why Ireland Must Take the European Plunge
To the Editor:
You discuss some of the issues of economics and belief that Irish voters will have to consider when they go to the polls for the June 18 referendum on the Treaty on European Union, also called the Treaty of Maastricht after the Dutch town where it was worked out last December (news article, May 6).
The main concern for many Irish voters will be the long-term economic impact of the treaty.
After having been exploited for centuries by Britain, Ireland's economy has struggled through several major problems since independence in 1922.
The worldwide recession has put further pressure on a country dealing with an unemployment rate of about 20 percent.
Being in a European union will not quickly cure Ireland's economic ills; but, if Irish voters reject Europe, they could face hardships reminiscent of the 1930's.


Treasury Securities Move Higher
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday after the Federal Reserve Board surprised credit market participants when it aggressively purchased notes and bonds for its own account.
Market prices were down from Monday's late levels at the time the Fed made its so-called coupon pass.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bear Stearns Secured Investors Inc., a unit of Bear, Stearns &amp; Co., New York, has filed for a shelf offering of $1.5 billion in collateralized mortgage obligations.
*
Business Finance Authority of New Hampshire is offering $42.6 million in tax-exempt state-guaranteed airport revenue bonds, which for some investors may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.
Underwriters led by Paine Webber tentatively priced the issue with a maximum yield of 6.7 percent for bonds due in 2022.
Yields on serial bonds range from 4.85 percent in 1995 to 6.45 percent in 2006.
Other term bonds include an issue due 2010 priced to yield 6.65 percent and one due in 2019, priced to yield 6.75 percent.
All the bonds are rated double-A by both Moody's and S.&amp; P.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Willie Brown and Anthony Bonifazio, outfielders; Gerald Stafford, pitcher, and Anthony Torres, shortstop.
Basketball  United States Basketball League
LONG ISLAND SURF -- Named Mike Burger strength coach; Bill Maranz assistant coach; Dan Lunde assitant general manager, and Jon Sartori trainer.
Signed Jim McCoy, guard, and placed him on the taxi squad.
Waived Carlton Screen, guard.
Football  National Football League
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Jeff Novak and Mike Kiselak, offensive linemen, and David Cool, placekicker.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Promoted Dwight Clark, executive administrative assistant, to coordinator of football operations, and Vinny Cerrato, scout, to director of college scouting.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Mazio Royster, running back. Arena Football League
DETROIT DRIVE -- Signed Erwin Grabisna, lineman.
SACRAMENTO ATTACK -- Signed Chris Parker, quarterback, and Wayne Adkins, wide receiver-defensive back.
SAN ANTONIO FORCE -- Signed Greg Ross, lineman. Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Gerald Roper, guard.
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Signed Glenn Kulka, defensive end.
Hockey  National Hockey League
CALGARY FLAMES -- Fired Paul Baxter, assistant coach. International Hockey League
SAN DIEGO GULLS -- Announced Bill Comrie, John Comrie and Bill Hunter have joined Fred Comrie as owners.
Named Bill Hunter vice president of operations-marketing and Steve Violetta director of marketing.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League
TAMPA BAY ROWDIES -- Named midfielder Ricky Hill interim coach. College
ADELPHI -- Announced the resignation of Jim Muller, women's cross-country coach.
TULANE -- Promoted associate athletic director Jim Sterk to senior associate athletic director.
WEST FLORIDA -- Named Donald Hogan men's basketball coach.
WESTFIELD STATE -- Named Pamela Moryl field hockey coach.


Bristol-Myers Stock Falls Nearly 10%
Bristol-Myers Squibb's stock fell nearly 10 percent yesterday after the company released a disappointing earnings forecast.
The news helped send the prices of other drug stocks tumbling. .
The shares of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company declined by as much as $7.75, but rebounded to close at $66.875, down $6.875, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The decline was spurred by the company's statement that its sales in the second quarter would rise less than 5 percent.
Michael E. Autera, chief financial officer, also said the company's earnings-per-share growth for the quarter would be in the "mid-single digit range" and lower for the entire year.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: California; 2 Women Win Nomination In California Senate Races
Democratic voters in California nominated two women in separate Senate contests today, setting the stage for a first in American political history: an election with two women running for the United States Senate from the same state.
The two women, Dianne Feinstein, a former mayor of San Francisco, and Representative Barbara Boxer, easily defeated their male opponents in races that many political experts called a historic watershed in a year of female political outrage and growing public demand for candidates who represent a break from the establishment politics of government in Washington.


Market Place; Finding Plays In Toy Stocks
TOYLAND is busy these days.
In the last month, Tyco Toys Inc. and Hasbro Inc. announced plans to acquire Japanese toy companies; Child World Inc., the huge retailer, filed for bankruptcy, and a rash of investor concerns pushed the stock of Mattel Inc. down roughly 20 percent from April to May.
To some investors, the turmoil reinforces a belief that toy stocks are best avoided, a theory born from ill-fated investments in the 1980's in companies like Coleco, whose sales of Cabbage Patch dolls tumbled from more than $500 million in 1985 to $125 million in 1987.


Rumors Fly On Meeting At Salomon
Wall Street eats rumors for breakfast, and its plate was heaped high yesterday.
The topic was who will be named today to replace Warren E. Buffett at Salomon Inc., where he has served as interim chairman since last year.
Salomon's directors are scheduled to gather for a monthly meeting in New York this morning, and executives close to the firm said Mr.
Buffett had said he would name a successor.
No one could be sure, however, just who it would be.


Book Notes
Guess the Title
Apparently some great god of hype was revealed in identical visions to marketing directors at various publishing houses.
Or maybe there was something in the water at the American Booksellers Association convention last week in Anaheim, Calif.
But for some reason contests seem to be the promotional tool of choice these days for publishers.
At the convention itself, Henry Holt ran a contest to guess the title of the next Sue Grafton alphabetical mystery, and more than 2,000 people entered before Ms.
Grafton revealed that the book would be called "J is for Judgment."


No Juicy Revelations or Smoking Guns
Michael R. Milken testified gingerly and at length yesterday against Alan E. Rosenthal, his former trading assistant at Drexel Burnham Lambert who is charged with carrying out two of the six felonies that sent Mr.
Milken to prison 15 months ago and Drexel out of business.
But there were no juicy revelations of insider trading, no courtroom confrontations, no broken friendships and apparently no smoking guns.


Rio and the New Millennium
The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development is taking place two years after the collapse of the Communist totalitarian system.
That system, one of the most monstrous in history, destroyed not only people and their souls but nature as well.
I live in a country that suffers from serious environmental problems and is one of the greatest polluters in Europe.
A large part of our forests are dying, one would shrink from dipping a finger in rivers and there are areas where people almost cannot breathe; in those areas, people die younger than elsewhere and children are born ill.
Some parts of my country have turned into something like a lunar landscape.


Chinese Dissident, in West, Tells Of Underground Rights Network
A former student leader from China who defected to the United States in April revealed the existence of an underground human-rights organization yesterday.
He said it operates through groups in cities throughout China.
The former student leader, Tang Boqiao, overseas spokesman for the group, asserted that it had several hundred members, mostly former students who took part in the 1989 pro-democracy movement, were imprisoned, and have since been released.
It was impossible to verify the size of the organization.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail
CONGRESSWOMAN LINKED TO SCANDALS WINS NOMINATION
COLUMBUS, Ohio, June 2 (AP) -- Representative Mary Rose Oakar won renomination today despite being linked to the House bank and post office scandals.
Ms. Oakar defeated Tim Hagan, a Cuyahoga County commissioner.
Seeking her ninth term, Ms.
Oakar was considered vulnerable because of her 213 overdrafts at the House bank and for her role as chairwoman of the committee overseeing the scandal-ridden House post office.
In April, she resigned as co-chairwoman of the Democratic Platform Committee, but denied she was pressured.
ALABAMA SENATOR WINS DEMOCRATIC NOMINATION
MONTGOMERY, Ala., June 2 (AP) -- Senator Richard C. Shelby won the Democratic nomination for a second term today.
He easily dispatched three opponents, including Chris McNair, a county commissioner whose daughter was one of four black girls killed in the 1963 Birmingham church bombing.
Mr.
Shelby led Mr.
McNair by nearly 4 to 1.
Mr.
McNair had sought support from black voters and from women angry over Mr.
Shelby's vote to confirm Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court despite accusations of sexual harassment by Prof.
Anita F. Hill.
BLACK CANDIDATES WIN RUNOFFS IN NORTH CAROLINA
RALEIGH, N.C., June 2 (AP) -- Black candidates won runoffs today in two newly drawn Congressional districts, heightening the possibility that North Carolina could send two blacks to Congress in November.
In the First District Democratic primary, Eva Clayton, a black businesswoman, defeated Walter Jones Jr., who is white and the son of the district's incumbent, who is retiring.
Ms.
Clayton will face a white Republican in November.
Black representation in the 12th District had already been guaranteed, with two black Republicans vying today for the right to face a black Democrat in the fall.
In that runoff, Barbara Gore Washington defeated George Jones.
PEROT UNVEILS PLANS FOR SOLVING U.S.
PROBLEMS
By Reuters -- Ross Perot, who stole the political limelight yesterday with a strong showing in surveys of voters on the day that President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton won the last round of primaries, said last night that he would treat the United States economy as if it were failed business.
In an interview with CBS News broadcast last night, Mr.
Perot called himself "just an ordinary citizen" who wanted to cure American problems by getting the budget deficit under control, reforming the tax system and making education work, especially for poor children.
He said he would only raise taxes as a last resort and only after much discussion with the American people, and that he would "bury" himself in meetings from his first day in the White House, to solve the budget deficit.
The Texas billionaire also said he would concentrate on problems at home rather than international affairs.
MARGOT PEROT BACKS ABORTION RIGHTS
WASHINGTON, June 2 (AP) -- Margot Perot, wife of the undeclared Presidential candidate, says the right to choose an abortion is "probably the most important issue to me."
"I think there are extenuating circumstances where an abortion might be the best choice, and certainly the choice that should be made by that individual," Mrs.
Perot said Monday on the NBC News program "Today."
GERALD FORD SEES TROUBLE FOR BUSH
WASHINGTON, June 2 (AP) -- Former President Gerald R. Ford says that the Presidential election would be thrown into the House if it were held now, but that President Bush would win in November if the economy continued to improve.
In a speech on Monday at the National Press Club, Mr.
Ford said that in traveling around the country he had concluded that "all incumbents, including the White House in my opinion, are in trouble."
"If the election were held today," he said, "we would have a three-man race, and I don't think any of the three would get the 270 electoral votes" needed to win.
MARILYN QUAYLE JOINS ATTACK ON HOLLYWOOD
HOUSTON, June 2 (Reuters) -- - Marilyn Quayle climbed into the political fray today by joining her husband in attacking Hollywood's values, deadbeat dads and Ross Perot.
Mrs.
Quayle, who as wife of Vice President Dan Quayle normally avoids political sparring, criticized what she characterized Mr.
Ross Perot's effort to buy the White House.
Mrs.
Quayle, in Houston to make a speech about breast cancer, defended her husband, who was criticized two weeks ago after attacking the TV show "Murphy Brown" because of its main character's having a child out of wedlock.
"The entertainment industry continually knocks the values that we need to have if we are going to have a civilized society," she said.
"Men need to be responsible for their actions and they need to be held accountable."


Food Notes
Postwar Salami
At its best, Hungarian salami is tender, mild and sweet.
The meat is pearled with tiny beads of fat and is rosy in the center and deep burgundy around the edges, becoming darker with age.
The salami, which is made only in winter and aged for 90 days, has a slightly wrinkled, chalky casing.
The finest Hungarian salami has a distinctive red, white and green band and a clover-leaf label, which are attached at the Pick Factory in Szeged.
This salami is now being imported by Paprikas Weiss, a 100-year-old company that had imported it before World War II.
It is sold at the company's store, at 1572 Second Avenue near East 82d Street, for $5.99 a pound.


Books of The Times; A Poet Who Also Held a High Government Rank
Archibald MacLeish  An American Life  By Scott Donaldson  In collaboration with R. H. Winnick.
A Peter Davison Book.
Houghton Mifflin. 622 pages.
Illustrated. $35.
There's so much gold about life and letters on nearly every page of Scott Donaldson's major biography of Archibald MacLeish that the book almost doesn't need mining for nuggets.
The names and works of poets and public officials -- MacLeish (1892-1982) was both -- vanish so quickly off the screen of fame in our forgetful century that it's worthwhile to recall a poet who held higher government offices than any American writer in history.


Babbit Takes Post To Promote Atlanta
Joel Babbit, who has been advertising athletic shoes and charge cards, will soon start trying to sell a city.
Mr.
Babbit, who last fall became executive vice president and general manager of the New York office of Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc., will join the City of Atlanta next month in the new position of chief of marketing and communications.
He had been president of Babbit &amp; Reiman in Atlanta before joining Chiat/Day/Mojo.


Stocks Up in Tokyo
Stock prices were slightly higher on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 63.13 points, or 0.35 percent, to 18,188.68.
On Tuesday, the index rose 121.44 points, or 0.67 percent.


Antoni Zygmund, 91, Professor Of Mathematics in Chicago, Dies
Antoni Zygmund, who was a professor of mathematics at the University of Chicago for 45 years, died on Saturday at his home in the Hyde Park section of Chicago.
He was 91 years old.
His death was announced by the University of Chicago.


Teen-Ager Arraigned in Shooting of Lover's Wife


Director Says Studio Stole Details in Book For Use in TV Series
Charges of plagiarism are commonplace in Hollywood among authors and screenwriters.
But it is highly unusual for a major Hollywood player like Barry Levinson to step forward and accuse a studio of stealing material and ideas.
Yet Mr.
Levinson, the Academy Award-winning director, and his lawyer, Barry Hirsch, one of the most powerful lawyers in town, have taken the first steps in a potential legal action against a new Warner Brothers television police series, "Polish Hill," that is scheduled to run this fall on CBS.
Mr.
Levinson is accusing Warner Brothers of lifting many details and plot lines from "Homicide,"a book by David Simon about the Baltimore police that the director had optioned for a television mini-series.
Warner Brothers denies the accusation.


SAC Stands Down
The Strategic Air Command, once the spearhead of America's nuclear deterrent, quietly furled its flag on Monday.
Its bombers and missiles, along with the Navy's nuclear-armed submarines, will be transferred to a new U.S.
Strategic Command with responsibility for all nuclear operations.
In an Air Force that's slimming down, SAC's standing down symbolizes a welcome change: the diminishing role of nuclear arms.
SAC was formed during World War II, when the Air Force was still part of the Army, and endowed with the mission of strategic bombing.
The bombing was intended to terrorize the enemy by striking at its cities.
That mission, which the Air Force could perform by itself, strengthened its case for autonomy and for pre-eminence in Washington's budget battles.


EXECUTIVE PLEADS GUILTY IN IRAQ CASE
A bank executive pleaded guilty today to illegally conspiring to lend $5 billion to Iraq, ending one chapter in a case that has become so politically explosive and murky that a Federal judge said a special prosecutor might be required to unravel it.
In admitting his part in one of the most expansive bank frauds in history, the executive, Christopher P. Drogoul, former head of the Atlanta branch of the Italian-controlled Bank Lavoro, declined to say whether his illegal activities were known to the United States or any other governments -- an allegation made by Congressional critics of the Bush Administration's failed courtship with Iraq.


University Presidents Less Secure in Jobs and Stature
By the end of a tough year of handling screaming students, angry professors, jealous alumni and hawk-eyed Federal auditors, the presidents of many elite American universities admit they have given serious thought to quitting.
Still, Benno C. Schmidt Jr.'s resignation last week as president of Yale University -- the fourth departure by a leading college president this year -- surprised nearly everyone and is widely seen as another sign that America's top universities are losing a whole class of leaders without a clear sense of who will replace them.


Esasky Reporting to Richmond Club
NICK ESASKY, who hasn't played in the major leagues in over two years because of vertigo, will report Friday to the Atlanta Braves' Class AAA farm club in Richmond to begin a 20-game rehabilitation assignment.
The 32-year-old Esasky played in only nine games with the Braves in April 1990 before his dizziness and unsteadiness was diagnosed as a form of vertigo.
The first baseman had signed a three-year, $5.6 million free-agent contract the previous winter after hitting .277 with 30 homers and 108 runs batted in for the Boston Red Sox in 1989. (AP)


Campus Journal; Debating Team Brings Prestige to Black College
More than 40 years ago, when Thomas Freeman was new to the campus of the Texas State University for Negroes, he gave students in his logic class a debating assignment.
While the topic has long since been forgotten, the assignment gave birth to a debating team that has proved to be a durable source of prestige for what is now Texas Southern University, and that has deeply affected the lives of some of Dr.
Freeman's former students.
He has coached his students to many victories, capped this spring when they won first prize at the International Forensic Association tournament in London.


A Future Valedictorian?


This Wine Is Kosher, Sparkling And Israeli
The Golan Heights Winery, which in the mid-1980's became the first producer to make world-class Israeli still wines, under its Yarden label, is now reaching for comparable success with its sparkling wines.
The nine-year-old winery plans to introduce Yarden brut sparkling wine into the American market, at first only in New York and New Jersey, in late summer.
This nonvintage kosher wine, made half from chardonnay and half from pinot noir grapes, is to sell for $18 to $20.


G.O.P. Leader Supports State Court District Plan
After months of political paralysis, the Republican leader of the State Senate suddenly urged the Legislature today to pass a Congressional redistricting plan that was designed by a state court panel.
The urgent call for action by the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, an Oyster Bay Republican, was an effort to pre-empt a panel of Federal judges who could decide as early as Wednesday to impose their own redistricting plan.
Officials with the Republican-led Senate, the Democratic-majority Assembly, and the state's 34-member Congressional delegation said today that governmental leaders generally agree that the state court plan is more advantageous for incumbents than the Federal court plan.


Critic's Notebook; Avant-Garde Turns the Tables on Beethoven
Like a candy bar between courses of nouvelle cuisine, Beethoven's "Kreutzer" Sonata on Sunday morning was the incongruous event of last weekend's three-day Ojai Festival.
What a delicious irony!
Arnold Schoenberg and Pierre Boulez are the customary intruders at functions like these and Beethoven the pious incumbent.
When smog permits, lovely hills are visible on either side of this pleasant town of art galleries, shops and private retreats.
The original movie version of "Lost Horizon" was filmed near here and individual upper-middle-class Shangri-Las dot the back streets and country lanes.
Ojai's valley has, indeed, a protective air, harboring orange groves, avocado trees and, for the last 46 years, music's avant-garde.
Estimable as the "Kreutzer" and its performers (Cho-Liang Lin and Andre-Michel Schub) were, the festival for one brief moment could be seen beating a dead horse in a corral full of live ones.


Nuclear Shutdown Funds Are Questioned
The surprisingly sharp increase in the cost estimates for shutting down the controversial Yankee Rowe nuclear plant in Rowe, Mass., is raising new questions about the adequacy of the trust funds set up by the power industry to finance other shutdowns.
On Monday, the owners of Yankee Rowe, shut down after years of protests by environmentalists, reported that new estimates of the shutdown costs for the plant were $247 million -- twice the earlier predictions, and more than three times the amount the plant's owners have set aside so far to cover the costs.


The No-Party System
If Ross Perot, candidate of no political party, had been on the California ballot yesterday, he might conceivably have defeated an incumbent President in the Republican primary and the front-runner in the Democratic primary.
Likewise, in New Jersey and Ohio, surprisingly large numbers of voters told exit-poll takers that they too would have voted Perot had his name been before them; he would have won the Ohio Democratic primary in a walk.


If Butterfat Is Cut, Cheese Doesn't Cut It
A NEW breed of cheeses is filling the shelves of supermarkets and specialty shops: low-fat, no-fat and reduced-fat cheeses.
They may not appeal to those who prefer rich, buttery varieties, but that has not prevented an explosion of versions that are more nutritionally correct, if less compelling.
At Fairway Fruits and Vegetables on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, sales of some of these cheeses have more than doubled, according to David Grotenstein, the manager for cheese and specialty foods.
"Two years ago we would sell two cases of Jarlsberg Lite a week," he said.
"Now, we are selling 10 cases."


Toilet Plunger Is the Model For Device to Restart Hearts
A MOTHER and son in San Francisco, who used a toilet plunger to revive a man whose heart had stopped, have inspired development of a simple new suction device that some experts say works better than traditional cardio-pulmonary resuscitation.
The device has been approved for marketing in several European countries, its manufacturer says.
In its first large-scale tests on people in the United States, rescue workers in several cities are about to begin using it on victims of heart attacks and potentially fatal heart rhythms.


Poor vs. Rich in Rio; If Development in Southern Hemisphere Is to Be 'Green,' North May Have to Pay
The Earth Summit, a vast environmental jamboree bringing together thousands of delegates from more than 170 countries, countless ecological watchdogs and the world press, gets under way tomorrow in Rio de Janeiro and it has already become mired in discord and suspicion between rich and poor nations.
The central issues are: Who will pay the bill for the first comprehensive attempt to repair the environmental damage caused by industrialization?
And who will insure that the poor nations of the southern hemisphere industrialize at a lower cost to the environment than the richer nations of the North did?


Pentagon Disciplines G.E. For Role in Bribe Scandal
In a harsh rebuke to one of the nation's largest military contractors, the Pentagon has suspended the General Electric Company's aircraft-engine division from receiving new Government orders because of the company's role in a bribery scandal involving a top Israeli general.
The action indefinitely bars the division, one of two primary suppliers of military jet engines, from renewing existing Government contracts and from being awarded new contracts.
In imposing the suspension late Monday, the Pentagon's Defense Logistics Agency said it was considering whether to expand the sanctions to cover all of General Electric.
The company, the Pentagon's third-largest supplier last year, with sales of $4.9 billion, provides the military everything from light bulbs to radar.


Murray's Specialty Gives Mets All They Need
The equation for Eddie Murray has worked out for more than a decade: maximum opportunity has led to maximum effort, which has led to peak production.
To Murray, the calculation isn't complicated or mystical.


INSIDE
White House Favors Trade Benefits for China
The White House announced that it planned to extend preferential trade benefits to China for another year, arguing that it was the best way to support economic and political change.
Page A13.
Harassment Inquiry Widened
A Navy investigation of assaults on women at a pilots' convention will now include senior officers who did not cooperate with investigators or did not stop the activity.
Page A15.
Milken's Defiant Testimony
Michael R. Milken, testifying as a witness for the prosecution against a long-time aide, issued a quiet, defiant defense of his own legacy.
Page D1.
A decision by Russia to print more money, coupled with a shuffling of ministers, has led to debate about President Boris N. Yeltsin's commitment to austerity measures in the economic transition.
Page A11.
Legal Fight on Hand Injuries
Setting a forum for a battle on one of the fastest growing work disabilities, a Federal judge in Brooklyn combined 44 hand-injury suits.
Page B1.


Terminal Evacuated In La Guardia Fire
The main terminal at La Guardia Airport was evacuated for more than an hour last night after a fire was discovered in a construction area beneath the terminal, the Port Authority said.
Five people, three of them police officers, were treated for smoke inhalation as a result of the fire, which was first reported at 9:46 P.M. and extinguished by 10:15 P.M., said a Port Authority spokesman, Peter Yerkes.
Several hundred passengers were evacuated from the terminal and about 15 arriving flights were held on the tarmac until part of the main terminal reopened at 11:12 P.M., the Port Authority said.
Five departing flights were also delayed, the Port Authority said.


Navy Widens Investigation Into Sex-Harassment Case
Widening its inquiry into a scandal in which at least 25 women were assaulted by Navy and Marine Corps pilots, the Navy today started a process that could lead to disciplinary proceedings against more than 60 officers suspected of misconduct in the incident at a convention of aviators last September.
The unusual action by Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d expands disciplinary actions that were begun in April after two Navy inquiries determined that the women, including 14 officers, were assaulted by scores of drunken and rowdy Navy and Marine Corps pilots in a Las Vegas hotel.


Celebrating 25 Years as a Teller of Mythic Tales
IN butterscotch sunlight, Diane Wolkstein sat in front of the statue of Hans Christian Andersen-cum-duckling in Central Park, just chatting.
Some things had changed in the quarter century since she started coming to this magical place to tell stories as New York City's first and so far only official storyteller.
A hillside that had been brown is now green; the boats cruising Conservatory Pond are fancier, and the rat population has, indisputably, more than held its own.


JAPANESE BUY 9% STAKE IN EMERSON RADIO
The Otake Trading Company of Japan has purchased a stake of nearly 9 percent in the Emerson Radio Corporation, a consumer electronics products company based in North Bergen, N.J.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Japanese company said it bought 3.8 million newly issued common shares in Emerson on May 22 for $2.89 each.


Exhaust as Lubricant for Ceramic Engines
A concept for a ceramic engine that would use its own exhaust gases for lubrication has won acclaim in the engineering community.
Mechanical engineers have long known that building an engine of ceramic materials, rather than metal, would produce a lightweight power source that could operate at high temperatures without warping or requiring liquid coolants.
Besides saving energy, because they would weigh less, these hot engines would burn fuel more efficiently than metal ones.
Aircraft would be one likely use for such power plants.


Architecture Critic Is Named at The Times
The appointment of Herbert Muschamp as architecture critic of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Paul Goldberger, the cultural news editor.
Mr.
Muschamp, who is the architecture critic of The New Republic and Artforum, is to join The Times on June 15.
In a memo to the staff yesterday, Mr.
Goldberger called Mr.
Muschamp "one of the most respected voices on architecture and design in the country." The author of two books, "File Under Architecture" and "Man About Town: Frank Lloyd Wright in New York City," Mr.
Muschamp, who is 44 years old, has also written on architecture for Vogue, House and Garden, The New Yorker and 7 Days, among other publications.
He has been on the faculty of the Parsons School of Design since 1983, and in 1986 established the school's graduate program in architecture and design criticism, the first such academic program in the country.


Three Players Sign On With the Giants
JEFF NOVAK and MIKE KISELAK, two offensive linemen who played for World League teams, signed with the Giants as free agents yesterday.
Novak, 6 feet 6 inches and 300 pounds, was a two-year starter for the Montreal Machine.
Kiselak, 6-3 and 290, was a two-year starter with the San Antonio Riders.
Place-kicker DAVID COOL of Georgia Southern also signed with the Giants. (AP)


New Museum Shows Lives Of Iroquois
A new Iroquois Indian Museum, built in the form of a traditional longhouse, has opened here in Schoharie County, the historical homeland of the Mohawk Indians, one of the Iroquois tribes.
The museum will present both the history of the Iroquois and their contemporary art, said Christina B. Johannsen, its director.


Brooklyn Firefighters Hurt
Two firefighters battling a blaze inside a vacant Brooklyn garage last night were seriously injured when a wall fell on them, the fire department said.
The two-alarm fire, which engulfed the one-story building at 6007 Fort Hamilton Parkway in Bay Ridge, was reported at 7:11 P.M. and brought under control at 8:32 P.M., the fire department said.
The cause of the fire, which was fueled by numerous tires inside, was not immediately known, the fire department said.
The two firefighters, Peter Conelli, 22 years old, and Joseph Siminski, 37, were listed in serious condition last night at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Staten Island, said Tom Kelly, a deputy fire commissioner.
Mr.
Conelli sustained a concussion and internal injuries, while Mr.
Siminski suffered broken ribs, head and neck injuries, lacerations and burns.


Puerto Rico Transit Bonds
A $506.4 million tax-exempt financing for the Puerto Rico Highway and Transportation Authority was offered yesterday, initially priced for public sale with a maximum yield of 6.79 percent for an issue due in 2018.
Underwriters led by Lehman Brothers said the debt offering comprised highway and highway refunding revenue bonds.


Irwin C. Lieb, Educator, 66
Irwin C. Lieb, a philosopher and educator who helped bring seven Soviet Jewish scientists to the United States, died on May 23 at Huntington Memorial Hospital in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 66 years old and lived in Pasadena.
He died of lung cancer, a family spokesman said.


Review/Television; With Paul Simon, MTV Slips Into Its Cardigan
Shades of old coffeehouses and intimate cabarets.
MTV continues to do almost embarrassingly well with a format that couldn't be more different from the hyperactive, sound-thumping videos that put the cable service on the global map.
How's this for a radical concept: no amps, no visual frills, no dancing, no audience distractions.
Just a nondescript performing space, maybe a few stools, some musicians and their instruments.
Just, in short, getting down to basics or, as the trade prefers, back to acoustics.
That's "MTV Unplugged," now about two years old and, in its inspired simplicity, as singularly fresh as ever.
Tonight at 10, Paul Simon and 11 of his band members can be seen on center stage at the Kaufman-Astoria Studios in Queens.
They were taped in March for "Presents Paul Simon" shortly after completing their months-long Born at the Right Time tour.
Mr.
Simon, of course, is a natural for this kind of setting, his signature lyricism and infectious rhythms lending themselves unstintingly to audience intimacy.


U.S. and Allies Ease Sales To Former Soviet Republics
After four decades of strictly limiting sales to the Soviet Union of goods that could have military uses, the United States and 16 allies agreed early today to ease controls on telecommunications equipment.
They will also start negotiations with the former Soviet republics on curbing exports of military technology to third world countries that they consider irresponsible.


Seles and Graf Slog Ahead to Semifinals
The overdose of bad weather, like a serving of strong spirits, affected everybody differently but nobody who played her French Open quarterfinal today got away unaffected by it.
Jennifer Capriati, snubbed in straight sets, 6-2, 6-2, by Monica Seles, felt like an elephant, "heavy and slow," on soggy center court.


Danish Vote Rejects A European Treaty
Danish referendum voters narrowly rejected the European union treaty, throwing into confusion the community's plans to build political and monetary unity on the foundations of its economic strength.
Fear of being overwhelmed in a federal Europe, one that might swallow up Danish sovereignty, seemed to be the main reason for the outcome.


The Pop Life
Los Lobos
Los Lobos, one of the few Mexican-American bands working in pop, will come to town tomorrow for three nights at the Bottom Line to support its new album, "Kiko" (Warner Brothers).
In 1987, the Los Angeles-based band had a hit with the track "La Bamba," but since then things haven't gone well commercially.
The group released "La Pistola y el Corazon," a record of Mexican folk music, and followed that with "The Neighborhood," a decent enough rock album that vanished like snow in the Mojave.
"Kiko," instead of returning the band to form, finds it in an experimental mode.
"This strange thing happened with 'La Bamba': it twisted things, and it took us a little bit to get back on the path again," said Louie Perez, one of Los Lobos' songwriters.
"The first reaction was to dig into the roots, so we made 'La Pistola,' which gave us the opportunity to perform more in Spanish using traditional forms. When we did "The Neighborhood," we found ourselves looking into the rock-and-roll base, part of that was going back and redefining things for ourselves."


Inventing A World In Which Hitler Won
Britain has Germany on the brain these days, and Robert Harris, the chief columnist on The Sunday Times, is a reason.
In a novel that has been at the top of his newspaper's best-seller list since mid-May, he has imagined what the world would have been like in 1964 if every Briton's worst nightmare in the darkest hours of World War II had come true and Germany had won.


Security Plan Approved for a Bronx High School
An agreement to increase security at Adlai E. Stevenson High School in the Bronx was approved yesterday by teachers, a day after they rallied to protest what they saw as dangerous conditions at the school.
The teachers had threatened to strike if their concerns on school safety were not addressed by administrators.
Last week, a teacher at Stevenson was beaten twice by the same student.
The student has been arrested in the case.


Theater in Review
Nebraska  Theater Row Theater 424 West 42d Street Manhattan Through June 28
By Keith Reddin; directed by Graf Mouen; set design by Christopher Barreca; lighting by Mimi Jordan Sherin; costumes by Connie Singer; sound by Jeffrey Taylor; associate producer, Bob Goldberg; production stage manager, Randy Lawson.
Presented by The New York Repertory Theater Company.
With: Michael Griffiths, Michael Hayden, Paula Mann, Robert North, Cathy Reinheimer, Anne Torsiglieri and Jon Patrick Walker.


Investors Had Faith; U.S. Didn't
Even for investors in church bonds, a brokerage firm can taketh away.
According to a civil suit filed yesterday by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the AMI Investment Corporation of Amarillo, Tex., hoodwinked tens of thousands of investors into believing they had bought no-risk investments in what were often financially troubled churches and other not-for-profit organizations.


Pallone Wins in New Jersey
Representative Frank Pallone Jr. showed remarkable resiliency in winning the Democratic nomination in New Jersey's redrawn Sixth Congressional District.
Page A18.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; Perot Not on Ballot but on Many Minds
As expected, New Jersey voters endorsed the nominations of George Bush and Bill Clinton today to head the tickets of their respective parties, but more than a quarter of the voters on both sides would have defected to Ross Perot if the Texas billionaire had been on the ballot, according to a survey of those leaving the polls.
Among voters in the Democratic primary who were questioned as they left the polls around the state, about half said they had voted for Governor Clinton of Arkansas as the party's nominee for President, 1 in 5 said they had voted for former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown of California, 1 in 10 said they had supported former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who ended his active campaign in March but was still on the ballot here, and another 1 in 10 voted for an uncommitted slate that appeared on ballots in some counties.


Poll Shows New Yorkers Prefer To Put State in Private Hands
Most New Yorkers are so angry with state government that they believe a private commission would do a better job than their elected officials, a public-opinion survey commissioned by State Comptroller Edward V. Regan has found.
The results suggest further evidence of a frustration with incumbents and may not bode well for those seeking re-election in state legislative races this year.
Mr.
Regan said he planned to run for Comptroller again in 1994 and had commissioned the poll, which was released last week, to determine whether his warnings and proposed remedies regarding fiscal stability were being heard.


Theater in Review
God's Country
La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through June 14
By Steven Dietz; directed by Leonard Foglia; set design by Michael McGarty; costumes by Nina Canter; lighting by Russell H. Champa; sound by One Dream; fight choreographer, Rick Sordelet, stage manager, Christine Lemme; production supervisor, Nancy Kramer.
The Barrow Group presented by La Mama E.T.C.
With: Seth Barrish, Lee Brock, Marcia DeBonis, Tom Riis Farrell, Aaron Goodwin, Larry Green, Reade Kelly, Leigh Patellis, Wendee Pratt, Michael Elting Rogers and Stephen Singer.
The Barrow Group brings to Steven Dietz's "God's Country" at La Mama the kind of imaginative, tight ensemble discipline one has come to expect of this troupe.
But even the great gifts of these performers, directed by Leonard Foglia, cannot always turn the author's earnest lessons into drama.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGNBUSH WIDENS PLAN ON BUSINESS ZONES
As Congress and the White House continued to fight over the response to the recent rioting in Los Angeles, the Bush Administration today announced a plan to expand urban enterprise zones, one of its favorite antipoverty proposals.
Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp, the Administration's most ardent advocate of enterprise zones, said in a telephone interview that the new plan would increase both the number of zones as well as the tax breaks they offer.


People
*
Nikki Fox was named to the new position of senior executive producer at Deutsch Inc., New York.
She previously headed television production at Reay Keating Hamer, London. *
Tom Hayden, who had been interim manager of the Chicago office of Bozell Worldwide, was named executive vice president and general manager.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.96
5.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.75
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.90
5.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.97
7.01
7.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.88
8.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.82
9.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.63
7.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Police Can't Identify Them, So Looting Suspects Go Free
Nearly a third of the people arrested for looting are being released because of the difficulty of identifying them, a prosecutor said today as the chaos of the Los Angeles riots continued to plague the court system.
"If you're talking about a police officer arresting 40 to 50 people, it's difficult because, simply, they are incapable of remembering people they met for a couple of seconds in a chaotic situation," said John Lynch, who is overseeing riot-related prosecutions for the Los Angeles County District Attorney's office.


Campaign Reform Needs an Amendment
To the Editor:
Re: "President Bush and the Sewer" (editorial, May 12): Only the most principled people bite the hand that feeds them.
There is no reason to think the President and Congress will ever undertake good campaign finance reform.
I would suggest a constitutional amendment, which must be adopted by 38 state legislatures:


New Coke Vienna Base
As part of a plan to invest nearly $1 billion in Central and Eastern Europe in the next three years, The Coca-Cola Company yesterday opened headquarters in Vienna for its operations in the region.


Some Top Urban Chefs Find New Life Outside the City Limits
WHEN Brendan Walsh packed up his sacks of blue cornmeal and strings of dried chilies to head for Island Park, L.I., in 1990, the acclaim he had earned at Arizona 206 in Manhattan immediately put his new Southwestern-style restaurant, the Coyote Grill, on the map.
His venture out of the city to Long Island was so satisfying that last fall, he and his partner, John Vitale, opened another restaurant, the North Street Grill, in Great Neck.
With innovative chefs like Mr.
Walsh choosing to do their cooking outside urban centers like Manhattan, the limelight they are used to is spreading beyond the city limits.


President Named to Oversee Daily Operations at Unocal
The Unocal Corporation said yesterday that Roger C. Beach had been named president and chief operating officer.
He takes over daily operations from Richard J. Stegemeier, the 64-year-old chairman and chief executive.
The company's financial operations and health, safety and environmental group will continue to report to Mr.
Stegemeier, who will concentrate on long-range planning.
The rest of the business will be under Mr.
Beach, a 55-year-old Nebraskan who had been president of the refining and marketing division of the Los Angeles-based oil company.


Pressure? What Pressure? Duckworth Says of N.B.A. Finals
Experience has taught Kevin Duckworth how to cope with the pressure of playing in the National Basketball Association finals.
For instance, take today.
When reporters rushed into the gymnasium, they found Portland's starting center sitting comfortably on the floor, his back resting against the wall.
All he needed was a bowl of chips and a remote control, and Duckworth would have looked like the perfect couch potato.


Glenn White, Ballet Dancer, 42; A Joffrey Principal and Teacher
Glenn White, a principal dancer and a teacher with the Joffrey Ballet, died last Wednesday at the Lake Taylor Hospital in Norfolk, Va.
He was 42 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his mother, Lillian White of Norfolk.


Roger Manton Keefe, Banker, 73
Roger Manton Keefe, a retired banker who worked for nearly four decades at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York and later with the Connecticut Bank and Trust Company, died on Saturday at St.
Joseph's Medical Center in Stamford, Conn.
He was 73 years old and lived in Norwalk, Conn.
His family said he died after a long illness.


Trottier Has Reasons To Savor Title No. 6
In the corridor outside the dressing room, soaked with sweat and sweet champagne, Bryan Trottier and Rick Tocchet of the Pittsburgh Penguins were celebrating the Stanley Cup championship with hugs, hand slaps and war whoops.
"I feel blessed, blessed!" said Trottier, the 17-year veteran center who played for the Islanders when they won the cup four times in a row and now has shared two straight championships with the Penguins.


Jesse Owens Wasn't Any Flash in the Pan
To the Editor:
Your May 20 sports pages article on the track star Carl Lewis compares him with Jesse Owens but does a great disservice to that star of another era by stating that he "was a prodigious athlete but a flash who faded quickly."
The Olympic champion was in fact not allowed to compete in any more track meets after the 1936 Games.
On the same day that the Games ended, Owens was suspended from amateur competition because he refused to travel to every stop of a post-Olympic European barnstorming tour.
Two weeks later, he signed a contract with a booking agent and was permanently stripped of his amateur status.


SLOVAK POLITICIAN CONFRONTS PRAGUE
Through the spring, Czechoslovakia's election campaign has unfolded as a tale of two countries.
To the west, in the Czech half of the nation, there is low unemployment, industrial muscle and a stream of Western investment.
Here, in the mostly rural east, there are closed mines and factories, rising joblessness and economic decline.
Now, with people across Czechoslovakia bound for the polls on Friday and Saturday to elect new provincial and federal Parliaments, voters in Slovakia are being asked to send Prague a message.
Isn't it time, some Slovak nationalists are asking, to take Slovakia out of Czechoslovakia?


STUDY OF VIOLENCE DIVIDING PRETORIA
The white minority Government has been accused of manipulating a report in order to relieve the Government of responsibility for the violence tormenting South Africa's black townships.
The accusers include not only the Government's foremost opponent, the African National Congress, but also, more circumspectly, Justice Richard Goldstone, a senior judge appointed by President F. W. de Klerk to investigate the violence.
His commission's interim report was presented to Parliament last Wednesday.


Public &amp; Private; Waiting for Perot
When the boys go to the barbershop, their mother takes notes.
Above the persistent hum of clippers, one of the old-timers tells the buzz-cut crowd that Ross Perot has been his choice since the second time he saw him on "Larry King Live," Larry King being to this wild-card candidacy what Walter Winchell was to aspiring film stars.
"There's none of this, that and the other thing that you get from the other guys," the old-timer says, which is as illuminating as anything I've heard about Mr.
Perot's appeal.


City Council Passes Budget for New York
The New York City Council ratified, as expected, a $29.5 billion budget early yesterday that adds $88 million for schools, police, parks, highway cleaning, cultural institutions and city colleges to the spending plan proposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins last month.
The budget, which is for the 1993 fiscal year that begins on July 1, follows an agreement on Saturday between the Mayor and the Council leadership.
Additions to the budget will be paid for by higher tax-revenue estimates and service reductions, mainly across-the-board administrative cuts at city agencies.


Fair Is Showcase for Lighter Side of the Rio Summit
Imparting a spirit of hope to the Earth Summit, a replica of a Viking ship docked here today, carrying thousands of messages from children around the world to leaders who are gathering here to chart the planet's environmental future.
"We will not be forgiven if we leave future generations to cope with global changes that we have left undone," Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway said.
"Clearly the future lies not in armies, but in educating a healthy population."


Sports of The Times; Who Said New Yorkers Are Fickle?
IT'S different now, in just half his lifetime, Bobby Bonilla said.
He could remember putting together a few dollars to watch the team from his home borough, the Bronx.
"Reggie could strike out three times, but the fourth time he'd come up they'd be chanting, 'Reggie! Reggie! Reggie!' " Bonilla chose to recall.
The wrath of the fans was saved for the Red Sox back in the old days, back in the late 70's, when Bonilla was a kid.


Parcells Has Surgery
Bill Parcells underwent successful open heart surgery yesterday at Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He is listed in stable condition in the intensive-care unit after a three-hour operation for a single bypass around a coronary artery blocked with plaque and scar tissue.
The 50-year-old Parcells is expected to remain in the hospital for six to eight days.
The former Giants coach, who is currently a football analyst for NBC, had undergone three previous heart procedures to clear the blockage in his left anterior descending artery.
But the blockage recurred each time.


Executive Changes
ASEA BROWN BOVERI POWER PLANT SYSTEM, Windsor, Conn., a unit of Asea Brown Boveri Inc., appointed Robert E. Donovan president.
AVON PRODUCTS INC., New York, named Philip B. Evans corporate officer and group vice president for the Americas.


Byrd Predicts Senate Will Defeat Amendment for Balanced Budget
Prospects for a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget, which seemed likely to sail through Congress only a few weeks ago, dimmed dramatically today when Senator Robert C. Byrd, a veteran vote-counter and master of Senate procedure, predicted that the Senate would kill it.
As chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, Mr.
Byrd has decisive power over the pet projects of every senator, although he said he was not applying this influence in his meetings with one senator after another to argue against the amendment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Pentagon suspended G.E.'s aircraft-engine unit from receiving new Government orders because of the company's role in a bribery scandal involving a top Israeli general.  [ Page D1. ]
A costly shutdown of a reactor is raising questions about the adequacy of the utility industry's trust funds.  [ D4. ]


Privacy of Jurors
To the Editor:
On May 9 you profiled all 12 jurors in the verdict on the four police officers accused in the beating of the Los Angeles motorist Rodney King, describing many of their homes and towns.
What were you thinking?
I spent the last seven years as a prosecutor trying cases in front of juries.
In ordinary drug or fraud cases, jurors often panic over the prospect of seeing their names and, more troubling, their addresses publicized.
They worry about one or two defendants losing their heads and seeking retribution.


Serbian Irregulars Fight to Hold Road to Sarajevo
When the Muslim Slavs attack, Radislav Unkovic crawls through the tall grasses in the Sarajevo suburb of Ilidza, his Kalashnikov automatic rifle in hand and the cross of the Serbian Orthodox Church pinned to his khaki jacket.
In the leather satchel at his hip are his spectacles and the pill prescribed by his doctor after a heart attack six years ago.
Before Sarajevo began to destruct in a war of ethnic armies two months ago, Mr.
Unkovic, now Captain Unkovic of the army of the newly proclaimed Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was a professor of philology, looking forward at the age of 55 to retiring and rereading some of the 3,000 volumes of literature and philosophy in his Sarajevo apartment.
Now, he is a recruit in the mobilization of all male Bosnian Serbs under 60, fighting what he regards as a battle not only for Serbian survival here but for Christian civilization in Europe.


Belcher and Reds Continue Surges
Reds 2, Cardinals 1
CINCINNATI, June 2 (AP) -- Tim Belcher won for the fourth time in five decisions, and the surging Cincinnati Reds cashed in on two St.
Louis mistakes to beat the slumping Cardinals, 2-1, tonight.
Cincinnati won for the seventh time in eight games by scoring two unearned runs off Jose DeLeon (2-5), who has lost his last three starts.
Tom Pagnozzi's passed ball let in a run in the second inning, and right fielder Felix Jose's error set up Bip Roberts's sacrifice fly in the fifth.


United Way Will Reduce Staff, Its President Says
In the aftermath of a management scandal, the head of the United Way of America told 260 staff members today that the organization would reduce the staff, freeze salaries and encourage workers to resign or go on leave this summer.
In an interview this afternoon, Kenneth W. Dam, the president of the organization, which represents the interests of local United Ways, said its ultimate size would be determined by the wishes of the local groups.


Correction
A brief notice on the obituary page yesterday about a memorial service for Burt Supree, a senior editor and dance reviewer at The Village Voice, misstated the time of the service.
It will be held today at St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street in Manhattan, at 6 P.M., not 3 P.M.


Call Comes and Franco Answers
His role had been that of bystander.
Disasters hit and John Franco did not pitch.
Scoring droughts stretched on and John Franco did not pitch.
One of the best, most expensive arms the Mets owned remained a prisoner of the baseball theory that forbids a closer from pitching in spots other than those that fit his role.
"It'll change," Franco predicted before the Mets' game last night against the Giants at Shea Stadium.
"It'll change."


Motive Is Central Question In Arson Trial of Au Pair
On the first day of the trial of the Swiss au pair charged with burning to death the baby in her care, the central question of the case remained unanswered: Why would she have done it?
In a two-hour opening statement this morning, the prosecutor, George L. Bolen, acknowledged that that was still a mystery.
As the jurors looked at the 20-year old defendant, Olivia Riner, the prosecutor said, it would be only natural to wonder.


For More Parents, Sweets Point the Way to a Balanced Diet
FOR many people, indelible impressions of childhood were made at the dinner table.
Meals were often a power struggle, and the giants who ruled the region set down the law: If you didn't eat this carrot -- or pea or banana -- you couldn't leave the table.
Some children resisted for minutes, even hours, growing steadily more frightened and angry.
These days, experts on children and food would tell those parents to cut it out.
There is a new orthodoxy in the land: Adults are supposed to provide a variety of healthy, appealing foods for children -- but they aren't supposed to force the children to eat anything.
Food is not to be used as a weapon, or a reward.
Children are supposed to choose what, and how much, they eat.


Another Twist of the Calendar


Chefs Urge Boycotting New Foods
Some 20 top New York chefs yesterday called for an international boycott of genetically engineered foods.
They were responding to the announcement last week by Vice President Dan Quayle that such foods could be marketed without prior approval of the Federal Food and Drug Administration and without special labeling.
"My gut reaction is that I don't want a biotechnician in a lab coat telling me it's a better tomato," Richard Moonen, executive chef at the Water Club, said at a news conference at his restaurant.
"I don't know where he is coming from. I think mother nature does a great job on her own. These people are tampering with the ecosystem and will cause problems. But what is most disturbing to me is the idea of selling the food without a label."


CHRONICLE
HUGH L. CAREY will be honored by the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government tomorrow evening, marking a 50-year relationship between the former New York Governor and the Rockefeller family that began in Fort Benning, Ga., where Winthrop Rockefeller was Mr.
Carey's infantry school instructor.
Mr.
Carey, 73 years old, is to receive the fifth annual Nelson A. Rockefeller Public Service Award from FELIX ROHATYN at a dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the institute, which was established by the State University of New York to study state and local government issues.


Watch Out for Blair at Lillehammer
BONNIE BLAIR, the winner of two speed-skating gold medals, said yesterday that she planned to make a run at defending her titles in the 1994 Winter Olympics in Norway.
Blair, speaking from United States Olympic Committee headquarters in Colorado Springs, said one of the main factors in her decision to carry on was that she would have to train only two years for the Olympics in Lillehammer.
The rotation has been changed so the Summer Games and the Winter Games will no longer be staged in the same year. (Reuters)


New Data Show Continued Slow Recovery
In reports suggesting a continued ragged and lackluster economic recovery, the Government said today that sales of new homes edged up 1.3 percent in April while its chief economic-forecasting index rose four-tenths of 1 percent.
The results, analysts say, mean that the economy is likely to keep forging ahead but without the long-awaited acceleration some thought they detected in Monday's report by purchasing managers of stepped-up activity in the industrial sector.


L.I. Dealer Pleads Not Guilty To G.M. Loan Fraud Charges
John McNamara, the Long Island auto dealer and real-estate developer accused of defrauding General Motors of more than $400 million, pleaded not guilty yesterday to Federal racketeering and fraud charges.
Mr.
McNamara, a tall man who has a wide, jowly face and who wore a dark pinstriped suit, showed no emotion as he entered his plea in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Topics of The Times; The Legs Have It
Jay Leno is already tinkering with the format of the "Tonight" show, but one element is sure to remain constant: the legs.
Indeed, Johnny Carson might easily have devoted at least one episode during his final visual farewells to a retrospective on legs -- one shot after another of anonymous legs, from tippy-toe to wherever.
No faces or midriffs, just legs, hundreds of pairs, sitting there next to him night after month after year.
Styles changed over Johnny's 30 years, but legs were legs, through mini and midi and pantsuits, through bell bottoms and jeans and leggings and those stretch skirts that resemble wide rubber bands.


David Binney Putnam Sr., 79; Wrote of Adventures as a Youth
David Binney Putnam Sr., who explored the Galapagos Islands at age 12 and piloted a stunt plane at 17 after being tutored by Amelia Earhart's technical adviser, died on Monday at Lawnwood Regional Medical Center in Fort Pierce, Fla.
He was 79 years old and lived in Fort Pierce.
He died of heart failure, said a son, Douglas Shields Putnam.


Missing Publisher Believed Dead
The president of an independent publishing house has disappeared while boating near his Connecticut home and is presumed dead, his family said yesterday.
Samuel S. Walker Jr., 65 years old, was paddling alone in a kayak from Stonington Harbor to an island about two miles offshore when he disappeared on Friday, said Ramsey Walker, his son.
When Mr.
Walker failed to return, his wife alerted the Coast Guard, which along with local police departments began a search of Fishers Island Sound.
The searchers found Mr.
Walker's kayak, a paddle and a life jacket about a half-mile from shore on Friday night, but did not find his body.
The Coast Guard suspended its search Friday night, but the police have continued the search.


Blackman May Play for Panama
Dallas Mavericks guard ROLANDO BLACKMAN says he will decide tomorrow whether to attempt to lead his native Panama to an Olympic berth.
Blackman was on the 1980 United States Olympic team that did not go to Moscow because of a boycott.


U.S. Drug Official Urges Mayors To Forgo Needle-Swap Programs
The Bush Administration today denounced the Mayors of New York City and Washington for allowing drug addicts to receive clean hypodermic needles under experimental programs intended to curb the spread of AIDS.
Bob Martinez, the director of the Office of Drug Control Policy for the Federal Government, urged Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York and Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly of Washington to reconsider their positions.
Both Mayors are supporting the programs as part of comprehensive efforts to combat AIDS.


Review/Television; In the Debate Over PBS, the Subject Is Objectivity
Tonight PBS takes on PBS.
At 8 P.M. on Channel 13, Charlie Rose sits at the head of a table where critics of public broadcasting face its defenders.
On your right, arguing that PBS documentaries have long been skewed to the left: David Horowitz, a founder of the conservative Committee on Media Integrity and a moving force in the current anti-PBS campaign in Congress; Richard Brookhiser, a former board member of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and Dorothy Rabinowitz, The Wall Street Journal's television critic.


Floor Mat in Auto Could Kill You
To the Editor:
Unexplained automobile accidents involving sudden acceleration are cause for concern and a search for explanations.
My auto mechanic recently recounted for me his own experience.
A customer had brought his car in because of sudden acceleration on several occasions, without accident.
A thorough inspection showed nothing.
A test drive was next.


Army Unrest Stirs Bolivia, the Land of Coups
In this country, which has had 77 governments in 167 years, the military coup has often been the engine for political change.
Historians note that since independence in 1825, Bolivia has experienced more than 150 coups or attempted coups.
And despite 10 years of civilian rule, any rumors of discontent in its armed forces are watched closely.
Encouraged perhaps by recent displays of military assertiveness in Venezuela and Peru, four factions in the Bolivian Army and Navy have been rattling their swords.


Man Freed After Serving 7 Years for Rape
With a black metal door clanking shut behind him, a Bronx man who spent seven years in prison after being convicted of raping a 5-year-old girl walked out of the Bronx House of Detention yesterday and into the arms of his weeping mother after a judge overturned his 1985 conviction.
Alberto Ramos's reunion came one day after the judge ruled that prosecutors had failed to give defense lawyers documents that would have aided his plea of not guilty.


Going Against Odds, Penguins Live to Gloat
In early March, the Pittsburgh Penguins were reeling from a series of disruptions and seemed unlikely to successfully defend their Stanley Cup championship.
Their popular coach, Bob Johnson, had died, and Scotty Bowman, who replaced Johnson, was not as beloved.
The team ownership had changed, from the DeBartolo family to a group headed by Howard Baldwin.


MICROWAVE COOKING
AS quick and cool as the microwave oven makes cooking, meals become less harried still when the microwave is used to prepare food ahead to serve chilled.
As the weather gets warmer, cold food is not only acceptable but positively welcome.
Here is a dinner party for eight.
The dessert and the soup can be made up to two days ahead.
I wouldn't make the fish more than a day early.
I prefer the potatoes hot, but if you like them cold, they can be made ahead and stored in water in the refrigerator.
Cooking times given do not include refrigeration time.


Britain Lifts Olympia's Hopes a Bit
The British Government today raised the hopes of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. and its lenders about the possible relocation of thousands of civil servants to the bankrupt Canary Wharf office development here.
Michael Howard, the Environment Secretary, told Parliament that the Government had tentatively decided to move some 2,000 civil servants in his department to the Docklands area of East London, where Canary Wharf is situated.
He said "detailed negotiations" over three possible sites in the Docklands, including Canary Wharf, were under way and a decision could be made soon.


Wine Talk
ACCORDING to news reports, European tourists are descending on New York City for bargains in Ray-Ban sunglasses, Timberland boots and Swatch watches.
It seems that these essentials can cost two or three times as much in the old country.
Lucky thing for the folks in these parts that the tourists don't know about Sam Warriner.
Sam is a restaurant man here on Martha's Vineyard; been one for 14 years.
And if all those Europeans knew about his wine list, they'd be running charter flights direct to this island.


American Labor Party Gave a New York Echo of World Events
To the Editor:
In "La Guardia Made a Career as a Maverick" (letter, May 12), Prof.
Gerald Meyer reminds us of the role played in New York politics by the American Labor Party until, as he puts it, "it was savagely red-baited out of existence." Noting La Guardia's affiliation with the A.L.P., he refers to Representative Vito Marcantonio as "the other great A.L.P. leader." Some of us may have a significantly different recollection of the politics of that period.
The A.L.P. was founded in 1936 by New York labor leaders, principally Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers and David Dubinsky of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, to provide another line on the ballot for supporters of Franklin D. Roosevelt who would have been uncomfortable voting the line identified with Tammany Hall and the other boss-led Democratic county organizations.
When Lenin split the world socialist movement, these labor leaders had sided with the democratic, strongly anti-Communist wing.
They now supported Roosevelt.


News's Suitor Calls Fewer Jobs Better Than Extinction
A Canadian publisher who is seeking to buy The Daily News in New York said today that the paper's unions should give him concessions because they would be less painful than extinction.
And he said that if the unions made the concessions, he would build a color printing plant to allow the paper to better compete for advertising.
The publisher, Conrad M. Black, whose newspaper holdings include The Daily Telegraph here and The Financial Post in Toronto, said employees of the bankrupt paper, which is owned by the Robert Maxwell estate, have little room to maneuver.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Speech Focuses on Policy, Not Victory
Determined to bask in a hard-won victory in spite of general-election concerns that loom immediately ahead, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said tonight that the Democratic Presidential nomination he was now certain to receive would set the nation on a path to substantive change.
In a speech to a celebratory crowd of supporters, a speech devoted more to outlining his policy priorities than to the usual election night dramatics, Mr.
Clinton portrayed today's primary success here and in five other states as a step toward crafting a fall election effort that would focus on his vision for the nation.


Hold the Game to a Special Moral Standard
Major league baseball is going through one of those intense introspective periods again, called upon to re-examine its hiring policies in wake of statements made last week by a frustrated Bill White, the National League president and the game's highest-ranking African-American.
Such questioning, from the news media, from the public, is necessary and good.
And baseball officials know the scrutiny invariably will come their way more so than it does to any other professional league.


Burton Says Counseling Has Helped
Miami Heat forward WILLIE BURTON, who missed the final eight games of the 1991-92 National Basketball Association season to undergo treatment for depression, says he is smiling again and eager to fulfill his potential in the league.
"My play is going to be something to watch; let me put it that way," Burton said yesterday in a news conference in Miami.
Burton was making his first public comments since he left the Heat on April 8, with the team's support, for counseling sessions at a center in Houston.


Julien J. Soubiran, Business Owner, 93
Julien J. Soubiran, the chairman and a co-founder of the Horan Engraving Company in Manhattan, died yesterday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 93 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Tickets on Sale
Tickets went on sale Monday for four college football games this season at Giants Stadium, including the Oct. 31 meeting between Notre Dame and Navy.
Also on sale for the first time will be tickets for the Grambling-Virginia Union game Sept. 12, the Penn State-Rutgers game Oct. 3 and the Army-Rutgers game Oct. 17.


Honors
*
Mike Sloser, chairman and chief executive of the Mesa Group, New York, was named president of the League of Advertising Agencies, New York, succeeding Joseph M. Dietz, president of J. M. Kesslinger Advertising, Newark.


Theater in Review
Nowhere
Ubu Repertory Theater 15 West 28th Street Manhattan Through Sunday
By Reine Barteve; translated by Bruno Kernz and Lorraine Alexander; directed by Francoise Kourilsky; set design by John Brown; lighting by Greg MacPherson; costumes by Carol Ann Pelletier; music by Genji Ito; production stage manager, Teresa Conway.
Presented by Ubu Repertory Theater, Ms.
Kourilsky, artistic director.
With: Julie Boyd, William Carden, Du-Yee Chang and Stephen Mendillo.
At a deserted train station somewhere near the end of the line in France, an attractive Armenian woman named Marie disembarks late one night.
In a strange yet haunting hour of murder and madness, interspersed with song and dance, Marie catalogues all the frustration and pent-up rage of generations of refugees.


Yields Down on C.D.'s and Bank Funds
In what has become an almost familiar pattern in the last few months, yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were down in the week that ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor's most recent survey.
The average decline was a little sharper for New York area banks than for those outside the market, reversing last week's trend.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 29
May 22
May 31
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.0
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
2.9
3.0
Gasoline stocks
214.4
216.6
213.1
Distillate stocks
93.3
90.7
107.3
Crude imports, daily
5.4
6.7
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.4
1.7
Crude stocks
344.5
349.1
349.6
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.0
88.7
89.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


INTIFADA TO BAN A DEADLY TACTIC
Alarmed by a wave of violence among Arabs in the occupied territories, Palestinian leaders are formulating a public declaration that would ban killing of suspected informers and clashes between rival political factions, Palestinians say.
"The discussions have been going on for some time, and most of the points have been agreed upon," said Ghassan al-Khatib, a member of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks.
"It should be declared in a big public meeting as a document that includes commitments which everyone should abide by."


Cynicism and Hope: Diverse Voices of Black Youth
This is a city of song and sorrow, a great fount of blues music and the place where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was murdered in 1968, touching off riots across the country.
This year, while the wounds from the recent rioting are still raw in Los Angeles, all seems calm here.
On these late spring weekends the sweet, smoky aroma of barbecue floats over shabby patches of the inner city.
Children play tag while the grownups set up folding chairs, stock ice coolers and slap grandma's secret sauce on the ribs.


COMPANY NEWS
CORNING LABORATORY SERVICES INC., Corning, N.Y., a unit of Corning Inc., reached an agreement with J.S.
Pathology P.L.C. to acquire all of J.S.
Pathology's outstanding capital stock for about $42 million in cash.
KIRBY CORP., Houston, a transportation and towing concern, completed the acquisition of Scott Chotin Inc. in a deal valued at about $34.6 million.


Computer Oracle Breaks Silence
After five years of supersecrecy, one of the nation's most respected supercomputer designers stepped back into the spotlight today and told a small gathering of scientists and executives that the companies trying to build the world's fastest supercomputer were racing toward the wrong goal.
Steve S. Chen, who achieved his reputation as an iconoclastic supercomputer engineer during the 1980's by leading a design team at the Cray Research Corporation, has not been heard from publicly since he left Cray in 1987.
At the time, the company was facing a shortage of development funds and a surfeit of egos -- primarily his and that of the company's founder, Seymour Cray.


Why Ireland Must Take the European Plunge; In North, Time to Go
To the Editor:
Britain has begun discussions again on Northern Ireland to bring a return of democratic government to that area, which has been governed directly from London since 1974.
But the fundamental question of Irish freedom and the unification of Ireland, the cause of the conflict, is not up for discussion.
If the intention of the British Government is peace and a settlement of the conflict, then the partition of Ireland, and Britain's control of that part of the country, must be part of the agenda.
Gerry Adams, head of Sinn Fein, the legal part of the Irish Republican Army, has declared that violence is getting nowhere.
This adumbration of an about-face is some indication that the I.R.A. is looking for another way to have Britain remove itself from Northern Ireland, and should be seized.
The recent vote of Irish nationalists in Northern Ireland against Sinn Fein indicates that the Irish people in the North are fed up with conflict and want peace above everything else.
The time is propitious for all-inclusive discussions on bringing peace to Northern Ireland, not just limited democratic government, the least part of the problem.


Varsity Spirit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Block Drug reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ire in Congress Delays Nicaragua Aid as U.S. Resumes Help for Peru
United States aid to Nicaragua has been temporarily delayed by members of Congress who believe that the leftist Sandinista movement has retained too much political influence, an Administration official said today.
In another action, the Bush Administration, responding to steps the Peruvian President, Alberto K. Fujimori, has made recently toward the restoration of democratic institutions, will resume some aid to Peru, the Administration said today.
The aid will include food and some anti-narcotics assistance.


COMPANY NEWS
BOEING COMMERCIAL AIRPLANE GROUP, a unit of Boeing Co., selected Bouten Construction Co. as general contractor for the previously announced expansion of Boeing's plant in Spokane, Wash.
GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP., St.
Louis, said its Land Systems division had received an $8.8 million contract from the Army for the further development of electrothermal gun technology.


Arabs and Iran Discuss Instability in Lebanon
As violence continued today between Israeli forces and Muslim guerrillas in southern Lebanon, senior Arab and Iranian officials held consultations in Damascus and Beirut to discuss the fighting and other Middle East issues.
In Damascus, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt held what officials said were urgent talks with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria.
At the same time, Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati of Iran met here in Beirut with leaders of the Iranian-backed Party of God and other groups engaged in attacks in the enclave that Israel has designated as a buffer zone in southern Lebanon.


BASEBALL: Decisions Are Near on Howe and Steinbrenner; Yankee Pitcher Cited Desire To Get Cocaine
Steve Howe, who is scheduled to attend a hearing on Monday on a proposed plea agreement involving his arrest on drug charges last December, said in a handwritten statement he gave to investigators at the time of his arrest that he wanted to acquire cocaine "one last time" before spring training.
Howe, a left-handed reliever for the Yankees, was arrested last Dec. 19 in Kalispell, Mont., and was charged with two Federal misdemeanors, attempting to possess cocaine and possession of two grams of cocaine.


MICC Investments reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Frankenberry to Quit Laughlin &amp; Constable
Frankenberry, Laughlin &amp; Constable Inc. in Milwaukee said yesterday that Dennis W. Frankenberry, one of three partners and creative directors, had decided to leave the agency.
A spokeswoman said he wanted "to move on and try new things."
In a telephone interview, Mr.
Frankenberry said, "I'm a person who needs new challenges." One that particularly interested him, he added, was the possibility of joining the November Company, the organization formed by leading agency executives to produce campaign advertising for the Bush-Quayle '92 organization.
He said he had held preliminary conversations, but added, "Nothing's definite."


Review/Dance; A New Life for a Classic
The New York City Ballet returned to its repertory on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater in a performance of such energy and commitment that it was hard to believe the dancers had lived through dancing 11 new pieces in five days in the just-ended Diamond Project.
That exuberance was epitomized in a poetic, exciting performance of George Balanchine's "Symphony in C," danced to Bizet's music.
There was an appropriate reverence here, given the 1947 ballet's status as a signature work of classical ballet.
But the dancers also breathed their own, contemporary life into the work, in the process illustrating one important reason the ballet has become a classic.


Confirmed: A Sibling Is a Plus
DR.
KAREN BURKE remembers a happy childhood spent "in relative solitude." She had no regrets about being an only child.
Until she was an adult.
"There are periods in my life when I get depressed not having a family and family gatherings," she said.
"There is a great yearning in me."


Fed's Chief Says Inflation Is Under Control; View on Japanese Banks
Alan Greenspan said in a statement released today by the Senate Banking Committee that the troubles of Japan's banks should make it easier for many American banks to increase their profits.
In written answers to questions that the Senate Banking Committee posed about Japan, Mr.
Greenspan said that as a result of the turmoil in Japan's financial markets, Japanese banks had scaled back their involvement in overseas markets.
In addition, he said, Japanese banks were now tending to seek a bigger spread between their cost of capital and the interest rates on their loans.
He said this development "lends support to forecasts of improved earnings prospects for competing U.S. banks."  Reduced Lending in the U.S.
Mr.
Greenspan said the financial pressures on Japanese banks had generally caused them to reduce their lending in the United States, especially for real estate and highly leveraged corporate restructurings.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric Co. is tentatively offering $60.9 million in tax-exempt power-supply-system revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.85 percent for an issue due in 2018 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
Yields on serial bonds range from 5 percent in 1994 to 6.7 percent in 2006, with another long-term issue due in 2010 priced to yield 6.8 percent.
The financing is rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P. *
Niagara Mohawk Power Corp., Syracuse, is offering $300 million in 8 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2004 at a price of 99.04 percent to yield 8.126 percent through Merrill Lynch.
Common  *
Franklin Quest Co., Salt Lake City, is offering five million common shares at $15.50 a share through Merrill Lynch. *
Illinois Central Corp., Chicago, is offering 9.96 million common shares at a price of $22.625 a share through Lehman Brothers. *
Intermet Corp., Atlanta, a company that makes precision iron parts for automotive and industrial customers, has filed for a public offering of 4.3 million common shares through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette. *
Maxus Energy Corp., Dallas, one of the largest independent oil and gas exploration and production companies in the U.S., is offering 20 million common shares at $6 a share through First Boston. *
Quantum Restaurant Group Inc., Roslyn Heights, L.I., is making an initial public offering of 2.15 million common shares at $10 a share through Lehman Brothers. *
Salem Sportswear Corp., Salem, N.H., is making an initial public offering of 2.75 million common shares at $12.50 a share through First Boston.


Television Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Turtle Lovers Open Hearts and Homes
LORRI CRAMER loves turtles.
She loves them enough, in fact, to have let a total of 800 of them crawl through the apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan that she shares with her husband, Mitchell, and children, Abigail, 12 years old, and Daniel, 9.
For five years, Ms.
Cramer and her family have run a halfway house and placement program for turtles in their home.
They take care of sick or abused turtles and look for good homes for them.


Miscellany
*
Greenstone Roberts Advertising/ Florida, a unit of Greenstone Roberts Advertising Inc., Melville, L.I., acquired Sunstar Marketing, Orlando, Fla.
Terms were not disclosed.


Breakwater Resources reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Bit of Chaos And Mirth
Ann Arbor Dance Works brought a varied program to the Merce Cunningham Studio on Sunday night that demonstrated that this professional company from the University of Michigan is both ambitious and talented.
Lucas Hoving's "Icarus," which dates from 1960, retells the Greek myth of a young man's fatal attempt to fly to the sun.
What makes the piece unusual is the way its steps are so carefully measured that the action appears totally predestined.


DEP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Iron Grip Is Pried From 27-Year Hold on an Office
The Mayor was out today, out of the office and out of the running for what had begun to look like a lifetime job.
His secretary said that he would not be in and that he would make no statements.
And that was all there was from Mayor Thomas G. Dunn, now 71 years old, the day after he lost the Democratic primary and, for all intents and purposes, the office he has held since January 1965.
It was an uncharacteristic response from a man who was almost never at a loss for words, or a point of view.
Many remember his "shoot to kill" order to the Elizabeth police during the 1967 riots in neighboring Newark.
Or the time he challenged an anti-apartheid law mandating state pension funds to divest themselves of stocks in companies doing business with South Africa.
Or his memorandum in 1983 stipulating a dress code for city workers, which, almost as an afterthought, directed employees to speak only English in the office under threat of dismissal.


N.J. Transit Singled Out In Budget Cut
Under the pressure of a June 30 deadline to balance a budget that is $1 billion in the red, Republican legislative leaders zeroed in today on their first target for cuts -- nearly $35 million and scores of management jobs at N.J.
Transit.
The agency would still get more than it got this year from the state but less than Gov.
Jim Florio proposed giving it.
The search for cuts comes as New Jersey officials grapple with a worsening budget picture that could do political as well as financial damage.
Critics have already charged that Mr.
Florio's budget projections were off base, and just two weeks ago, Republican legislators rolled back the state sales tax by one percentage point, at a cost of $608 million in revenue.


Navy Official Widens Inquiry Into Sexual Assaults by Pilots
Widening the inquiry into a scandal in which at least 25 women were assaulted by Navy and Marine Corps pilots, the Navy on Tuesday started a process that could lead to disciplinary proceedings against more than 60 officers suspected of misconduct in the incident at a convention of aviators last September.
The unusual move by Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d expands disciplinary actions that were begun in April after two Navy inquiries determined that the women, including 14 officers, had been assaulted by scores of drunken and rowdy Navy and Marine Corps pilots in a Las Vegas hotel.


Sharper Image Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Egghead Software reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Quotation of the Day
"When we make a statement that someone is licensed to practice medicine, that should mean more than knowing multiple choice answers from a book. They should have skills that allow them to relate to patients well, to listen properly, to hear what's said." -- DR.
DANIEL J. KLASS of Philadelphia.  [ A1:2. ]


Kemp Urges Passage of Urban Aid Plan


The Democratic Delegate Tally


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Advisors -- Hamilton Jordan; The Team Perot Picked To Head His Campaign
He left politics years ago, but Hamilton Jordan still carries a credential that few Democrats in recent times can claim: He masterminded a Democrat's successful run for the White House.
Mr.
Jordan is widely credited with helping catapult a little-known Governor and peanut farmer, Jimmy Carter of Georgia, to the Presidency in 1976.
The last previous successful Democratic campaign had been Lyndon B. Johnson's in 1964.


Calendar: Garden Tour And a Call for Weeders
Roses and Rocks  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue off Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights; (718) 622-4433.
A free walking tour highlighting fragrant roses in the Cranford Rose Garden starts at 1 P.M. on Saturday.
There will also be a show of fine art with an environmental or botanical theme from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
A benefit party and auction will be held on Wednesday at 6 P.M., with a reception in the newly restored rock garden, followed by dinner and a silent auction of plants for rock gardens.
Advance registration is required.
Tickets, $175.


Frances Brice Stark, Hollywood Figure, 72
Frances Brice Stark, Fanny Brice's daughter, who became a philanthropist and a well-known figure in show business circles, died on Sunday at her home in Los Angeles.
She was 72 years old.
She died after several strokes and heart failure, a family spokesman said.


Fun House via Computer
THE artist Rodney Alan Greenblat says that art and computers are most compatible.
He has designed "Rodney's Fun Screen," an educational software game that transplants his funky childlike creatures, buildings and other doodads onto the screen.
The idea for the game, due out in the fall from Activision, a computer software company, came to Mr.
Greenblat about a year ago when he was making art on his Macintosh computer for his children.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Advisors -- Morton H. Meyerson; The Team Perot Picked To Head His Campaign
Eclectic and unconventional, Morton H. Meyerson was not part of the inner circle at Electronic Data Systems that defected with Ross Perot when the Texas billionaire formed a new company, Perot Systems Corporation, to compete with the General Motors subsidiary in 1988.
Mr.
Meyerson, who was named special adviser to the Perot campaign today, as he marked his 54th birthday, had been president at E.D.S. since 1979 and a confidant of Mr.
Perot since a few years after he was hired as a computer programmer in 1965.
One piece of advice that Mr.
Perot rejected was Mr.
Meyerson's warning not to sell E.D.S. to General Motors in 1984 for $2.5 billion.


Primary Hurdle Over, Candidates Look Ahead
All 11 New Jersey Representatives who ran in Tuesday's primary won renomination, but incumbency may not mean so much in November.
The Presidential election will again top the ballot in the fall, when President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas may be joined by the ultimate government outsider, Ross Perot, whose presence could draw disenchanted voters to some of the scores of minor-party candidates and independents who will be competing in the Congressional races.


In Lessons on Empathy, Doctors Become Patients
At Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan, a medical student is speaking with a listless woman who is suffering from headaches and stomach pains.
She is obviously troubled, and talks in a near whisper, at one point mentioning her serious family troubles and that her mother died of stomach cancer.


Norman Schur, Lexicographer And Lawyer, 84
Norman W. Schur, a New York lawyer who parlayed a lifelong love of words into a second career as a lexicographer, died on Friday at Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 84 years old and divided his time between homes in Weston, Conn., and Hawkhurst, Kent, England.
Mr.
Schur, a graduate of Columbia Law School, spent more than 50 years in private practice in Manhattan, specializing in estates and trusts.
In 1960 he began to practice in England as well.


Researchers Report Much Grimmer AIDS Outlook
The worldwide epidemic of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, threatens to infect 40 million to 110 million people by 2000, and international efforts to stop the spread of the fatal disease have stalled, a leading AIDS research group said yesterday.
The conclusions, compiled by 40 experts and researchers from around the world, are far grimmer than those of the World Health Organization, which predicts, at most, 40 million H.I.V.-infected people by 2000.


A Woman's Place: In the Senate
Think back to that angry day last fall when seven women Representatives marched to the Senate, demanding that the Clarence Thomas confirmation vote be shelved until Anita Hill's sexual harassment charges could be heard.
Then fast forward to this week's California primary, where Democratic voters set the stage for the first election in history with two women running for the Senate from the same state.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about Olympia &amp; York's loan troubles misstated the amount of a loan made by the Swedish bank Svenska Handelsbanken.
It was $9.4 million, not $20 million.


Mob Trial Prompts Review of Contracts
Based on a former Mafia leader's testimony about payoffs in the construction industry, New York City officials yesterday began re-examining contracts with three companies that have obtained $100 million in city business in recent years.
Law-enforcement officials have not accused the companies of being mob-controlled but the city officials say they are trying to determine if payoffs for labor peace would have given the companies an unfair advantage in winning contracts.


Topics of The Times; The Voters Judge Chief Gates
On the afternoon that rioting engulfed Los Angeles, Police Chief Daryl Gates left town to lobby against a ballot initiative that would limit the chief's term of office.
On Tuesday Los Angeles voters, appalled at Chief Gates's priorities, overwhelmingly approved the measure -- and finally made the chief more accountable.
For decades, the city's police chiefs have been selected by a Police Commission independent of the mayor.
The system was intended to shield the department from political corruption, but it allowed the police to grow more and more remote from the public.


The Numbers Are In, And Broadway Had A Record Season
It's official now: Theatergoers spent a total of $292 million at the box office in the 1991-92 season, the most in Broadway history, according to figures made public yesterday by the League of American Theaters and Producers, the Broadway trade group.
More shows were produced this season than in any of the last five years, and attendance was up slightly.
But these gains could be attributed to the second half of the season, one of the busiest in years.
The box-office increase reflected higher attendance, the increased price of tickets, which averaged $3.24 more than last year, and the fact that this season offered more musicals, which charge more for tickets than straight plays.


Corrections
A theater listing on May 17 in the special Summer Arts section misidentified a company performing at Guild Hall in East Hampton, L.I., and referred incorrectly to the scheduled plays.
The company is the Actors Studio; it will present only one play by Joyce Carol Oates, and the Arthur Miller play to be presented is not a premiere.
Another listing misidentified a theater company in Tucson, Ariz., that will present "Hay Fever" and "Light Up the Sky." It is the University of Arizona theater arts department, not the Arizona Theater Company.


SEMICONDUCTOR PLANT TO BE BUILT BY DIGITAL NEAR BOSTON
The Digital Equipment Corporation said it would build a $425 million semiconductor research and manufacturing plant in Hudson, Mass., about 25 miles west of Boston.
The plant, to be completed in 1994, will produce future generations of Digital's Alpha family of microprocessors, which the company announced three months ago.
The plant, which will begin production in 1996, will supplement the production of existing plants in Hudson and in Scotland, Digital said.


Superior TeleTec reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Mixing Pleasure With Business


Polydex Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Reynolds Invited to Run in New Jersey
BUTCH REYNOLDS, the 400-meter world record holder who says his two-year suspension for using drugs is unwarranted, has been invited to compete Wednesday night at the Holmdel International meet in Holmdel, N.J.
To accept, he would need another court injunction that would allow him to run in this country, even though the penalty, imposed by the International Amateur Athletic Federation, precludes him from running outside the United States.
Under the power of an injunction that expires on Monday, Reynolds was denied the chance to compete last weekend in a Grand Prix meet in San Jose, Calif.
His invitation was withdrawn when the federation indicated that the others in the meet could be "contaminated" by participating in an event with a suspended athlete.
The same possibility awaits if he runs, as planned, at a meet Saturday in San Francisco.


Treasuries Mixed in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in light trading yesterday, influenced by a snag in Europe's march toward unification, another strong sales report from automobile manufacturers and very positive comments about inflation by the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan.
Selling pressure first emerged in Europe after Denmark rejected the European Community's treaty for political and monetary union, even though analysts said the vote might eventually benefit dollar-denominated financial assets.


Review/Pop; Bleak Tidings and Visual Spectacle From Genesis
Phil Collins comes across as a droll fellow.
While singing with Genesis tonight at Giants Stadium, he made popeyed funny faces, folded his limbs to imitate the television evangelist Oral Roberts, trucked across the stage like a cartoon character and knocked a tambourine against his feet, knees and head.
Between songs, he played the emcee with jocular self-parody.
Yet the songs themselves told a different story: one of pessimism, isolation and despair.
Although Genesis has sold millions of albums since the early 1980's, it offers no pop reassurance.
The music often sounds like romantic ballads, with Mr.
Collins' grainy voice enfolded by Tony Banks's keyboard chords.
But in the band's current hit, "Hold On My Heart," the singer warns himself not to get involved.
A previous single, "No Son of Mine," was about a man who left home to get away from an abusive father and "the crying of my mother"; when he returns as an adult to try and reconcile, his father disowns him.
As in many other Genesis songs, the music shifts from minor keys to triumphant major chords for its bleakest tidings.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A new optimism is taking hold in executive suites across the country.
After a steady stream of layoffs last fall and winter, businesses are mapping new hiring and expansion plans.  [ D1. ]
Some 164,000 more payroll jobs were lost than had previously been thought during the 12 months through February, the Labor Department disclosed.  [ D2. ]


Ibrahimpur Journal; A Single-Minded Man Fights to Free India's Slaves
The spare 15-year-old in a tattered shirt stood stiffly, shaking his head.
"No," he said.
"I don't know Bharat."
Gently, Kailash Satyarthi placed his hand on the young man's shoulder and said: "Bharat is this country, where you live. Bharat is India."


AT HOME WITH: Gordon Elliott; 'Mind if We Come In?'
SOMEWHERE there are early risers for whom dawn does not come up like thunder.
Nighttime's tranquillity is broken instead by gentle sounds: soft-soled slippers, percolating coffee, coos from a windowsill pigeon.
Not for Gordon Elliott.
Forty-five minutes after a 5:15 wake-up phone call, a shower, a cab ride from his TriBeCa loft to the Upper East Side studios of WNYW-Fox 5, Mr.
Elliott is knocking on the doors of unsuspecting citizens, sleep still in their eyes, teeth still in a glass.
"Good morning!" he announces cheerfully in his down-under accent.
"Gordon Elliott, Channel 5! May we come in?" His 6-foot-7-inch frame already is.


Disabled Vets Gone, But Peddlers Abound
To the Editor:
Has the New York City ban preventing licensed disabled veterans from peddling on Fifth Avenue accomplished anything?
Any stroller on the avenue between 42d Street and 59th Street will find that while the disabled veterans are gone, there are scores of peddlers selling books, greeting cards and educational toys permitted through some loose interpretation of the First Amendment; illegal immigrants from Senegal selling phony name-brand wristwatches from attache cases, and the usual illegal three-card monte games.
My conversations with the booksellers indicate they work not for themselves but a company, many of them are not United States citizens, and they do not charge city sales tax.
Last Christmas season there were as many as a dozen tables to a block.


April Orders To Factories Rose by 1%
Factory orders rose 1 percent in April for the fourth straight monthly gain, and inventories shrank, the Government reported today in a sign that the manufacturing sector is slowly pushing the economy forward.
"The manufacturing sector is really cranking up," said Sung Won Sohn, an economist with the Norwest Corporation in Minneapolis.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Optioned Pat Mahomes, pitcher, and Jarvis Brown, outfielder, to Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Willie Banks, pitcher, and J.T.
Bruett, outfielder, from Portland.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Placed Rickey Henderson, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to May 28.
Activated Walt Weiss, shortstop, from the 15-day disabled list.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Jack Daugherty, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to June 1.
Purchased the contract of Russ McGinnis, catcher-infielder, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Signed Ritchie Moody, pitcher, and Scott Malone, first baseman-outfielder.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Shannon Stewart, outfielder, and Tomothy Crabtree, pitcher.
National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Signed Mark Thompson and Michael Eiffert, pitchers.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Scott Samuels and Rick Freehling, outfielders; Mark Skeels, catcher, and Andrew Larkin, Matt Petersen and Ken Kendrena, pitchers.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Stanley Evans and Jeremy Kendall, outfielders, and Larry Mitchell, pitcher.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Activated Pedro Guerrero, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Luis Alicea, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
UTAH JAZZ -- Promoted Scott Layden to director of basketball operations.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Charles Henry, tight end.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Scott Lockwood, running back, and Freeman Baysinger, defensive back.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Agreed to terms with Elijah Alexander, linebacker. College
JERSEY 9 ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION -- Named Roger Kindel, associate athletic director at FDU-Madison, president and Mark Corino, athletic director at Caldwell College, vice president.
METRO ATLANTIC ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Extended the contract of Richard Ensor, commissioner, through 1995.
Added women's soccer as a championship sport.
NORTH COAST CONFERENCE -- Elected Agnar Pytte, president of Case Western Reserve University, president, and S. Frederick Starr, president of Oberlin College, vice president, effective July 1.
DARTMOUTH -- Named Jim McCracken men's and women's squash coach.
FAIRLEIGH DICKINSON -- Announced the resignation of Micah Blunt, men's assistant basketball coach.
JUNIATA -- Named Jill M. LaPoint women's field hockey coach.
MINNESOTA -- Fired Katalin Deli, women's gymnastics coach.
Announced the resignation of Gabor Deli, assistant women's gymnastics coach.


Chinese Police Halt Tiananmen Square Memorial
The police arrested several Chinese today as they tried to mark the third anniversary of the army's attack on democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, and detained and roughed up foreign journalists covering the incident.
The police detained seven foreign journalists for about three hours, and beat up a Tokyo Broadcasting System television cameraman who had been trying to film plainclothes policemen on the square.
The cameraman, Atsushi Yamagiwa, was reportedly knocked to the ground and kicked before being taken away bleeding.


Testimony Unlikely to Get Milken Out of Jail Sooner
Michael R. Milken did not appreciably help his chances of reducing his prison sentence when he testified on Tuesday against a former protege at Drexel Burnham Lambert accused of taking part in a tax fraud and embezzlement scheme, law enforcement officials said yesterday, terming his testimony conflicting.
Testifying for the prosecution, the 45-year-old Mr.
Milken implicated the defendant, Alan E. Rosenthal, in a conspiracy involving bond trading that the prosecution contends was mastermined by Mr.
Milken.


York Research Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Sports of The Times; Sarajevo's Olympic Connection
IN the craggy mountains above Sarajevo the other day, a Serbian soldier stopped an American correspondent.
But the soldier's question was not about political developments following the United Nations sanctions to pressure Yugoslavia, now composed of Serbia and Montenegro, into ending the bloody war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Instead, the soldier's question involved a much lesser conflict.
"How," he asked, "are the Chicago Bulls doing in the N.B.A. playoffs?"


Northwest Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ingrid Caven  Cabaret singer The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Chelsea Through Saturday
"She's Janis Joplin as an old German dame," one observer was overheard to say after Ingrid Caven's spectacular opening-night performance on Tuesday.
Another person commented, "She has the face of a witch playing a clown -- or is it a clown playing a witch?"
Both descriptions were accurate as far as they went.
For by any standard the German cabaret singer, who was making her New York debut, is a remarkable stage presence.


Police Officer in California Cleared in Shooting Deaths
A judge today dismissed charges against a police officer who killed two Samoan brothers, arousing new tensions in a city already traumatized by what many people say are lenient court decisions in cases with victims from minority groups.
"We are just absolutely devastated," said June Pouesi, a local representative in the nation's largest Samoan center.
"There is a sense of loss, a sense of confusion. Nineteen shots, 13 of them in the back: How could wrong be made into right?"


Pop and Jazz in Review
Indigo Girls  Folk duo Beacon Theater
From the start of their careers, Amy Ray and Emily Saliers of the folk duo Indigo Girls have made no bones about, nor apologies for, their esthetic of emotionalism.
Singers and songwriters in the confessional 1970's mode, they construct songs around strummed acoustic guitars and imagery that pays no heed to any world other than the inner one; both Ms.
Ray and Ms.
Saliers possess voices that are unflinching in pitch and emotive timbre, which they combine in harmonies that lock tighter than a battle line.
Not surprisingly, their audience has remained, since their second album and major-label debut "Indigo Girls" (Epic) in 1989, primarily women, who seem more apt than men to accept the emotion without being put off or discomforted by it.
Everything about their show on Tuesday night was geared toward facilitating emotional expression.
The lighting, spare and modest, served to intensify high points and underscore quiet moments; the band, which included cello, violin, bass and drums, colored in the more upbeat numbers and left the stage when Ms.
Ray and Ms.
Saliers needed nothing but their acoustic guitars.
Whether the song was a labored narrative like Ms.
Saliers' "Virginia Woolf," from the duo's latest album "Rites of Passage" (Epic), or the more plainspoken introspection of Ms.
Ray's "Secure Yourself," they communicated without window-dressing or protective fronts.
Their ability to deliver emotion with force but without aggression is perhaps their most feminine trait.


LDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Laurentian Bank reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Court Faces New Test In Fight Over Embryos
The fate of seven frozen embryos, which appeared to have been sealed by the Tennessee Supreme Court on Monday, was thrown back into question today when the doctor who has been storing them said he would neither discard them nor continue to store them.
The development could force the case back into the courts for clarification if the now-divorced couple who supplied the sperm and eggs for the embryos continues to be at loggerheads over the disposition of them.


Flow International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Discomania? Some Say It's Really Discoterror
CHELSEA by day is a more or less tranquil community, where residents tend to their town houses and tulips and go about their business without much fuss.
By night, the pace of life quickens a bit when young disco-goers come into what has become Manhattan's disco district.
What exactly happens at night is a matter of some debate.
Residents say the club-goers are boisterious, fight, set off car alarms, trample gardens, litter sidewalks and sometimes even urinate in hallways.
The club owners say the complaints are greatly exaggerated.


Stocks Off in Tokyo
Stocks fell in Tokyo today, with a good portion of the losses coming in the afternoon trading session.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 224.61 points, or 1.23 percent, to 17,964.07.
Futures-related selling depressed prices, but most investors remained sidelined ahead of futures settlement next week, brokers said.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei gained 63.13 points.


Courier-Agassi to Be Duel of Odd Dimensions
The clay was mushy.
The drizzle was intermittent.
The haze was humid, but the air packed a chill: no wonder only the intrepid road warrior types like Jim Courier, Andre Agassi and homespun hero Henri Leconte prevailed today in the men's quarterfinals at the rain-warped French Open.
The flamboyant Agassi and the functional Courier, American contemporaries unalike in all things except their voracious appetite for a French Open title, muscled their way into the semifinal round by treating today's opponents in similar fashion: they banged them into submission.
Leconte forged ahead in more emotional fashion, stirring the crowd as he pumped his fists and came back from a two-set deficit.


Rock's About as Neopagan as Stravinsky
To the Editor:
In "Let's Not Take Rock Too Seriously" (letter, May 10), Ken Whelan rebukes Camille Paglia's sentiment that rock music is politically relevant and deserving of Government subsidy.
He attacks rock for possessing the "anti-democratic" qualities of being "tribalistic, orgiastic, neopagan and certainly demonic."
Tribalistic?
Any more than our idolizing certain superstars of the "classical" field?
And orgiastic?
Yes, rock offers instant gratification.
Yes, it is superficial and shallow, but why can't there be a place for that also?


Solo Serve Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 4


North Korea's Bomb
The North Koreans are on the verge of making the bomb, and seven international inspectors are in Pyongyang this week belatedly trying to stop them.
If they fail, North Korea will go nuclear, South Korea will feel the pressure to follow and so will Japan.
A nuclear-armed Asia will be the price the world pays.
North Korea now has enough nuclear weapon material for six to eight atomic bombs.
This is the conclusion of U.S. intelligence analysts, who have watched a small reactor operate for four years at Yongbyon, 60 miles north of Pyongyang.
Each year, the analysts say, the reactor has created about two bombs' worth of plutonium.


Stray Bullet Hurts Girl, 3, In Brooklyn
A 3-year-old girl sitting on a bed inside her baby sitter's Brooklyn apartment was critically wounded last night when she was struck in the head by a stray bullet fired by someone spraying the street and building with gunfire, the police said.
Two men standing outside the three-story building, at 375 Sheffield Avenue in East New York, were also seriously wounded in the shooting, the police said.
None of the victims were believed to have been the intended target of the gunfire, the police said.


Hospital Authority Revenue Bonds
The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Hospital Authority of North Carolina priced $248.3 million health-care-system in revenue bonds yesterday to yield a maximum 6.61 percent for an issue due in 2020.
Underwriters led by Paine Webber said other long-term issues include a bond due in 2022 that is priced to yield about 6.59 percent and another due in 2012 that is priced to yield 6.45 percent.


Events: Memories And Lively Canes
People Remembered
Winter Garden at the World Financial Center, along the Hudson River at Vesey Street (West Street); (212) 727-3100.
The Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt, which has more than 1,000 panels, will be on display from noon to 10 P.M. tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Saturday and 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Sunday.
No charge


Yankees Take Time To Create a Disaster
It took more than four and a half hours and 13 torturous innings for the Yankees to play the final game of their eight-game road trip tonight.
And when it finally ended, it ended with a bizarre loss.
It was just more torture.
Shawn Hillegas made a throwing error trying to pick John Cangelosi off third base with no outs in the bottom of the 13th to allow the winning run to score and give Texas a 4-3 victory at Arlington Stadium.
The Yankees had led, 3-0, but were limited to three hits over the final seven innings.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; PEROT AND HANOI DISCUSSED BUSINESS
After going to Hanoi in 1987 to try to free Americans who might have remained in captivity after the Vietnam war, Ross Perot and an associate discussed private business opportunities with top Vietnamese officials, according to a Vietnamese official and Mr.
Perot.
In a June 1990 letter the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry designated Mr.
Perot and his company as a business agent of the Government of Vietnam to help procure American investment after diplomatic and trade relations were normalized, Mr.
Perot said today.
Those criteria have yet to be met.


F.C.C. Radio Plan Draws Opposition
A Federal plan to make room on the nation's airwaves for pocket telephones and other new mobile communication technologies is running into roadblocks from powerful senators, as well as from industries that would have to give up radio frequencies they are now using.
The high-stakes battle for the right to use a scarce resource is reminiscent of the 19th-century land fights between cattlemen and sheepmen.


2 Skulls in China: Early Humans Outside Africa?
Anatomically modern human beings, believed by many scientists to have first evolved in Africa, may have independently evolved in China and other parts of the world, a joint American-Chinese anthropological team has concluded.
That finding, being reported today in the British journal Nature, is based on the sizes and features of two very old skulls excavated from a site in China's Hubei Province.


B.V.R. Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ANN TURNBULL cringes when people refer to her 24-year-old stepson as mentally retarded and autistic, as if those adjectives define who he is.
She talks about his job in an office, and the volunteer work he's done at their church and for environmental causes.
She describes him as a musician, as well as a landlord whose roommates help him with household chores in lieu of paying rent.
She and her family are proud of his independence.
"Independence is choosing how to live your life," said Dr.
Turnbull, the co-director of the Beach Center on Families and Disability, a research and training institute at the University of Kansas, Lawrence.


Raytech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Albany Legislators Agree on Plan For Revised Congressional Lines
Legislative leaders agreed yesterday on a plan for redrawing New York's Congressional map, overcoming months of discord as they came face to face with the threat that an alternative plan would be imposed by a Federal court.
The agreement provides for a plan that reduces the state's Congressional delegation from 34 to 31, as dictated by the United States Census, and creates a new district in New York City with a Hispanic majority.


Anchorage Newspaper's Final Issue
The Anchorage Times published its final issue this morning, capitulating in a long and bitter newspaper war to its crosstown rival, The Anchorage Daily News.
The Times, founded in the tent city along Ship Creek that was Anchorage in 1915, was for most of its life the dominant journalistic voice in Alaska.
But it failed to adapt to changing times and competitive pressure after the anemic Daily News was bought by McClatchy Newspapers Inc. of Sacramento, Calif., in 1979.
McClatchy's flagship paper is The Sacramento Bee, which won two Pulitzer Prizes this year.


U.N. CHIEF CHARTS DEFENSE OF NATURE
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations opened the Earth Summit today by appealing to the nations of the world to embark on an era of "new collective security" by redirecting military spending toward environmental protection.
Urging nations to draw from their defense budgets to prevent damage to the ecological capital on which the security of future generations depends, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said that the concept of world security was becoming less and less a military matter and "instead, is acquiring an economic and ecological dimension."


Next Wave's '92 Season At Brooklyn Academy
The Brooklyn Academy of Music is to celebrate the 10th anniversary of its influential Next Wave festival with 10 music, theater and dance productions.
The festival, which will run from Oct. 13 to Dec. 27, includes world premieres of works by Philip Glass and David Rousseve, several American and New York premieres, and a revival of Mr.
Glass's first opera, "Einstein on the Beach."
The festival is to open with "Frida," a quasi-operatic theater piece about the Mexican painter Frida Kahlo by Hilary Blecher, Migdalia Cruz and Robert Xavier Rodriguez that was first presented at the American Music Theater Festival in Philadelphia last year.
The production includes puppetry based on artworks by Kahlo and her husband, the muralist Diego Rivera, and music by Mr.
Rodriguez that incorporates Mexican and pre-Columbian folk sources.
It is to run from Oct. 13 to 27 at the Majestic Theater, the academy's annex.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  California-Fullerton Eliminates Miami


Astro-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Serbs Say Muslim Slav and Croatian Gunmen Killed Civilians in 6 Villages
In accounts that appeared to confirm that atrocities against civilians are being committed by all sides in the ethnic war here, Serbs from a mountainous area outside Sarajevo said today that Muslim Slav and Croatian gunmen swept through at least six villages in the region last week, executing Serbian men after they had been forced to kneel and recite the Muslim incantation "God is Great."
The Serbs also said the attackers looted and burned their homes, then rounded up large numbers of survivors and forced them to spend three to five days in darkened, damp railroad tunnel with virtually no food or water.


Howe's Statement
Statement of Steven Howe at 857 Highland Loop on 12/19/91 at approximately 15:30 given to Special Agent Wes Hearon regarding my involvement to purchase cocaine from J. J. (No promises or threats have been made).


Minntech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sathima Bea Benjamin  Jazz singer Weill Recital Hall
Sathima Bea Benjamin, a South African-born jazz singer who has lived in the United States since the mid-1960's, was a protegee of Duke Ellington and lists Sarah Vaughan, Ella Fitzgerald, Nat (King) Cole and Billie Holiday among her role models.
The singer is married to the pianist Abdullah Ibrahim.
For her solo concert on Monday evening she was backed by a distinguished trio that included Kenny Barron on piano, Buster Williams on bass, and Billy Higgins on drums.
The same musicians appear on her newest album, "Southern Touch."
But as impressive as Ms.
Benjamin's musical connections may be, the singer who appeared at Weill Hall on Monday evening lacked fundamental vocal skills.
Although she showed a sophisticated understanding of jazz phrasing, her singing was excruciatingly flat in pitch and uncertain in texture, and she had difficulty negotiating simple vocal intervals.
Her diction was also flawed.
"Street of Dreams" was pronounced "stweet of dweams."


After Nigeria's Census, Skeptic Count Is High
Like tens of millions of other people, Mejeroh Obada stayed home for three days in November to take part in what Government officials here said would be the most thorough effort ever to count Nigeria's population, Africa's biggest.
But the census takers never came.
It was much the same, said Mr.
Obada, a 23-year-old computer programmer, for his large extended family of aunts, uncles, cousins and so on.
Most waited in vain to be included in what was billed as the country's first reliable statistical portrait.


Executives Say Hiring Will Be Back in Vogue
After a steady stream of layoffs last fall and winter, a new optimism is taking hold in executive suites across the country.
In contrast to last year, many businesses are turning confident enough to map new hiring and expansion plans.
Interviews with chief executives, along with the results of several recent polls, show a marked upturn in hiring plans and general agreement that outside a handful industries in the throes of reorganizing, including the military, computer and banking businesses, the worst of the layoffs are over.


Where Italian Players Can Relax
Fifty-two Italian journalists and 42 Italian soccer officials had traversed many difficult miles to arrive, rain-soaked and cranky, at the Yale Bowl on Sunday.
Now, they were totally baffled.
Luca Fusi for Riccardo Ferri? What kind of lineup craziness is this?


'STAR WARS' SEEN AS PACT VIOLATION
Top analysts in the Pentagon's "Star Wars" program have concluded that even the most rudimentary defense of the nation from nuclear attack would violate the Antiballistic Missile treaty.
But the director of the antimissile effort said yesterday that his agency had not adopted this view.
The finding that a planned deployment of 100 land-based interceptors clashes with the 1972 ABM treaty is spelled out in a 112-page draft of a report scheduled to be sent to Congress this month by the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, which runs the "Star Wars" program.


Public Storage Properties XII reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Genovese Drug Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 22


Tax-Exempt Fund Yields Fall for 4th Time in 5 Weeks
Yields offered by money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed in the latest week.
In the period ended Tuesday, tax-exempt money fund yields were down for the fourth time in five weeks.
Analysts noted, however, that the demand for tax-exempt funds continued to be fed by the narrowing of the yield spread between taxable funds and tax-exempt ones.


City Opera Postpones a New Janacek Production
The New York City Opera announced yesterday that it was postponing its new production of Leos Janacek's "Excursions of Mr. Broucek" until the 1993 or 1994 season.
The postponement is part of an attempt to cut expenses because of the precipitate decline in government and corporate support since 1990.
The production, which was to have opened on Oct. 30 for four performances, was part of the company's critically acclaimed cycle of Janacek operas.
Its cancellation was surprising, partly because the Janacek series is a pet project of Christopher Keene, the company's general director, and also because the City Opera has always regarded the presentation of 20th-century opera a central part of its mandate.


CHRONICLE
Once again, DAVID and MICKI COLFAX will have the pleasure of seeing a son graduate magna cum laude from Harvard.
At today's commencement, it will be REED COLFAX, 22 years old, the third of their four children, who will receive his degree with high honors, following in the path of his brothers Grant, 27, class of '87, and Drew, 24, '90.
What makes the Colfax story exceptional -- beyond the collection of magna cum laude degrees -- is the fact that none of the young men ever attended an organized school before entering Harvard.
They were all educated at home in Boonville, Calif., by their parents.


Don't Leave Reapportionment to the Politicians
To the Editor:
Redistricting problems and the inability of the New York State Legislature to agree on new Congressional district lines (news article, May 13) highlight the reasons for the State Constitution to be amended to create a nonpartisan reapportionment commission to redraw all legislative lines after the next census.
The problems that we are experiencing this year take place every 10 years.
The State Legislature is required to redraw Congressional and state legislative lines to meet the "one person one vote standards established by the Supreme Court." And, it is usually confusing.


CHRONICLE
It may not be in the Ivy League, but Baruch College of the City University of New York might as well be, the way BERT W. WASSERMAN talks about his alma mater.
"It afforded me a start on my success in the business world, and I have tremendously fond memories and fond feelings for it," said Mr.
Wasserman, 59 years old, who is to be honored at a dinner tonight at the Plaza.
With the $500,000 proceeds of the affair, the college is establishing the Bert W. Wasserman Chair of Finance.


Two Pesos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


APA Optics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CPAC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Cooperation, Not Conquest
THE motto of Family Pastimes, a Canadian game maker, is "Play together, not against each other." The company was started by Ruth and Jim Deacove about 20 years ago, when they were "trying to find good playthings for our two daughters," Mrs.
Deacove said.
Mr.
Deacove, who taught art, and another artist are the esthetic hands behind the boards' painterly designs.


Senate Opposition Growing To Cameras in Courtrooms
A bill that would allow television cameras back in New York State courtrooms is running into unexpected opposition in the State Senate, and legislators said today that they were now not sure whether it would pass.
The Democratic-led Assembly passed the bill on Monday, by a vote of 101-45.
But some members of the Republican-controlled Senate say they have recently decided to oppose the measure because news events, including the Amy Fisher case on Long Island and the trial of William Kennedy Smith, have made them uneasy about the electronic news media's role in sensational criminal cases.


New AIDS Plan in Schools: Emphasis on 'No'
The argument on how best to teach AIDS prevention in the public schools grew more tangled yesterday, as two Board of Education members offered a proposal that would virtually require mathematical computation of whether there is overall emphasis on abstinence as the most effective way of avoiding the disease.
The proposal stipulates that the total time devoted to teaching abstinence at any point in the school year must exceed the time devoted to teaching students to use condoms.
The proposal, whose text was released yesterday, would replace an AIDS education resolution narrowly adopted by the Board of Education last week that left its seven members bitterly divided and for the first time publicly defied the wishes of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.


New Jersey Saves Its Incumbents
If New Jersey is an indicator for states that are losing Congressional seats this year, there is hope for incumbents.
In all House races where members were challenged on Tuesday -- and there were more challengers than usual -- the incumbents won.
But in a curious counter-trend, the profound effects of redistricting were clear nonetheless.
The results of the 1990 Census cost New Jersey one of its 14 House seats, and remapping put several incumbents at risk.
Rather than fight for survival in unfamiliar territory, three veteran Democratic members from the state's New York City suburbs retired.


Stewart Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Judge Asks Noriega Jurors About Pressure
The judge who presided over the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega today interviewed three people who served on the jury to determine whether one had been improperly pressured to reach a verdict earlier this spring.
The inquiry was at the request of Mr.
Noriega's lawyers to investigate assertions that prayer sessions were held to change the mind of a female juror who had wanted to acquit the deposed Panamanian ruler.
The lawyers have said that the sessions could be the basis of an appeal, but today they said that no appeal on those grounds was planned.


Parents Bring a Home For Mentally Ill to Life
The new group home for the mentally ill at 100 Broadway will have a look all its own.
Instead of the drab furniture typical of such places, this one will be filled with whimsical tables, chairs and dressers painted by artists from all over the state.
Chairs that were once rusty and tired-looking are now fuchsia with orange swirls or light purple and covered in crushed potpourri spotted in black like a Dalmatian.


Guillevin International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


No EZ Answer for Cities
Groping for responses to the Los Angeles riots, President Bush rushed to embrace enterprise zones, and now he promises to make them bigger and better.
There's much less here than meets the eye; indeed, more can only mean less.
Enterprise zones, EZ's for short, are surely worth modest experimentation -- but no more.
Inflating a dubious idea does not make it a practical answer to the torments of American cities.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In His Own Words; On TV, a Very Public Education for Ross Perot
Ross Perot never asked to be asked about homosexuals.
Or taxes.
Or, for that matter, much of anything else that might raise the passions and the hackles of the populace.
Mr.
Perot, the Texas billionaire who is running undeclared but hard for President, has danced a complex media minuet since first announcing his interest in running the country three months ago.


An Obstetrics Office a Lot Like a Cradle
WHERE would you find a doctors' office in a floor-through loft?
A hallway punctuated with orange, blue and yellow columns?
Window guards meant to look like flower gardens?
A collection of vintage dolls perched behind a reception desk?
And a large abstract painting in the waiting room depicting a woman breast-feeding?
At the SoHo Obstetrics and Gynecology office, of course.
"We wanted to make a place where women felt comfortable," said Amy Noe, who manages the office, at 135 Spring Street, near Greene Street.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN Woman in the News: Barbara Boxer; 2 Senate Nominees Who Have Paid Political Dues
As newlyweds in 1962, Barbara and Stewart Boxer chose a Brooklyn apartment that seemed the perfect place to start their marriage, but for the musty carpet in the lobby, which the landlord promised would be replaced any day.
Months passed with no action.


Times Names Three Editors To New Jobs
Appointments to three editing positions at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
Harold Gal, who has been deputy editor of the style department, becomes obituaries editor.
Mr.
Gal, 61 years old, joined The Times in 1948 and has held editing positions on the foreign and metropolitan desks, on the international edition formerly published in Paris, and in the Washington bureau.
As deputy in the style department, he also edited the Consumer's World page.


Public Broadcasting Wins Senate Battle For Federal Money
Conservative critics were decisively defeated today when the Senate rejected their efforts to reduce proposed Federal spending on public broadcasting by nearly $400 million over three years.
By a 75-to-22 vote, Senators rejected a Republican measure to freeze Government financing of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which had become enmeshed in a dispute over ideology and sexual expression.


Where Did Czechoslovakia's Democrats Go?
The rally was supposed to be a rousing sendoff for candidates running on the Civic Movement ticket, the political party that is direct heir of the popular pro-democracy front that forced Czechoslovakia's Communist Government to give up power in 1989.
But fewer than 300 people were huddled under umbrellas this morning on a rain-soaked square in this city, at the very center of the country, watching and listening while the party's speakers cajoled passers-by to choose them when they go the polls on Friday and Saturday, in Czechoslovakia's second free parliamentary election since the so-called Velvet Revolution.


AM International reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Robert Morley, Jowly Actor Of Jovial Roles, Dies at 84
Robert Morley, the portly, jowly character actor of the British and American stage and screen, best known for his comically pompous and jovial roles, died yesterday at a hospital in Reading, west of London.
He was 84 years old.
He died after a stroke on Sunday afternoon at his home in Wargrave, a village near Reading, his son Sheridan Morley, a British theater critic and biographer, said in a statement issued in London.


Review/Television; A General of Today Salutes Yesterday's
Tonight Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf, retired, warrior of field and tube, joins Charles Kuralt, a veteran of television, in targeting the most renowned commanders of World War II.
"The Year of the Generals," which actually covers several years in addition to the central one of 1942 and includes an admiral and a field marshal, makes for a vivid two hours of military history.
The documentary, part of a continuing CBS project to tell the story of World War II with the help of General Schwarzkopf, can be seen at 9 P.M.
The men whose careers are chronicled and whose personalities are analyzed rank mighty high in 20th-century warfare: Gen.
Erwin Rommel, Field Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery, Adm.
Chester Nimitz and especially the four American soldiers, Dwight D. Eisenhower, George C. Marshall, Douglas MacArthur and George S. Patton Jr.


Mets Find a Way to Keep Young Whiz on the Farm
The New York Mets' penchant for growing quality pitchers on the farm has accorded them a luxury over the years: The more quality arms they produce, the more seasoning it allows them for the next crop of youngsters coming along.
That is the case with Julian Vasquez, a 24-year-old relief pitcher who turned heads last season by allowing only two earned runs in 64 innings at the Class A level, and who has continued to capture the imagination of his organization by forcing a promotion to Class AAA ball this season after recording 17 saves at the Class AA level.


Jose and Morgan Honored
FELIX JOSE of the St.
Louis Cardinals and MIKE MORGANof the Chicago Cubs have been named National League player and pitcher of the month for May.
Jose, an outfielder, batted .346 for the month, including four doubles, two triples and four home runs.
He drove in 25 runs, scored 15 and stole 5 bases.
Morgan was 5-0 during May with a 2.32 earned run average. (AP)


RADIO SHACK DISBANDING A COMPUTER SALES STAFF  The Tandy Corporation said its Radio Shack unit was disbanding a staff of more than 100 salespeople that sold personal computers to small businesses. Ed Juge, director of market planning at Radio Shack, said most small-business customers now preferred buying computers in retail stores.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail
CANDIDATE PAID BACK TAX DAY BEFORE STARTING BID
PHILADELPHIA, June 3 (AP) -- Lynn H. Yeakel, the Democratic candidate for the United States Senate, paid $17,856 in back city taxes and penalties a day before she announced her candidacy, a newspaper reported today.


Denmark's Signal; Rejection of European Union Treaty Points Up Anxieties on Sovereignty
By its rejection on Tuesday of the treaty on European union, Denmark exposed the idea of European political unity for the fragile cold-war creature that it really was.
The message sent by Denmark, one of the smallest and proudest nations in Europe, was that it feared being swallowed up in a federal state dominated by larger and more powerful neighbors.
But the concern of the supporters of union was that the Danes were not alone in their anxieties.
Some officials in 10 Downing Street expressed relief that finally it was not just Britain that had doubts about how far national interests and ancient symbols of national sovereignty should be submerged in a European federal state. 2 Different Views
Nationalism nearly destroyed Europe in two world wars, and it lies at the heart of the unresolved contradiction between two different views of what the European Community should be today: a confederation of freely cooperating sovereign states, or a federation with a single currency, a single economic policy and a single foreign and security policy.


U.S. Increases Figures Showing Loss of Jobs
The Labor Department disclosed today that 164,000 more payroll jobs were lost than had previously been thought during the 12 months through February.
But it contended that these and a number of other mostly downward revisions in job data did not materially change the shape of the recession or the budding recovery.
"The recession was much milder than the average postwar recession under both the previously published and the revised time series," the department declared, calculating a 1.8 percent loss of nonfarm jobs from July 1990 to the new low point of January 1992.
Previously, figures showed a recession-period job loss of 1.4 percent through a low point in April 1991.


Parcells on the Mend After Surgery
The former Giants coach BILL PARCELLS was said by his doctor to be in good condition yesterday, a day after coronary artery bypass surgery in Philadelphia.
"He's in good spirits and we expect a full and complete recovery," said Dr.
EZRA DEUTSCH.
The operation lasted about three hours and involved implanting an artery to bypass blocked coronary arteries, Deutsch said.
The 50-year-old Parcells, a football analyst for NBC, is expected to be hospitalized for another five to six days, Deutsch said. (AP)


Health Care New Casualty of a New Vietnam
Health care has become a casualty in Vietnam's conversion from a centralized Communist economy to a free-market system, the Health Ministry has reported in a study circulating among medical officials.
In a radical departure from basic Communist policy, the Government has begun to charge fees for medical services and education, leaving people to wonder what is left of the country's declared Communism, except the one-party system.


Trimel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Cooper Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A.T.&amp;T. Strike Looms As Contract Talks Stall
The chance of a nationwide strike against the largest long-distance telephone company increased today, as negotiations between A.T.&amp;T. and unions representing 125,000 workers remained mired in disagreements over wage increases and job security.
"Union leaders are just amazed that there has been so much talk and so little real progress," said Jeff Miller, a spokesman for one union, the Communications Workers of America.
"We've reached the point where we need a breakthrough pretty soon to push this particular round of talks to a conclusion."


Alzheimer's Worsens Life-Support Dilemma
To the Editor:
The predicament of the family of Rosemarie Doherty, who choked on food and is now in a coma, kept alive by a system of tubes ("New York Rule Compounds Dilemma Over Life Support," front page, May 12), is painfully familiar to families caring for victims of Alzheimer's Disease.
My wife, Minna, has had the disease for 15 years.
She is in an advanced stage, having lost all observable mental capacity, including the ability to speak, stand, walk or even turn in bed.
She can still be fed, but like Mrs.
Doherty, she recently choked on a piece of food and was rushed to the hospital and placed on a respirator.
I gave the doctor specific instructions that there was to be no tube feeding, either through the nose or the abdomen, since I knew that in New York State, once a tube was inserted, I would be powerless to have it removed.


Growing
MAYBE you have to have roots in the old country to love a fig the way she should be loved.
"This is Pop's tree," said Chris DiPaola, standing by an Italian Purple Red.
"She's 23 years old." Pop's tree grows out of a whisky barrel, and her branches are like sturdy arms raised to the sky.
Mr.
DiPaola has pruned her in a vase shape, by taking out the stems in the center.


Home Video
Customers shop for tapes with great expectations, but if they don't find what they want, they will often not accept substitutes.
A recent survey of video-store customers includes a startling statistic: 60 percent of those polled said they were leaving stores without renting anything.


60 Seconds Of Persuasion Isn't Cheap
AN industry that produces the world's most costly minutes of film is worrying about its own financial health.
The nation's television-commercial production industry faces daunting challenges, brought on largely by the continued recession at the advertising agencies they work for.
Agencies want to entice consumers with spectacular spots that can cost as much as $1 million a minute to film, score and edit.
Yet at the same time, cutbacks in client spending, and account losses, are forcing agencies to urge production companies to economize, sometimes to the point of making once-lucrative assignments unprofitable.


Agency Rent-A-Car Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A Heron of New York Proportions


CUC International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Stuarts Dept. Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


CROWN CORK AND SEAL AGREES TO PAY POLLUTION PENALTY
The Crown Cork and Seal Company of Philadelphia has agreed to pay a $320,000 civil penalty to the Federal Government in connection with violations of the Clean Water Act, the United States Attorney in Boston said.
The consent decree, filed in Federal District Court in Boston along with the civil complaint, resolves a claim against Crown Cork for violations of Federal and local waste water pre-treatment standards.
Crown Cork operates a can-making plant that discharges waste water into the sewage system of Lawrence, Mass., the United States Attorney's office said.


Ted Koppel Says 'Nightline' Is in Jeopardy
Ted Koppel, the anchor of the ABC News program "Nightline," said yesterday that he feared the "possible demise" of the program because of lack of support by ABC's affiliated stations and that he might quit the program.
Roone Arledge, the president of ABC News, said in a taped message at the annual ABC affiliate convention in Los Angeles that "Nightline" was at a crossroads and that without support from its 200 affiliates, ABC might abandon the program.


Image Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Both Sides Raise Voices in Police-Pistol Debate
Even by Albany standards, in which the anteroom to the Assembly chamber sometimes gets so packed that the sergeant-at-arms hangs up a "No Lobbyists" sign, the lobbying over the bill that would force New York City to arm its police officers with semiautomatic weapons has become ferocious.
The police union, which wants the guns, has scheduled almost every Assembly lawmaker for a visit.
According to some legislators, the union has raised the implied threat of a campaign against those who refuse to support the bill, although the union denies such a threat.
Glock, a company that manufacturers semiautomatics, has distributed a rebuttal of a Police Department study that raised questions about the safety of the weapons.


3 Networks Won't Broadcast President's News Conference
For only the second time in his 3 1/2 years in office, President Bush has requested a half hour in prime time for a news conference.
But none of the three broadcast networks plans to cover his news conference, scheduled for tonight at 8.
Cable News Network will carry the news conference live, but will follow it with a half-hour interview with Thomas W. Luce 3d, the head of Ross Perot's petition campaign and an hourlong interview on "Larry King Live" with Bill Clinton, the likely Democratic Presidential nominee.


Bridge
One of the greatest card players from the early years of the game was little known to the general public.
Morrie Elis, who died Sunday in Lauderhill, Fla. at the age of 84, twice won the McKenney Trophy for the best tournament performance in a calendar year, and won six national titles, including the Vanderbilt Knockout once and the Life Master Pairs and the Masters Individual twice each.
He was also runner-up in 13 national championships, for a career performance that few have ever matched.
In recent years Elis played little, but was proud of the performances of his daughter, Judy Tucker, who won a major title at the Spring Nationals in March.
Just before he abandoned his native New York for Florida in 1978 he had a chance to demonstrate his superb skill in card play as South on the diagramed deal.


Hollinger Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AEP Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidate; PEROT HIRES PAIR OF TOP MANAGERS TO RUN CAMPAIGN
With opinion polls showing Ross Perot cutting deeply into both Republican and Democratic strength, his embryonic campaign today announced the hiring of two veteran political strategists, one from each party: the engineer of Jimmy Carter's successful run for the White House in 1976, and Ronald Reagan's 1984 campaign manager.
At a news conference here, the Perot campaign said it was bringing on board Hamilton Jordan, the main strategist behind the only Democratic Presidential victory since 1964, and Edward J. Rollins, who managed Mr.
Reagan's landslide re-election.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about Bristol-Myers Squibb's stock misstated the day's closing price.
It was $66.875, down $6.875.


Congressmen Study Odds In New Plan
The state plan for drawing new Congressional districts in New York would pit many fewer incumbents against each other than its Federal court rival, but that is cold comfort to people like Representative Gary L. Ackerman of Queens who would still be squeezed into uncomfortable competition with their colleagues.
If the state plan prevails in Federal court, Mr.
Ackerman will not avoid a fight.
He could only choose between challenging his Queens neighbor, James H. Scheuer, a 13-term incumbent, in a district that stretches to Suffolk Country, or Nita M. Lowey of Westchester County, in a district that snakes over the Whitestone Bridge and whose population is just one-third in Queens.


Kash N' Karry Food Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Advisors -- Edward J. Rollins; The Team Perot Picked To Head His Campaign
Even before his decision to join the Ross Perot campaign, Edward J. Rollins, the conservative bomb thrower and master spin doctor, had made a career of being contrary, changing sides in political fights and driving Republican Presidents to distraction.
He did it in 1982, when he sent President Ronald Reagan through the ceiling of the Oval Office by telling reporters that the President's daughter, Maureen, was sure to lose her campaign for the Republican Senate nomination from California.
In 1990, Mr.
Rollins infuriated President Bush by advising Congressional candidates to distance themselves from Mr.
Bush's decision to raise taxes.


Corrections
A brief report in The Living Section yesterday about schedules of shortwave programs, with an article on the broadcasts' increasing audience, misstated the frequencies that get the best reception at night.
The most useful frequencies after dark are below 9 megahertz (MHz).


Luria (L.) &amp; Sons (A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Review/Music; A Scottish Opera Has U.S. Premiere in St. Louis
The young Scottish composer Judith Weir is obviously captivated by the sounds and heritage of her native land.
They haunt her 90-minute opera "The Vanishing Bridegroom," which received its American premiere here in the Loretto-Hilton Center on Tuesday night.
Presented by the Opera Theater of St.
Louis, one of this country's most venturesome and accomplished regional companies, the opera is weighted with allusions to Scotland's folk past and its musical styles.
It was first performed in 1990 in Glasgow (the city's District Council commissioned the work), and it will be repeated here on Saturday and on June 10, 12 and 18.
But this is not the Scotland of Sir Walter Scott and Romantic opera.
Miss Weir, who has written another opera, "A Night at the Chinese Opera," along with a wide variety of instrumental works, has deliberately constructed a prism for viewing that Scottish past.
Her Scotland is something yearned for -- heard in her imitations of the chanted psalms of a Gaelic congregation or the traditional weaving songs sung by women -- but also something a bit detested.


Abroad at Home; Dollars and Cynicism
Why are Americans so disaffected from the political process these days?
Why do so many say they will spurn both major party candidates this fall and vote for Ross Perot?
Money is a good part of the answer to those questions.
Ordinary people are increasingly aware that government policy is shaped less by public needs or public opinion than by political contributions.
What the big contributors want, they usually get.
Mere voters hardly have a look in.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  LEARNING TO HEAL, AND TO LISTEN
For years, patients have complained that their doctors lacked compassion, but only recently have the institutions that hire and train those doctors begun to devote significant resources to solving the problem.
One residency program now has incoming residents check into the hospital incognito to see how it feels to be a patient.
Other programs have student doctors wear blurred contact lenses and joint-restricting splints so they can understand the elderly.
A1.
AGREEMENT ON A REDISTRICTING PLAN
Legislative leaders agreed today on a plan for redrawing New York's Congressional map, overcoming months of disagreement as they came face to face with the fact that the alternative was a plan imposed by the Federal court.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  MAFIA TESTIMONY SPURS INVESTIGATION
After a former Mafia leader's testimony about payoffs in the construction industry, New York City officials yesterday began re-examining contracts with three companies that have obtained $100 million in city business in recent years.
B3.
NEW AIDS POLICY PROPOSAL
The argument on how best to teach AIDS prevention in the public schools grew more tangled yesterday, as two board members offered a proposal that would virtually require mathematical computation of whether there was overall emphasis on abstinence as the most effective way of avoiding the disease.
B3. 3-YEAR-OLD SHOT IN BROOKLYN
A 3-year-old girl sitting on a bed inside her baby sitter's Brooklyn apartment was critically wounded when she was struck in the head by a stray bullet fired by someone spraying the street and building with gunfire.
Two others were also wounded in the shooting in East New York.
B3.
LAWSUIT CHALLENGES MEDICAID CUTS
A Federal judge has temporarily blocked the first phase of a $550 million reduction in New York State's Medicaid budget in what advocates say is the first in a series of lawsuits intended to modify the cuts.
B6.
REGION  WILL INCUMBENCY BRING VICTORY?
All 11 New Jersey Representatives who ran in Tuesday's primary won renomination, but incumbency may not mean so much in November.
In the fall, when Presidential candidates top the ballot, scores of disenchanted voters could be drawn to minor-party candidates and independents competing in the Congressional races.
B6.
FATHER TELLS OF RUSHING HOME
On the telephone, the Swiss au pair said, "Fire. Fire." Those were the words, William Fischer told a jury yesterday, that sent him racing home to learn that his 3-month-old daughter had been fatally burned.
Mr.
Fischer spent all day on the witness stand as the first prosecution witness at the trial of the au pair, Olivia Riner, who is charged with the arson murder of Mr.
Fischer's daughter, Kristie.
B7.
COURTROOM CAMERAS ON HOLD
A bill that would allow television cameras back into New York State courtrooms is running into unexpected opposition in the State Senate, and legislators said today that they were not sure whether it would pass.
B6.
Chelsea Journal B3  Chronicle B9


MacKenzie Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


What's at Baker Brands? Ask the Neighbors
A small area of the Upper East Side of Manhattan was briefly at flood stage yesterday when a 20,000-gallon vat of vinegar ruptured, sending a stream of foul-smelling fluid flowing into the streets and sending two cars floating away.
Yes, vinegar. Yes, on the Upper East Side.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Night Light
Q.
I would like to add night lighting to my backyard garden.
Is this hard to do? -- Vlado Andropovitch, Boston
A.
Not anymore.
Formerly, the only fixtures available were 110 volt, so a licensed electrician had to install the lines outdoors.
But now, low-voltage kits with transformers that reduce the system to 12 volts allow exterior lighting that is both safe and easy to install.


Let's Not Forget France Sank Rainbow Warrior
To the Editor:
As a devoted reader, I am always distressed when you obscure the historical record.
You report May 8 on the disappearance of Sidney J. Reso, an Exxon official who was possibly kidnapped by a group calling itself the Rainbow Warriors.
The article explains: "The name Rainbow Warrior belonged to a ship owned by the environmental group Greenpeace that was sabotaged and sunk in 1985."


TIE/Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS: The Green Wave; Making Hardware Environmentally Friendly
What makes a product environmentally friendly?
The answer is easy for supermarkets, where goods that are biodegradable or made from recycled materials usually carry special labels.
But Mike Eisen learned that the question, when asked of the hardware business, can create a logistical headache.


Laettner Down From the Rafters?
The retired jersey of CHRISTIAN LAETTNER and Duke's 1992 national championship banner will come down from the rafters at Cameron Indoor Stadium if he does not earn his degree by July, a newspaper in Durham, N.C., reported yesterday.
The Herald-Sun quoted an unidentified source as saying that Duke Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI had notified Laettner that if he did not obtain his degree by the end of the first summer session, he will take down both the jersey No. 32 and the banner.
Laettner finished the spring semester one credit short of the necessary requirement to graduate from Duke. (Reuters)


Seagram Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fast Horse Out of Belmont Stakes
On the day before the filing of entries for New York's busiest and best weekend of racing in 1992, the sun finally began to bake the wet track at Belmont Park yesterday and nearly 100 horses were being primed for 10 stakes races worth $3 million in prize and bonus money.
But the season's most accomplished speed horse, Dixie Brass, will not be among them this Saturday for the 124th running of the Belmont Stakes, the third race in the Triple Crown series.


Reading, Reflecting, Reveries
THE Emily Dickinson Reading Garden was built in a weekend last year, but students are just putting in the finishing touches.
Volunteers from the Sterling Community Service Foundation, parents, children and school staff members transformed an unused lot into a pastoral patch for exultation and contemplation at Public School 75, West End Avenue and 96th Street.
"It was a barn-raising type of thing," said Roberta Kirshbaum, the principal.
The foundation, a nationwide group, works for positive changes at public schools; it came up with the idea for the 20-by-40-foot strip and donated the greenery, along with American ash and Norway maple stumps used as seats.


Carolco Pictures reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Graphic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Jordan Is Better by Half as Bulls Romp Over Blazers
With a record-setting long-range shooting performance, Michael Jordan turned a much talked-about matchup into a mismatch.
Inspired by the challenge of Clyde Drexler and the Portland Trail Blazers, Jordan carried the Chicago Bulls to a convincing 122-89 victory in tonight's Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals.
Jordan scored 35 of his 39 points in the first half, the most points ever scored by a player in one half during the finals.
He set the finals record for most 3-point baskets in a half (6) and he tied the finals record for the most 3-point baskets in a game (6).
Jordan also attempted the most 3-pointers ever (10) in an N.B.A. championship series game.


Optimism On Soccer TV
ABC and ESPN, which will televise the 1994 World Cup, along with MasterCard International, Coca-Cola and M &amp; M/Mars, which will sponsor the telecasts, are convinced of one thing: those who participate in soccer and those who attend games will watch the World Cup because it is the World Cup.
At yesterday's announcement of the ABC-ESPN partnership with the three sponsors, each party sounded a similar note.
"We're convinced that when our country sees the event on their soil, it will be a tremendous success," said Steve Solomon, senior vice president of ABC Sports.


Catherine Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  EUROPE TRIES TO REGROUP
A day after Danish voters rejected a treaty on European union, members of the European Community vowed to forge ahead with plans for political and monetary integration.
But it was not clear how such integration might be achieved.
A1
News Analysis: European unity is exposed as a fragile notion.  A14  OPENING DAY IN RIO
Appealing to nations to redirect military spending toward environmental protection, Secretary General Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations opened the Earth Summit.
A10
The man from Canada who helped bring the world to Rio.
A10  TIME TO ACT, OUSTED HAITIAN SAYS
The exiled President of Haiti asked the United States and other countries in the hemisphere to start taking direct action to restore democracy in Haiti.
He suggested intercepting oil tankers, and said a naval blockade might be necessary.
A10  CHINA REMEMBERS TIANANMEN
The police arrested several Chinese as they tried to mark the third anniversary of the attack on pro-democracy demonstrators.
Foreign journalists covering the event were roughed up and detained.
A5  NEW QUESTIONS ON 'STAR WARS'
Pentagon analysts have concluded that even a rudimentary defense against nuclear attack would violate the Antiballistic Missile treaty.
The effort's director said his agency had not adopted that view.
A7  AID TO NICARAGUA HALTED
United States aid to Nicaragua has been put on hold at the request of members of Congress who believe the Sandinistas retain too much influence.
A9  SERBS TELL OF KILLINGS
Armed Muslim Slavs and Croats swept through at least six villages last week, executing Serbian men, Serbs said.
A3  TOO MUCH DEMOCRACY?
More than 80 parties are on the ballot, voters are exhausted and bewildered, and Czechoslovakia is assured of parliamentary gridlock on the eve of elections.
A6  NEW LIGHT ON OLD HUMANS
Anatomically modern human beings, believed by many scientists to have first evolved in Africa, may have independently evolved in China and other parts of the world, a research team has concluded.
A8  Ibrahimpur Journal: Building freedom from bonded labor.
A4  Citing trade with Iraq, the U.S. suspends exercises with Jordan.
A14  In the new Vietnam, health care becomes a casualty.
A12  Nigeria takes a census, and the skeptic count is high.
A13  An American who defected in 1962 is found in a Russian hospital.
A11  National A16-21, B10-11  PEROT HIRES A RARE KIND OF DUO
Ross Perot appointed an odd couple to run his Presidential campaign: Hamilton Jordan, the main strategist behind Jimmy Carter's victory in 1976, and Edward J. Rollins, Ronald Reagan's campaign manager in 1984.
A1
Of Perot, taxes, homosexuals and hot water.  A18
Now thinkable and ponderable: a legitimate three-way race.  A19
News analysis: The California voting and the cutting edge.  A20
Women in the News: Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein.  A20  PEROT AND THE VIETNAMESE
Discussions about investment opportunities in Vietnam appear to have overlapped with Ross Perot's efforts to determine whether any American prisoners of war remained alive in Southeast Asia.
A1  VICTORY FOR PUBLIC TELEVISION
The Senate overwhelmingly approved the spending of $1.1 billion over three years for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
The vote, which followed similar action by the House, was a defeat for public television's conservative critics.
A1  GRIM FORECAST ON AIDS
An American-led research group said that international efforts to stop the spread of AIDS had stalled and that the virus that causes the disease threatened to infect as many as 110 million people around the world by the year 2000.
A1  NEW TENSIONS IN LOS ANGELES
In a case similar in many ways to the one that touched off rioting a month ago, a Los Angeles County judge dismissed charges against a police officer who killed two Samoan brothers.
A16  BIG TEST FOR WHITTLE
A California judge is expected to rule today on a lawsuit that seeks to keep Channel One, the news program with commercials aimed at youths, out of the state's public schools.
A16  NEW FORESTRY POLICY
The Forest Service said it planned to reduce the amount of timberland harvested by clear-cutting.
But conservationists said that the alternative timber-cutting practices to be employed by the agency were just as destructive and that the new policy would therefore make little difference.
B10  THREAT OF PHONE STRIKE GROWS
Negotiations between A.T.&amp;T. and unions representing 125,000 workers remained mired in disagreement over wages and job security.
B10  The fate of seven frozen human embryos is in doubt again.
A16  Presbyterians chose a sanctuary-movement figure as chief.
A21  A mystery arose on the racial disparity in infant mortality.
B11  Metropolitan Digest, B1 CONSENSUS ON DISTRICTING
Legislative leaders agreed yesterday on a plan for redrawing New York's Congressional map, overcoming months of discord as they came face to face with the threat that an alternative plan would be imposed by a Federal court.
A1  MEDICAL COURSES IN COMPASSION
At Mount Sinai and at least two other New York hospitals, medical students are taking part in a $1 million program to teach today's doctors about dealing with patients.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-11  Recapturing an uptown elegance.
C1  Siblings are a plus.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C12-20  City Opera postpones a production.
C13  It's official: Broadway had a record season.
C13  Sports B14-19  Baseball: Howe cited desire to get cocaine.
B15  Decision on Steinbrenner near.
B15  Obituaries B11-12  William Gaines, publisher of Mad magazine.
B11  Robert Morley, actor.B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  No EZ answers for cities.
A woman's place: the Senate.
Jersey saves its incumbents.
Topics: Judging Chief Gates.
Letters A22  William Safire: Rabin redux.
A23  Anthony Lewis: Dollars and cynicism.
A23  Gary Milhollin: North Korea's bomb.
A23  Kevin Phillips: The G.O.P. crackup.
A23


Fed's Chief Says Inflation Is Under Control
The Federal Reserve Board's chairman, Alan Greenspan, said today that even as the economy expanded, he did not see inflation re-emerging as an economic threat in the United States in the next two or three years.
"Short of an extraordinary expansion, which does not seem to be embodied in the data, inflation seems to be well contained," Mr.
Greenspan said here at the International Monetary Conference of the American Bankers Association.


European Community Askew After Danes Say No to Union
Shaken by Denmark's rejection of their ambitious plans for political and monetary integration, members of the European Community vowed today to press ahead with the project.
But it is no longer clear how European union might be achieved.


G.M. Selling Its 50% Stake in Robotics Unit
The General Motors Corporation, as part of a push to improve its finances and concentrate on building cars and trucks, said today that it was selling its 50 percent interest in a robotics venture, the GMFanuc Robotics Corporation.
G.
M. also said that it held meetings here Tuesday with about 600 top suppliers to its North American automotive operations to announce intiatives to drive down the costs of building vehicles in North America.
J.
Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, G. M.'s new purchasing director, told suppliers that "we are looking at everything," a G. M. spokeswoman, Antonette Simonetti, said.


Medtronic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Books of The Times; 2 Contrasting Murder Mysteries
Double Deuce  By Robert B. Parker 224 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $19.95.
All Around the Town  By Mary Higgins Clark.
302 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
Needless to say, the action in Robert B. Parker's latest Spenser thriller is spare, fast-paced and exciting.
But "Double Deuce" is about relations between the sexes as much as anything else.
So one might as well describe its plot in terms of three significant developments.
In the first, someone shoots and kills a 14-year-old girl and her 3-month-old daughter in front of a Boston housing project whose address is 22 Hobart Street (hence the title).
In the second, a television reporter named Jackie Raines joins Spenser and his sidekick, the imperturbable Hawk, in their search for the suspected killers among the youth gangs that terrorize the project.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CHOOSING outdoor house paint can seem an overwhelming challenge, but if you plan to repaint a house and are satisfied with its present colors, you need consider only the kind of paint to use and how much to buy.
Even if you want new colors, a systematic approach can simplify color selection.
To match existing colors, find a paint store offering computerized color analysis and take along a small chip, about an inch square, of each color you wish to duplicate.
Paint stores are listed in the Yellow Pages; those carrying better-known brands usually have color-analyzing equipment.
The service is usually free if you buy paint.


To Recapture an Uptown Elegance
SINCE 1976, Josephine E. Jones has been the proud owner of a house with an unglazed terra-cotta front on West 122d Street, one of seven houses dating from 1887.
Mrs.
Jones has always had two goals: to be sure her daughter, Wendy, got an education -- "I've been a single mother since Wendy was 6 months old," she said -- and to own her own house.
Now that her daughter has been educated (Dalton class of '71, Yale '75, Columbia graduate school '81, now a playwright and English professor), Mrs.
Jones is a bit freer to concentrate on the house.
It is an ambitious project, but having held three jobs at a time, Mrs.
Jones said, "Don't tell me what I can't do."


Sales Gain Of 11.1% for U.S. Vehicles
Sales of domestically built vehicles closed out the month on a strong note, rising 11.1 percent from May 21 to 31 and reinforcing hopes that the automotive sector is finally joining in the overall economic recovery.
Sales of domestically built cars rose 2.1 percent, to 237,400, and sales of domestically built light trucks, a category that includes mini-vans and utility vehicles, rose 27.9 percent, to 158,025.
Together, domestic light vehicle sales totaled 395,425.


TBWA to Glamorize Motorola Computers
For its initial campaign to increase awareness of Motorola Inc.'s line of business computers, TBWA Advertising Inc. in New York will invoke some of the more glamorous uses to which computers can be put.
Four 15-second television commercials, scheduled to begin running on Sunday, will link the computers made by the Motorola Computer Group in Tempe, Ariz., and San Jose, Calif., to computers that "land thousands of planes a day" and "make the CAT scan possible."


A Judge Invalidates Lines For Albany Senate Districts
In a bizarre legal sideshow to the Congressional redistricting battle, a state judge today invalidated the new lines for state Senate elections this fall, acting on a lawsuit that the Republicans who drew up the Senate lines insisted had been kept secret from them.
The judge, Leland DeGrasse, issued a four-page ruling that said there had been "numerous violations" of the state Constitution, including unnecessary crossing of county lines and unequal populations in the 61 Senate districts.
He said the court reserved the right to draw the lines on its own.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Advisors -- Thomas W. Luce 3d; The Team Perot Picked To Head His Campaign
The first assignment that Thomas W. Luce 3d accepted from Ross Perot was to direct legal strategy in the court battles that followed Mr.
Perot's worst beating in business, the 1973 collapse of Dupont Glore Forgan, the Wall Street brokerage firm.
The calamity cost Mr.
Perot $65 million after taxes, and took Mr.
Luce 10 years to conclude, but it forged strong ties between the two native-born Texans.
Since April Mr.
Luce, 51 years old, has headed of Mr.
Perot's Presidential petition campaign.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Monday about Coca-Cola's plans in Eastern and Central Europe misstated its investment intentions.
In the next three years the company plans to invest nearly $1 billion in the region in addition to what it has already committed.


Deborah R. Linfield, Litigation Attorney For Times, Dies at 38
Deborah R. Linfield, a senior litigation attorney for The New York Times Company, died yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 38 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Her family said Ms.
Linfield, who had never smoked, died of lung cancer, which was diagnosed 19 months ago.
She had recently been accepted into a research treatment program conducted by the National Institutes of Health at the Garden State Cancer Center in Newark and had been there last week for an initial treatment with radiated monoclonal antibodies.


Alzheimer's Worsens Life-Support Dilemma; Who Decides Meaning?
To the Editor:
Whatever merits in the charges pending against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian for assisting three women to commit suicide, and I believe they are substantial, the statement by his lawyer, Geoffrey Fieger (news article, May 16), goes beyond anything said so far by Dr.
Kevorkian in his own defense.
I am referring to Mr.
Fieger's post-mortem statement that Mrs.
Williams's "life, for all intents and purposes, was meaningless."


DOUBLE-DIGIT GROWTH SEEN BY I.B.M. IN EAST EUROPE
The International Business Machines Corporation expects double-digit sales growth in Eastern Europe, excluding the former Soviet Union, over the next few years, the chairman of IBM Europe, Renato Riverso, said.
Current annual sales in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Romania and the former Yugoslavia are around $300 million, he said.


For a Livelier Read
THE company that brought "Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?" to the computer-game universe is now publishing children's books on compact computer disks.
Broderbund Software has begun a Living Books series with "Just Grandma and Me," a picture book by Mercer Mayer that appears in animated color on screen at the click of a mouse.
Children can listen to, and watch, a narrative of this simple story of two critterlike characters at the beach.
Or they can play with the story by using the mouse to make the starfish, say, do a quick, if unlikely, jig.


International Corona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Court Temporarily Halts New Medicaid Co-Payments
A Federal judge has temporarily blocked the first phase of a $550 million reduction in New York State's Medicaid budget in what advocates say is the first in a series of lawsuits intended to modify the cuts.
Judge Charles P. Sifton of Federal District Court in Brooklyn issued a temporary restraining order on Monday, which delays a provision of the new state budget that would have required Medicaid patients to pay at least part of their bills as of June 1.


On the Business Stage, Mixed Reviews for Lotus's Chief
For months, when Jim P. Manzi has looked forward to the Lotus Development Corporation's 10th-anniversary blowout next week at the Boston Garden, he has dreamed about sharing the stage with his lifelong hero, the singer Ray Charles.
But now, he will have even more to celebrate.
On Tuesday the world's largest computer company, I.B.M., announced that it would incorporate two relatively new Lotus software programs into its networking strategy for personal computers.
The move not only promises to enhance the market position of the Lotus programs, but may also vindicate Mr.
Manzi's effort in recent years, often criticized, to find new products beyond the popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet program that made Lotus one of the largest software publishers.


3,500 Degrees Are Awarded In Queens
The president of Queens College asked this year's class of 3,500 graduates yesterday to embrace and nurture "family values" to counter increasing tension and violence bewteen ethnic and racial groups.
"This has been a year of hatred, and bitter ethnic and racial conflict throughout the world," the president, Dr.
Shirley Strum Kenny, said.


Topics of The Times; Rash Rush to Star Wars
The rush to deploy Star Wars defenses never did make much strategic sense.
Now the Pentagon's chief program analyst concludes that hasty deployment could lead to defective defenses.
His judgment invites Congress to cancel its commitment to begin deployment as early as 1996.
In an internal report, David Chu, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for program analysis and evaluation, warned that if the $35 billion anti-missile program proceeds as planned, forgoing rigorous testing, it is "almost certain to suffer early, significant cost growth and schedule slippage."


Locating Obsolete Flatware Patterns
"IT offends no one," Beverly Bremer said.
Mrs.
Bremer, who owns the Beverly Bremer Silver Shop in Atlanta, was discussing the appeal of Chantilly, a silver pattern produced by Gorham since 1898.
Even though Chantilly is still made, adding matching pieces to an existing set can be a problem.
Knife-blade styles have changed over the years, for one thing.
"There are lots of different Chantilly blades," Mrs.
Bremer said, ticking off a long list.
"If you inherited your mother's pattern and wanted to buy more knives, you'd need to know exactly which blade she had."


Blazers Find Jordan Out of Their Class
Michael Jordan has an open invitation to try to do it all over again Friday night.
At least, that was Clyde Drexler's low-key challenge after Jordan scored 39 points, most of them from outside, in tonight's 122-89 opener of the National Basketball Association finals.
"That shot will be available to him in Game 2," Drexler said, over and over again, after Jordan had shot 16 for 27, including 6 of 10 from the 3-point range, most of it with Drexler as the defender of record.


Technology Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Ralphs Grocery Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Hoge Named Editor Of Foreign Affairs
James F. Hoge Jr., former publisher and president of The New York Daily News, was apppointed editor of Foreign Affairs magazine yesterday.
He succeeds William Hyland, the editor since 1983, who announced in February that he would step down in the fall.


A's Use Long Ball To Defeat Red Sox
Athletics 7, Red Sox 6
OAKLAND, Calif., June 3 (AP) -- Jose Canseco hit two home runs, Mark McGwire hit his major league-leading 20th homer and Terry Steinbach broke a sixth-inning tie with a two-run single today as the Oakland Athletics beat the Boston Red Sox, 7-6.
Canseco hit a two-run homer in the first off John Dopson and added a bases-empty homer in the third, his 12th this season.
McGwire also homered in the third.


Father Testifies on Details of Case Against Swiss Au Pair
On the telephone, the Swiss au pair said: "Fire. Fire."
Those were the words, William Fischer told a jury here today, that sent him rushing home to learn that his 3-month-old daughter had been fatally burned.


Alzheimer's Worsens Life-Support Dilemma; Not the Ruling's Fault
To the Editor:
"New York Rule Compounds Dilemma Over Life Support" (front page, May 12) illustrates difficulties faced by hopelessly ill patients and their families.
The ruling of New York State's highest court in the case of Mary O'Connor should not be blamed, but rather the decision's misapplication.
Judge Sol Wachtler, author of the decision, has stated in lectures, publications and in an interview in your pages that the clear and convincing standard of evidence necessary to terminate life support does not necessarily apply to all other cases.


Universal Holding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rodgers Released From Hospital
California Angels Manager BUCK RODGERS was released from Centinela Hospital Medical Center in Inglewood, Calif., yesterday, 10 days after undergoing surgery for injuries sustained in the team's bus accident in New Jersey last month.
Rodgers, 53 years old, was the most seriously injured of 12 players, coaches and staff members in the crash of one of two buses taking the Angels from New York to Baltimore early May 21.
He suffered a broken elbow and knee in the accident and was operated on three days later.
Rodgers isn't expected to return to his job on a full-time basis for at least two months. (AP)


VERIFONE DEVELOPS INNOVATIVE CHECK-READING DEVICE
Verifone Inc., a maker of check and credit card verification systems, introduced what it said was the first commercial application of neural-network chip technology.
Such chips mimic the way the human brain processes information, including the ability to learn, and are expected to find many uses in artificial vision and voice recognition.


Going Beyond Belief From the 3-Point Range
After Chicago's 122-89 victory over Portland, Michael Jordan, still dazed by the way he had scored 39 points, slowly made his way to the Bulls' locker room.
He had scored 35 points in the first half to help the Bulls gain a 66-51 lead at intermission.


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Pamida Holdings Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Rio Planner: A Magnate Who Meditates
On a spring morning in Stockholm 20 years ago, Maurice Strong, a self-made Canadian multimillionaire, says, he embarked on a "journey of hope," one that has now brought him to this steamy Latin American city at the beginning of what passes for winter in the Southern Hemisphere.
The start of that journey was the first world environmental conference the United Nations had held, which Mr.
Strong organized.
It was a successful meeting that elevated environmental concerns to the international agenda for the first time.
And it made Mr.
Strong a natural choice to organize the Earth Summit, which opened here today.
Building Coalitions
Since 1989, when Javier Perez de Cuellar, then the United Nations Secretary General, asked him to plan the Rio summit meeting, Mr.
Strong has been crisscrossing the world, building coalitions.


Xerox Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


People
*
Ralph L. Thompson, 43 years old, was named president, chief operating officer and managing partner at Fahlgren/Martin, Atlanta.
He was previously executive vice president and chief operating officer at the Martin Agency, Richmond, where a spokeswoman said there were no immediate plans for a successor.


Mears Will Skip Race in Detroit
RICK MEARS, still sore from two crashes last month at Indianapolis, will miss the Detroit Grand Prix this weekend.
ROGER PENSKE, owner of the Marlboro Team Penske, said yesterday that PAUL TRACY, the team's test driver and part-time race starter from Canada, will join EMERSON FITTIPALDI, the other Penske regular, at Detroit, replacing Mears. (AP)


SkyWest Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Diana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Army Reprimands 3 In Gulf War Death From 'Friendly Fire'
Three Army officers have received letters of reprimand for their role in the accidental death of an American sergeant in the Persian Gulf war, a Pentagon official said today.
Overruling lower-level Army investigators, Gen.
E.
H.
Burba, commander of American combat forces based in the continental United States, decided that three officers in the Third Armored Cavalry had acted "negligently" by ignoring the boundaries of their battlefield zones, the official said, speaking on the condition that he not be identified.


INSIDE
Serbs, Too, Recount The Yugoslav Horror
In accounts that appeared to confirm that atrocities against civilians are being committed by all sides in the ethnic war, Serbs from an area outside Sarajevo said Muslim Slav and Croatian gunmen swept through six villages last week, executing Serbian men and burning homes.
Page A3.
Earth Summit Opens
The United Nations Secretary General asked that military spending be shifted to the environment.
Page A10.
Clue to Human Evolution
Two ancient skulls suggest that modern humans may have evolved independently in different parts of the world, scientists say.
Page A8.
More Jobs Are on the Way
After a stream of layoffs, businesses are confident enough to map broad new hiring and expansion.
Page D1.
Bulls (Jordan) Win Opener
Paced by Michael Jordan's 35 first-half points, Chicago routed Portland, 122-89,in the title opener.
Page B15.
Publisher of Mad Dies
William M. Gaines, who as publisher of Mad magazine conferred immortality on a gap-toothed cover boy, is dead.
He was 70 years old.
Page B11.
Robert Morley Is Dead
The actor of the British and American stage and screen, best known for his comically pompous and jovial roles, died at 84.
Page B12.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Politics' Cutting Edge; Californians Making Political Waves That May Wash Over Nation by Fall
Once again, Californians are at the cutting edge of national trends, pushing non-interest in politics to the outer limits.
The turnout for Tuesday's primary was the lowest for a Presidential primary in more than half a century.
But those who did vote made waves, with Democrats nominating two women for United States Senate seats and an extraordinary number of women for Congress and the state Legislature.
In what one official portrayed as a gesture to the ultimate outsider, 18 women, Democratic and Republican, were nominated for the state's 52 seats in Congress, 15 of which are open.


Pall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Bonilla Packs His Bat and Emotions for Three Rivers
Bobby Bonilla stood at his locker Tuesday night and stared at his travel case, the club's trip to Pittsburgh less than 12 hours away.
What to pack?


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.89
5.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.69
3.72
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.83
3.85
5.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.97
6.97
8.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.86
8.38
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.70
9.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.65
7.20
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


London Exchange Names New Chairman
Liffe, the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange, has named Nicholas Durlacher chairman.
He succeeds David Burton, 55 years old, who has been chairman since 1988 and who continues his role as an executive director of the investment bankers S. G. Warburg &amp; Company.
Mr.
Durlacher, 46, is chairman of Barclays de Zoete Wedd Futures and has been on the board of Liffe since 1984, serving as deputy chairman since 1988.
He is currently chairman of the exchange's finance committee.


Philip Dunne, 84, Screenwriter And an Opponent of Blacklisting
Philip Dunne, a leading screenwriter who was a founder of the Screen Writers Guild and a vigorous opponent of the House Committee on Un-American Activities in the 1950's, died on Tuesday at his home in Malibu, Calif.
He was 84 years old.
He died of cancer, said a daughter, Philippa Dunne.


William Gaines, Publisher of Mad Magazine Since '52, Is Dead at 70
William M. Gaines, who as publisher of Mad magazine conferred immortality on a goofy-faced, gaptoothed cover boy and the "What -- me worry?" motto, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70 years old.
He died in his sleep, editors at Mad said.


New York City Begins Talks With Its Unions
A broad coalition of municipal labor unions, representing 200,000 New York City workers, began contract negotiations with the Dinkins administration yesterday by demanding a raise, job security and improved health and welfare benefits, despite an earlier warning by Mayor David N. Dinkins that the city had no money and would grant no raises without productivity gains.
The talks come while all the city's labor unions are working without contracts and have not had wage increases for more than a year, raising the possibility of a work slowdown or other job action by irate unions.
They have already threatened to withhold their political support from Mayor Dinkins in next year's election.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Strategy; Perot Makes Major Parties Do Some Major Rethinking
With the primaries behind them, strategists in both parties are surveying the terra incognita of a three-way race that could redraw the electoral map and test the assumptions of a generation of Presidential campaigns.
Ross Perot's surge in opinion polls could very easily subside, but it is already causing a fundamental rethinking of strategy in both major parties.


Market Place; McDonnell Stock: Delayed Descent
LAST fall, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation appeared to have put its financial woes behind it, and the stock reached its highest price in several years.
The large number of short-sellers who were betting against the aerospace company started bailing out, in some cases with big losses.
But they jumped too quickly.
For the last few months, McDonnell Douglas's shares have been diving faster than an F-15, and they continued downward yesterday.
They closed on the New York Stock Exchange at $39.125, down $1.625 on the day.
The price has declined $20 a share in a month, and since last fall has lost more than half its market value.
The decline has been so sharp that McDonnell Douglas, which is based in St.
Louis, is considering stepping in to start buying shares itself.
Herbert J. Lanese, the company's chief financial officer, said in an interview yesterday that with the stock trading at 35 percent of its book value a share buyback would make sense.
He declined to say how many shares the company might purchase or at what prices.
"We've got some cash," Mr.
Lanese said.
"We're considering going into the market for some of our own shares."
Mr.
Lanese said the loss of investor confidence had been exaggerated by thin trading.
Of McDonnell Douglas's 39 million shares, about half are owned by employee stock plans or McDonnell family trusts.
As a result, only 18 million shares or so are available for active trading, and Mr.
Lanese said any active buying or selling had an outsized effect on the price.
But to many investors, the problems extend well beyond liquidity.
For starters there is the growing uncertainty over McDonnell Douglas's chances of cobbling together a deal, announced with great fanfare in November, to sell up to 40 percent of its commercial aircraft business for $2 billion to a nascent aerospace company in Taiwan.
There are also nagging concerns about the ability of the company to control cost overruns on its largest Pentagon contract, the C-17 transport plane, and head off mounting Congressional opposition to the program.
If those problems are not enough, the company is being battered by the depressed worldwide market for jetliners, a result of the hard times being suffered by airlines.
Apparently disenchanted by McDonnell Douglas's continuing troubles, one of its largest institutional shareholders, the Magellan Fund, started selling big chunks of the stock in the middle of May, including a 500,000-share block on May 14, traders said.
Seeing profit in the downward spiral, short-sellers have surged back in recent weeks.
Mr.
Lanese said short interest in the stock might now be as high as 3.5 million shares, up from 3.2 million on May 15 and just over 2 million as recently as February.
The eroding confidence among investors has also extended to their faith in John McDonnell, the chairman and chief executive.
"From the outside looking in, it looks like they haven't made enough of a change in the corporate culture and enough of a change in the way they make decisions to give people confidence in the company's prospects," said Howard A. Rubel, an analyst at C. J. Lawrence in New York.
"There's a management core there that's excellent, but they're also being burdened by what I would call a less decisive c.e.o. than is appropriate."
The losses suffered by most airlines and the end of the cold war have made for a tumultuous time for all military contractors and aerospace companies.
In McDonnell's case, much of the uncertainty centers on the proposed deal with Taiwan Aerospace, which appears to be collapsing.
Without the $2 billion that deal would provide, McDonnell Douglas will be unable to afford to develop a planned jumbo jetliner, the MD-12.
And without the MD-12, McDonnell Douglas will be unable to remain competitive with its rivals in commercial aircraft, the Boeing Company and Airbus Industrie, the European consortium.
The question now is whether McDonnell Douglas's share price is bottoming out, creating a buying opportunity.
"Not yet," said Lawrence M. Harris, an analyst at Kemper Securities in Chicago.
"It's possible there could continue to be some slippage from these levels, not because of changed fundamentals but simply because of investor psychology."
Mr.
Rubel of C. J. Lawrence put it in even blunter terms: "Their performance hasn't given me the confidence to stick my neck out to get people to buy the stock."


Krabbe Plans Return on Home Track
Germany's double world sprint champion, KATRIN KRABBE, plans to return to action for the first time since the lifting of her drug suspension at a meet on her home track in Neubrandenburg, Germany, on June 13.
Krabbe, who is waiting to see whether officials will allow her to run at this year's Barcelona Olympics, will compete over 100 meters in regional championships, the meet organizer, ULRICH KRUEGER, said. (Reuters)


CENTOCOR PLANS NEW TRIAL OF TOXIC SHOCK DRUG
Centocor Inc. said it would begin a new clinical test of Centoxin, its flagship drug for the treatment of toxic shock.
The Food and Drug Administration had found insufficient data to approve the drug in April after learning that Centocor had made changes in analyzing data midway through a previous trial.
The F.D.A. action sent the company's stock plummeting and led to the ouster of its co-chief executive.
Centocor shares gained $3 each yesterday, closing at $14.625 in over-the-counter trading.


Astral Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Exiled Haiti Leader Chides U.S. on Response to Coup
The exiled President of Haiti asked the United States and other countries in the hemisphere today to stop talking about democracy and start taking direct action to restore it, beginning with the interception of oil tankers bound for Port-au-Prince.
The exile, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said that sooner or later a naval blockade of Haiti might be necessary to bring down the military Government that ousted him eight months ago.


Review/Film; Is Women's Anger a Laughing Matter?
How do female stand-up comics differ from their male counterparts?
What does comedy mean to them?
How do they feel about their audiences and about being able to make those audiences laugh?
These not altogether burning questions are addressed by Gail Singer's "Wisecracks," a full-length documentary that is noticeably bigger than its subject.
Still, Ms.
Singer manages to offer an interesting overview, not to mention scattered moments of insight and humor.
The two dozen comics who are featured here constitute a wide range of talents and attitudes.
Not surprisingly, some are much more adroit than others, both on and off the stage.
Analyzing their art is not the normal purview of many of them, and the film is seldom selective enough in choosing which of their conversational comments to include.
A remark like "Because laughter is such an affirmative thing, it's never a negative thing" contributes little to anyone's understanding of what comedy is and why it matters.


Essay; Israel: Rabin Redux
The legendary Brooklyn Democratic leader Hymie Shorenstein used to refer to F.D.R. as "the Staten Island Ferry." Asked why, he replied: "You know how when the boat glides into the ferry slip, it drags in all the garbage from the harbor behind it? For the rest of our candidates, F.D.R. is the Staten Island Ferry."
The election in Israel three weeks from now centers on one man: Yitzhak Rabin.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Los Angeles; Voters Back Measure to Control Police Force
City officials expressed hope today that Los Angeles had taken a first step toward healing its ailing police force, with the overwhelming passage on Tuesday of a ballot measure that would bring it under political control.
"This victory signifies the overwhelming desire of our people for an accountable police department that fights crime instead of being held hostage to the whims of an arrogant, divisive chief of police," Mayor Tom Bradley said in a statement published today.


Review/Theater; The Holocaust's Effect on a Family
Deb Filler, the robust, bushy-haired narrator of "Punch Me in the Stomach," aims for the impossible in her autobiographical monologue at Theater Off Park.
Brought up in New Zealand, or "the land of no blintzes," as she calls it, she is the daughter of a Holocaust survivor.
In her comic memoir, written with Alison Summers, who also directed, she interweaves her memories of growing up in New Zealand with the story of her father's imprisonment at Auschwitz.
The 90-minute monologue is an extended comic shtick in which Ms.
Filler impersonates many members of her large Jewish family.
She mimics accents well enough to be able to recreate a whole party of colorful relatives talking at once.


Pop and Jazz in Review
John Scofield  Guitarist Sweet Basil
The guitarist John Scofield's first set on Tuesday night went slack quickly.
Mr.
Scofield is a tremendously exciting guitarist who has developed his own harmonic vocabulary and can play with a furious sense of swing.
But he and his group -- Joe Lovano on tenor saxophone, Dennis Erwin on bass, Bill Stewart on drums -- had done absolutely no arranging for the show, and the tunes were little more than a springboard for endless improvisations.
Four tunes took up one long hour.
Not that anybody in the group played badly.
Mr.
Scofield played tricky and dense improvisations and Mr.
Lovano, one of New York's better saxophonists, filled his lines with abrupt jolts and declarations.
The rhythm section was fairly interactive, and Mr.
Stewart maintained the swing with some logical motif building.
But the lack of arrangements was accentuated by the group's complete lack of dynamics, a situation that mirrored pop music more than jazz.
Once a tempo had been set, on it ran.
Once the volume had been set, it rarely changed, and Mr.
Stewart didn't seem to want to vary the shading behind each soloist, which would have structured the performances.


BASEBALL: Decisions Are Near on Howe and Steinbrenner; Vincent Close To a Ruling On Owner's Fate
Commissioner Fay Vincent is expected to announce next week his decision on George Steinbrenner's request to be reinstated to active duty with the Yankees.
Barring some last-minute negative development, Vincent is expected to allow Steinbrenner to return to the team sometime next year.
Vincent declined yesterday to discuss his thinking or his plan for an announcement.
But he labeled as "horsefeathers" a radio report that he and the deactivated Yankee owner had reached an agreement.


Value City Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Wickes Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Exiled Haitian Leader Calls for Muscle in Embargo


U.S. Forest Service Increases Protection of Public Timber
After three years of studying alternate methods of cutting trees, the United States Forest Service said today that it was directing its foresters to reduce substantially the amount of timberland harvested by clear cutting.
The order, to be issued on Thursday by F. Dale Robertson, chief of the Forest Service, is meant to increase protective management of the 191 million acres of national forests.


Brady Invites Latin Nations
The Treasury Department announced today that Secretary Nicholas F. Brady had invited the finance ministers of 11 Caribbean and Latin American nations to Washington to discuss how to spur trade and economic growth in the hemisphere.
Treasury officials said the meeting would seek to persuade the ministers to take new steps in President Bush's Enterprise for the Americas Initiative, to promote market-oriented reforms as well as investment.


Public Storage Properties XV reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Frito-Lay Inc., Dallas, moved the last of its product accounts from Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham Agency, Dallas, to two sibling Omnicom Group shops.
DDB Needham's Chicago office, which handles accounts like Fritos and Cheetos, was awarded Tostitos and Rold Gold Pretzels.
And BBDO New York, which handles accounts like Lay's and Ruffles, assumed all responsibilities for Doritos, as well as Smartfood and new products.
At the same time, Tracy-Locke was named Frito-Lay's national agency of record for promotions.


A Surprise In Chairman At Salomon
In recent months, Warren E. Buffett has dropped various hints about the kind of person he would select to replace him as chairman of Salomon Inc.: an experienced businessman, a knowledgeable investor, a seasoned Wall Street person.
He chose none of the above.
Yesterday Salomon named Robert E. Denham, its general counsel, who came to Wall Street to join Salomon only nine months ago.
Mr.
Buffett had called on the 46-year-old career lawyer to sort out the legal mess left behind after the disclosure of the company's role in a Treasury auction scandal.


Economic Watch; Hiring Russian Scientists: Exploitation of the Workers?
A dollar does not buy much these days -- unless you are in the market for a superbly trained physicist, software designer or materials engineer working in the former Soviet Union.
And the opportunity is not being ignored by the masters of capitalism: Last week A.T.&amp; T. and Corning Inc. announced separate deals that would link Russian specialists in glass technology to major producers of fiber-optic cable and other glass materials in the United States.


East New York, Under Siege; Life and Death in an Area Caught in Its Own Crossfire
At 14 years old, Mario Jaime can recite the calibers and names of a dozen semiautomatic guns and assault weapons he has seen on the streets of his East New York neighborhood.
His older brother was shot in the stomach by an intruder in the family's apartment a few months ago.
A mural across the littered bullet-pocked street where he lives recalls Diamond, a friend shot more than 10 times in the corner bodega a year ago.
Diamond was wearing a bulletproof vest.
It did no good.
When a wild volley of gunfire erupted from a rooftop Wednesday night, wounding three people, including a 3-year-old girl on her baby sitter's bed, Mario was not surprised by the violence -- only by the outside attention that it drew.
Making It Is Making It Through Alive


Penn Varsity Throws Record For 2,000 Meters Into Lake
Ideal rowing conditions and the new oars with the "hatchet" blades were mainly responsible today for the fastest times ever recorded at the Intercollegiate Rowing Association's regatta.
In crew, the concept of record times lacks respect because of the variables of wind and current, especially on river courses.
But the I.R.A. regatta has a 40-year history here on Onondaga Lake, so the Penn varsity's time of 5 minutes 40.8 seconds for the 2,000-meter course, in use since 1968, had significance.


Bonilla Learns That He Can't Go Home Again
Next season, Barry Bonds could wind up being booed at Three Rivers Stadium as badly as Bobby Bonilla was tonight.
Chances are Bonds, who stands to be a free agent beyond the financial reach of the Pirates, will be booed worse.
For 1992, though, Pittsburgh is behind Barry Bonds, and to date the lavishly talented left fielder is the reason the Pirates are ahead of everyone else in the National League East.


Carl Stotz, 82, Founder of Little League Baseball
Carl E. Stotz, the lumberyard clerk who stumbled over a lilac bush during a backyard game of catch with his two young nephews in 1938 and came up with the idea for Little League baseball, died yesterday at Williamsport Hospital in Pennsylvania.
He was 82 years old and died of a heart attack, his family said.


U.S. Struggles With Yugoslav Participation
While the International Olympic Committee and Spain are deciding if, or under what conditions, athletes from Yugoslavia will be allowed to compete in the Barcelona Games, other governments including the United States, are reviewing a similar problem.
This week in Washington, State Department officials have been formulating a policy that would set forth conditions to allow Yugoslav nationals to compete in events in the United States.
It's a tricky question because of the recent United Nations sanctions against Yugoslavia.
As part of the resolution, all member countries are required to take "necessary steps" to prevent anyone representing Yugoslavia from participating in sports events.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Charges of insider trading were filed by the S.E.C. against seven corporate executives and investors.
Among those accused of using confidential corporate information for personal gain were a former Bear, Stearns director who is the husband of the automobile heiress Charlotte Ford, and the co-founder of Revlon cosmetics.  [ Page A1. ]
The insider charges offer a possible explanation for what had previously been an inexplicable series of stock-price run-ups.  [ D1. ]





INSIDE
Polish Cabinet Dismissed
The Polish Parliament dismissed the Government after Interior Ministry officials distributed a list of reputed Communist collaborators.
Page A7.
Health Care Compromise
The judge who struck down New Jersey's way of financing health care for the poor offered to back off if state officials stepped in.
Page B1.
Budget Woes in Trenton
First, New Jersey learned its budget gap wasn't so bad.
Then, it learned its bond rating might be worse.
Page B4.
A Trade Crisis Averted
An 11th-hour agreement provided ways for the U.S. to increase its sales of computer chips in Japan.
Page D1.
Love Me Slender
The people have spoken.
They prefer the younger, slimmer Elvis as the image on a new stamp, and the Postal Service will comply.
Page A10.


PARLIAMENT OUSTS POLAND'S PREMIER
The Polish Parliament voted overwhelmingly early this morning to dismiss the Prime Minister and his Government after Interior Ministry officials released a list of people it said had collaborated with the Communists.
The Prime Minister, Jan Olszewski, whose five-month tenure was an embattled one, had made a last-minute attempt on Thursday to derail a no-confidence vote by distributing the list to the chairmen of the 29 parties in the lower house of Parliament.


Accounts
*
Stella D'oro Biscuit Co., New York, to Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, New York, for the breadstick and cookie company's $3 million account, previously at Firestone &amp; Associates, which recently moved to West Palm Beach, Fla.


THE EARTH SUMMIT;
The World Bank has proposed that the United States and other aid-giving countries contribute $5 billion to a fund that would provide virtually free grants to help the world's poorest countries protect their ecological systems, officials disclosed here today.
The plan is being pressed by the World Bank president, Lewis T. Preston, who wrote to the donor countries last week explaining his plan to add a $5 billion "earth increment" to a World Bank subsidiary known as the International Development Agency when its funds are replenished next year.


Politicians Do Politicians' Work
After months of dickering and then hiding behind the courts, New York State legislative leaders have agreed on a redistricting plan for New York's 31 seats in Congress.
They did so only because the alternative was worse.
A Federal court plan would have sacrificed several incumbents and risked minority representation.
But regardless of the motive, if the new agreement holds up, at least politicians will finally have done what is inherently politicians' work.


A New Head for Oregon Utility
The Portland General Corporation has named its president, Richard Reiten, to be the president and chief operating officer of its principal subsidiary, Portland General Electric, in a big restructuring of the utility company.
Mr.
Reiten will assume the utility's top job in December, succeeding Kay Stepp, who will remain as president until July 1 and serve as a consultant for the rest of the year.


Corrections
A report by Reuters in the Company News column of Business Day on Wednesday about the purchase of a stake in Emerson Radio misidentified the purchaser.
It was Shigemasa Otake, a major shareholder of the Otake Trading Company of Japan, not the Otake company itself.


Olympia's Bank Debts Detailed
Many banks do not have adequate protection on their loans to Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. and would face heavy losses if their collateral were liquidated today, according to court documents filed by the insolvent Toronto-based property giant.
The papers, detailing which banks belong to which syndicates and the full extent of the security backing the loans, provided a unusual snapshot of the financing operations of the secretive, privately owned developer.


Entwining 1967 War And Love
Alexandre Arcady's intermittently stirring film, "For Sasha," aspires to be something like the "Dr. Zhivago" of the Arab-Israeli war in 1967.
The movie, which opens today, teems with characters who are vital and attractive and whose personal dramas are given an extra romantic weight by Philippe Sarde's overripe symphonic score.
The movie, which is set on an Israeli kibbutz just below the Golan Heights, portrays a utopian community where hard work and lofty dreams have turned the desert landscape into a bountiful Eden.
The camera lingers sensuously over deep blue skies and golden sunsets and on the shining faces of the people who have brought about this transformation.


Denmark Needn't Derail Europe
Danish voters shocked the European Community by voting down ambitious plans for economic and political union.
But the immediate crisis need not halt the lowering of barriers within Western Europe.
And if Denmark's partners adapt to the vote imaginatively, they could make it easier for the Community to reach out to the formerly Communist East.
Denmark specifically rejected the Maastricht treaty, which provides, among other things, for the introduction of a common European currency by 1999.
The referendum is the clearest sign yet that Europeans are uneasy about surrendering the attributes of sovereignty to a centralized authority.
In several countries, this unease is heightened by suspicions that the new Europe may be dominated by Germany and other big states.


Treasury Securities Are Becalmed
Prices of Treasury securities were essentially unchanged on nearly non-existent volume yesterday, as credit market participants curbed buying and selling until after May employment data are released this morning.
"The past two days have been hideous," one Government securities trader said.
"For the most part, people are washed out and waiting for Friday."


Favorites In Belmont Draw 3 Posts Nearest Rail
Eleven colts, including two from Europe, were entered yesterday in the 124th running of the Belmont Stakes.
No Triple Crown will be at stake tomorrow, but a record purse of $764,800 plus a $1 million bonus will make this the richest running of New York's classic race.
In the second feature of a day of features at Belmont Park, seven horses will run in the $500,000 Nassau County Handicap, the fifth event of the nine that compose the American Championship Racing Series for senior handicap horses.
They will include Hammer's 3-year-old Dance Floor, a graduate of the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness, who will skip the mile-and-a-half Belmont to challenge his elders at a more negotiable mile and one-eighth.
But the stars of the cast will be two New York favorites, Strike the Gold and Fly So Free, hometown neighbors and rivals for the last two seasons.


Care for Environment Doesn't Hurt Economy; Democracy Overridden
To the Editor:
The Bush Administration's use of appointed, unelected "Cabinet level" panels to eviscerate major environmental laws deserves more scrutiny.
The stunning "override" of the Endangered Species Act by a panel of Bush appointees (front page, May 15) and the efforts of Vice President Quayle's Council on Competitiveness, another so-called Cabinet-level panel, to gut the Clean Air Act should prompt vigorous debate on whether or not the power exercised by these panels is legitimate or a flagrant abuse of the governmental process.
More is at stake than foul air and loss of old-growth forests.
When people follow due process and work for a law, and it is enacted by their elected representatives, they have every right to expect it to remain intact.
When laws are systematically dismantled by panels that are havens for industry lobbyists and party fund raisers who could not advance their agendas through the legislative process, fundamental questions arise.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Perot to Testify in Senate on Americans Missing in Southeast Asia
The Senate committee on American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia today called Ross Perot to appear at a hearing on June 30 to answer questions about all aspects of his efforts to find and free Americans he believes have been held since the Vietnam War.
Some senators are said to be pressing for Mr.
Perot to explain his discussion of business opportunities with Hanoi.
This includes the decision by Vietnam's Foreign Ministry in June 1990 to designate Mr.
Perot and his company as business agents for Vietnam after diplomatic relations were normalized.
That has not happened.


Review/Theater; Reversing the Stereotypes in the War of the Sexes
There's still pleasure to be found in the glossy Hollywood romantic comedies of the unabashedly sexist 1950's, but it's a guilty pleasure.
Entertaining as they may be, "Pillow Talk" and "The Seven-Year Itch" and even Billy Wilder's sublime "Apartment" relegate women to the stereotypes of prig (Doris Day), bimbo (Marilyn Monroe) and victim (Shirley MacLaine).
In "Spike Heels," a new comedy at the Second Stage, a young writer named Theresa Rebeck wonders if the beloved old gags of that era might be dusted off for retrograde fun even as the sexual roles are given a modern reversal.
Her heroine is the smart cookie of the piece.
It's the men's turn to be the virgins and tramps.
The idea is wicked and promising, but the execution is a letdown despite a sexy cast that features Saundra Santiago, Kevin Bacon and Tony Goldwyn as its principal triangle.
The problem is not Ms.
Rebeck's feminist agenda or her plot.
As the working-class Georgie, the Boston secretary played by Ms.
Santiago, bounces between her decent, bookish, chaste downstairs neighbor (Mr. Goldwyn, in the Tony Randall, Tom Ewell or Jack Lemmon role) and the slick lawyer who is her boss (Mr. Bacon, in the Rock Hudson or Fred MacMurray role), the complications are no less amusing for being familiar.
And Georgie's highly developed sense of self-esteem is just the contemporary wild card to keep Ms.
Rebeck's permutations on the vintage comic formulas from reaching predictable resolutions.


People Say Don't Be Cruel to Image: They Like Younger Elvis
Delores Shackley stood in the crowd of television crews and Elvis fans gathered at Graceland mansion this morning, crossing her arms in frustration.
Not because she had to wait in long lines to swoon and reminisce with the thousands of other fans who arrive here daily to see the rock star's estate.
Not because Elvis memorabilia is as pricey here as blue suede shoes.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that will be closing soon.
Closing This Weekend
"A SMALL FAMILY BUSINESS," Music Box Theater, 239 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Lynne Meadow directs Alan Ayckbourn's comedy.
Final performance: Sunday at 3 P.M.
Performance times: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"NOWHERE," Ubu Repertory Theater, 15 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
Reine Barteve's drama about an Armenian woman trying to overcome her past.
Final performance: Sunday at 3 P.M.
Performance times: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 679-7562.
"JULIE HALSTON'S LIFETIME OF COMEDY," Actors' Playhouse, 100 Seventh Avenue, at West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village.
A one-woman show, directed by Kenneth Elliott.
Final performance: Sunday at 7 P.M.
Performance times: tonight at 8:30; tomorrow at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $24.
Information: (212) 691-6226.
"WIND AND GLACIER VOICES: THE NATIVE AMERICAN FILM AND MEDIA CELEBRATION," Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
A series of short films shown in screenings of one and a half hours, including "Navajo Talking Picture," directed by Arlene Bowman, and "Starting Fire With Gunpowder," by William Hansen and David Poisey.
Call for exact films and times.
Admission: $7; $4 for the elderly at weekday matinees.
Information: (212) 875-5601.


Judge Stays Rate Ruling For Hospitals
The Federal judge who struck down New Jersey's system of financing health care for indigent patients last week said today that he would suspend his action if the Governor and the Legislature agreed to deal with the issue at a special summer session.
Judge Alfred M. Wolin of Federal District Court said he recognized the "catalogue of horrors" that would result from his ruling last week, including immediate financial crises at 20 inner-city hospitals serving 900,000 people.
He stayed its effect until June 12 to give Gov.
Jim Florio and legislative leaders time to deliver to him a signed "statement of principles" agreeing to conduct the special session with a single focus: health care.


Having a Moment in the Sun


If That Man Is Following Her, Connecticut Is Going to Follow Him
Erin Tavegia was 15 years old when a man started following her back and forth from her high school in Meriden, Conn., a couple of years ago.
Erin and her family were terrorized by the man, who would park his car outside their house and appear at all hours of the day and night.
As Erin walked to school, he would drive slowly behind her, sometimes inviting her to join him in the car.
When she left school, he was in the parking lot or nearby, and would drive behind her as she walked home.


Foreign Affairs; Silver Lining for Eurodoom
Very bad week for Europe, the troubadours of doom will sing for weeks.
Perhaps the idea of a united Western Europe was buried in Denmark.
Southeastern Europe is going up in flames.
And the great Russian experiment in democracy and free enterprise is collapsing.
But these troubles could prove beneficial.
European leaders have been marching along with dreams of their cohesiveness that belie reality.
Reformist technicians in Russia have been out of touch with suffering workers.
The leaders need wake-up calls to address tough questions about ends and means, questions that have become politically incorrect even to ask.
Midcourse corrections are now in order.


Care for Environment Doesn't Hurt Economy; Where's the Evidence?
To the Editor:
In your May 8 front-page article on the global warming negotiations at the United Nations in preparation for the Earth Summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro, you report: "Scientists who are advising the talks here say that if the heat-trapping greenhouse gases continue to build up in the atmosphere at present rates, the earth's climate will warm by 3 to 8 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of the next century, with possibly catastrophic effects on the world's climate."
John B. Oakes (Op-Ed, May 8) writes of "a catastrophe in the making that, unless checked, will raise sea levels, drown coastal areas and change agricultural production before the end of the 21st century."


Giuliani Says New Budget Fails to Cut Spending
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former and future Republican candidate for mayor of New York City, yesterday criticized the $29.5 billion budget approved this week by the City Council and Mayor David N. Dinkins, saying it failed to reduce city spending.
Mr.
Giuliani contended that the Mayor and Council had missed an opportunity to trim significantly the size of city government.
He said he would have frozen city spending at current levels and would have reduced the size of the work force of more than 200,000 municipal employees by 10 percent over the next year through attrition.


NATO Sees a Role With Peacekeepers For Eastern Europe
The NATO alliance, searching for a new role after the end of the cold war, agreed in principle today to support peacekeeping operations in violence-ridden areas of Eastern Europe or the former Soviet Union if asked by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In a communique issued at the end of its meeting here, the alliance deplored the continuing violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as in Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan.
But officials of the alliance made clear today that this agreement did not mean that they had decided to intervene, either in the old Yugoslav federation or in former Soviet republics where fighting has erupted.
Ground Troops Mentioned
The NATO ministers also issued a statement condemning Croatian involvement in the violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but blaming the Serbian-controlled Belgrade Government for most of the violence.
Some European ministers said they hoped the implied threat that NATO might eventually become involved would help persuade those responsible for the violence in the Balkans to stop it.


At the Movies
Mythology and the Heart
"I have a penchant for first-time writers," said Tony Bill.
As examples, the producer, director and sometime actor points to David Ward with "The Sting," to Martin Brest with "Going in Style" and to John Patrick Shanley with "Five Corners."


Students Protest Education Budget Cuts


Bill to Aid Former Soviet Lands Is Stuck in Capitol Hill Quagmire
The Bush Administration's multibillion-dollar assistance package for Russia is stalled in Congress, as election-year politics and the Los Angeles riots have sapped much of the enthusiasm for the foreign aid legislation.
Both Administration and Congressional leaders say the bill will not be passed before President Boris N. Yeltsin's meeting with President Bush on June 15 -- as Mr.
Bush had requested in April -- and that they do not know when, or if, it will be approved.


Review/Film; Victorian Inhumanity In Asylums
The opening scenes of "Beautiful Dreamers" offer a harsh reminder of some of the more benighted aspects of Victorian culture.
In a London, Ontario, mental hospital, a patient who has been compulsively masturbating is brutally shackled to a chair to prevent him from touching himself.
At a medical convention in Philadelphia, one doctor smugly demonstrates a crude electrical shock treatment for catatonia, and another passes around a jar of ovaries while delivering a solemn discourse about how their removal will cure "nymphomania and moral insanity."
It is at this gathering that Dr.
Maurice Bucke (Colm Feore), the young Canadian physician who runs the London asylum, first meets the American poet Walt Whitman (Rip Torn).
Both are outraged at the inhumanity being flaunted in the name of medical progress.
After visiting Whitman's home and meeting his mentally disturbed brother, Eddie, whom the poet treats playfully instead of with fear and loathing, Dr.
Bucke invites Whitman to Canada for an extended visit.


Xoma Hit By F.D.A. Decision
The Xoma Corporation was dealt a potentially crippling blow today when the Food and Drug Administration refused to approve the company's flagship drug.
The agency found that the results of two clinical trials of E-5, Xoma's drug to treat septic shock, did not support approval.
The F.D.A. told Xoma that additional clinical testing might be warranted.


Gift May Put Lid on Self-Cleaning Toilets
The self-cleaning public toilets that New York City hopes to install got good reviews today from Barry F. Sullivan, New York City's Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, and several New York business leaders who toured the JCDecaux factory on the outskirts of Paris where they are made.
But it may be impossible for the company to deal with the city because its founder and chief executive, Jean Claude Decaux, has been charged in Lieges, Belgium, with violating a law that forbids political contributions by companies with municipal contracts.


Patrick Peyton, 83, 'Rosary Priest' Who Led Millions in Prayer, Dies
The Rev.
Patrick Peyton, the Roman Catholic priest who coined the saying "the family that prays together stays together" and who fostered prayer by millions of people through radio, television, films and worldwide preaching crusades, died on Wednesday in California.
He was 83 years old and lived in Albany, N.Y.
Father Peyton, who often worked on program productions in California, died of kidney failure at the Little Sisters of the Poor home in Los Angeles, said a spokesman for his organizations, the Family Rosary Crusade and Family Theater Productions.


Restaurants
Before restaurant chefs began touting homey, assertive food as the wave of the 90's, Alison on Dominick was turning out just that for its scores of faithful customers.
This unassuming three-year-old spot in the western fringe of SoHo has survived the crushing recession (and a neighborhood that stumps all but the most seasoned taxi drivers) by offering consistently enticing fare and warm hospitality.
A simple formula indeed but one that is often neglected.
The restaurant is named for its owner, Alison Price, an engaging and vigilant host who oversees a well-disciplined staff.
Since opening day the chef has been Thomas Valenti, whom Miss Price worked with at Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan.


New U.S.-Japan Accord on Semiconductors
In an 11th-hour attempt to head off a trade crisis, Japanese and American electronics companies agreed today on measures aimed at vastly increasing the sale of American semiconductors in Japan this year.
A key part of the plan is that Japan's 10 largest electronics companies, including giants like Hitachi, Toshiba and Sony, will take "emergency special measures" in which they will give American and other non-Japanese suppliers advance information on their need for semiconductor products in the third and fourth quarters.


A Mad World
Mad magazine has changed hardly at all in the last 40 years.
The main reason is that its founder and publisher, William M. Gaines, never outgrew himself either.
Mr.
Gaines, who died Wednesday at age 70, was a rumpled man with stringy hair "styled only by the force of gravity" and a wise adolescent's irreverence for pompous personages and sacred institutions.
In the beginning, Mad parodied other comic books.
Mickey Mouse became Mickey Rodent and the Lone Ranger was left to burn at the stake by his not-so-trusty sidekick, Pronto.


At Last, a Senior Prom Worthy of the Name
WHAT a familiar June scene: the high school cafeteria all decked out with crepe paper, flowers and blue-and-gold balloons, the long array of food for hungry dancers, the band on stage, everyone pretty well dressed up for the Big School Event, which helps make June the favorite month of every local hairdresser.
Cameras and smiles flash everywhere as the music drifts out the door past the towering local superintendent and the shorter principal standing there together, arms crossed and neckties 8 A.M.-straight, presiding over the end of yet another school year. (If they're both inside, that means there's no one on passion patrol out in the parking lot right now.)


Art in Review
Peter Halley  Gagosian Gallery 136 Wooster Street SoHo Through June 26
With his latest paintings, Peter Halley seems to want to stretch out coloristically and expand the range of Day-Glo colors on which he relies in composing his geometric abstractions.
The results are collisions of screeching pinks, greens, reds and yellows so disastrous that one can't be sure Mr.
Halley was not trying to be perverse.
He also seems to want to make the compositions more complex than those of his previous works, but now the elements simply don't hang together.
Each of the paintings is dominated by his characteristic "prison cell" shape -- a large rectangle of color, which sprouts a number of differently colored right-angled tentacles or conduits.
The big rectangle is rendered in a rough surface that contrasts with the smoothly painted conduits.
In the past, these rectangles have appeared more integrated with the other parts of the composition, the whole image seeming to occupy one plane.
But here, in colors that often clash with their surroundings, the rectangles look disconnected, as if they occupy different places in space than the rest of the compositions.
Allusions to machinery or biomorphic shapes that had been implicit in Mr.
Halley's work are no longer vivid.


Winfield Taylor; Advertising Executive, 86
Winfield Taylor, a retired New York advertising executive, died on Monday at his home in Somers, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Review/Film: Patriot Games; Fear and Loathing on the Trail Of Evil in the New World Order
THE Queen of England owes a debt of gratitude to the makers of "Patriot Games," the sleek film adaptation of Tom Clancy's best-selling paranoid thriller.
Their version of this story is so intelligently streamlined that it has the good grace to leave the Queen alone.
In Mr.
Clancy's original, which revolves around a plot against the Prince of Wales and his young family, the heroic ex-C.I.A. agent Jack Ryan foils the attackers and becomes an instant celebrity on English television.
For his trouble, he is not only knighted but also thanked ad nauseam by Her Majesty.
So the Queen visits Jack's bedside and makes Jack and Cathy Ryan house guests at Buckingham Palace, gushing about the adorableness of the couple's little daughter, Sally.
The Queen's husband treats Jack like a new chum.
Their son, the Prince, listens gratefully to Jack's friendly advice about how to solve his marital problems and how to be more of a man.
"We must see more of each other," the Prince declares.
By the end of the novel, Jack has saved the Prince's life yet again and feels comfortable addressing him as "pal."


Executive Changes
BIDERMANN INDUSTRIES, New York, a unit of Bidermann International S.A., a menswear maker, appointed J. Andrew Bolt vice president and chief financial officer.
BLOOMINGDALE'S, New York, named Susan Miller vice president for strategic planning.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in some editions of Business Day yesterday about Olympia &amp; York's loans misstated the point at which the company first stopped paying interest on some loans.
It was March 1992, not August 1991.


Art in Review
Jennifer Bolande  Metro Pictures 150 Greene Street SoHo Through June 13
Although Jennifer Bolande's sculpture of the 1980's incorporated neon signs and stereo speakers, it seemed little concerned with the consumerist issues of Neo-Conceptualism.
The objects' inner assemblages often looked as if they had been taken straight from the street and stacked, in a kind of controlled recycling characterized by low-key wit, lively inventiveness and a subtle eye for metaphor.
These qualities remain a constant in her multi-faceted current show, which includes sculpture, photography and drawing.
Here, Ms.
Bolande presents herself as a stage manager of off-beat and discontinuous visual stunts.
"Optimism Percolator" features a film projector that both turns a bicycle wheel suspended from the ceiling and plays a continuous super-8 image of a spinning lottery wheel.
The tall flag poles standing in different parts of the gallery designate nothing in particular, but they do so intriguingly.
One is topped, totemlike, with a small gilded sculpture of a groundhog; another carries a plasterlike cast form in the shape of a draped sheet or flag; a third is anchored to the gallery floor with a staked rope, like the pole of a circus tent.


Bergelt to Merge With Earle Palmer
The New York office of Earle Palmer Brown and Bergelt Litchfield in New York said yesterday that they had reached an agreement in principle to merge to form Earle Palmer Brown/Bergelt Litchfield.
Terms of transaction between the two privately held shops were not disclosed.
The merged agency, with 55 to 60 employees, will be headed by David Venghaus, now chairman at Bergelt Litchfield, and Jane Maas, president of Earle Palmer's New York office, who will retain that title.
A spokeswoman for parent company, Earle Palmer Brown Advertising in Bethesda, Md., said no client conflicts or layoffs were anticipated.


House Votes to Ban A-Bomb Tests
Moving to end an ominous symbol of the cold-war era, the House today approved a one-year ban on all testing of American nuclear weapons.
The vote was 237 to 167, largely along party lines.
Support for the measure, the first total moratorium on American nuclear testing that Congress has considered, is growing in the Senate, though the outcome there is uncertain.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Bill Selby, shortstop.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed David Manning, Kevin Runivan, Chris Kelley, Brent Evans and Chad Wiley, pitchers; Scot Sealy and Earl Heib, catchers; and Wesley Shook, outfielder-catcher  National League


Corrections
Because of a computer processing error, an article and a chart last Friday about the 1990 Census misstated percentages of 16- to 19-year-olds who have dropped out of school and are not working.
The five states with the lowest percentages are North Dakota, 2.81; Minnesota, 3.52; Nebraska, 3.67; Wisconsin, 3.74, and Iowa, 3.77.
The states with the highest percentages are Kentucky, 9.16; Louisiana, 9.11; Arizona, 8.53, and West Virginia, 8.36.
The District of Columbia had the highest percentage, 10.55.


12 Sign the Climate Treaty As Political Clouds Gather
In the first substantive act of the Earth Summit, a dozen nations signed a climate treaty today to curb gas emissions, but three European countries considered taking much stronger action on their own.
The new declaration by the European nations would commit signers to stabilize the emission of gases that trap heat in the atmosphere at 1990 levels, and then to make further cuts.
It would also set a deadline of 2000 to reach stabilization.


Hodges Criticizes Jordan For His Silence on Issues
A day after scoring 39 points against Portland, Michael Jordan took a different sort of shot this afternoon -- from one of his teammates.
Craig Hodges, the Bulls' 3-point shooting specialist and one of the league's best, chided Jordan and other National Basketball Association players for failing to use their visibility to call attention to pressing social and political issues, from the deepening plight of inner-city youth to the failure of owners to hire more black head coaches.


Critic's Notebook; On a TV Show, Should Anything Go?
Fancy some Peekaboo Ploys?
Or maybe a few Steamy Suggestions?
When it's a matter of slipping sex onto home screens, television is arguably at its most inventive as it inches forward from the harmless tease to the very gates of hard core.
Whether in comedies or commercials, movies or soaps, a glimpse of glistening skin can be worth a thousand lines of dialogue in the constant struggle to boost a rating or push a product.
At the same time, sparingly used language can be employed to bring the sometimes subliminal message unmistakably home.
A classic instance is the perfume ad that, littered with androgynous beauties and intimations of boundless decadence, ended with the sigh: "Ah, the smell of it!" Ah, indeed.


Banker's Resignation Is Rejected by Russia
The Russian Parliament refused today to accept the resignation of Georgi Matyukhin, the head of the central bank and a leading figure in the tug-of-war over Russia's fiscal policy.
"We should not blame only the central bank for the complex financial situation," said a new First Deputy Prime Minister, Vladimir Shumeiko, who spoke before the lawmakers in Mr.
Matyukhin's defense.


War's Accidental Deaths Spur Push for Solutions
Although the smoke from the Persian Gulf war has long since cleared, the accidental deaths from American fire during the conflict are still sending shock waves through the military.
In recent weeks the military has begun teaching tens of thousands of marines and soldiers worldwide new methods for preventing the accidental deaths.
The Pentagon has spent millions of dollars for seven military contractors to build new combat identification devices and to test them in the Texas desert.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Italy Defeats Ireland, 2-0, in U.S. Cup
Fueled by Giuseppe Signori's first-half goal, Italy held off Ireland, 2-0, yesterday at Foxboro, Mass., in an exhibition soccer match before 34,797 fans at Foxboro Stadium in U.S Cup '92.
Italy, 1-0-1 in U.S.
Cup '92 play, now moves to Chicago to face the United States (2-0-0) tomorrow in a game that will decide the tournament champion. (AP) GOLF  Lopez Shares First-Round Lead
Two veterans, Nancy Lopez and Ayako Okamoto, and unheralded Katie Peterson-Parker shot four-under-par 67's yesterday to take the first-round lead at the McDonald's Classic at Wilmington, Del.
Parker, a struggling second-year pro not even listed among the top-100 money winners, shot 32-35 with four birdies at the par-71 DuPont Country Club. (AP)


Yankees Fall to Tigers Quickly and Quietly
Maybe the Yankees could blame it on the cruel schedule makers in the American League who forced them to play Wednesday night in Texas, return to New York early Thursday morning and then play the Tigers at Yankee Stadium last night.
Maybe that's why they were so sluggish in losing, 6-2, to the Detroit Tigers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues; House Backs Abortion at Military Bases Abroad
Threatening to entangle President Bush on yet another front of the abortion battle in this election year, the House voted today, 216 to 193, to lift the Pentagon's ban on abortions at American military hospitals overseas.
Mr.
Bush has opposed such measures in the past and is expected to do so again.
The vote today, on a provision of a $274 billion spending bill for the coming fiscal year, fell far short of the two-thirds majority needed to override his expected veto, and the provision also faces serious obstacles in the Senate.


A Tragedy of Manners at the Movies
ANARCHY reigns at the local multiplex.
People talk with impunity.
They comment.
They narrate.
They respond.
They exhort.
They laugh too hard and sigh too heavily.
They slurp sodas, munch on four-course box lunches, jingle their pocket change and crinkle cellophane candy wrappers.
These cultural criminals view silence as an opportunity to gossip about their friends, provide their very own dialogue or introduce actors as they appear on screen.
"That's Robert Redford. . . . That's Robert Duvall. . . . Oooh, that's Glenn Close," one astute woman shared with me while watching "The Natural." She was suffering from Army Archerd's Virus, a malady contracted from overexposure to the Hollywood columnist's long-winded Oscar-night star introductions.


Mental Hospital Operator Settles Lawsuit With Texas
The Texas Attorney General and National Medical Enterprises have reached a settlement of a civil suit that will require the national operator of psychiatric hospitals to pay more than $9 million to the state and agree not to engage in numerous marketing and admission practices.
As part of the agreement, the hospital company will be prevented from paying Texas school officials for referrals and rewarding hospital employees on the basis of the number of patients kept in hospital wards.


Review/Art; Another Look at Richard Smith, 30 Years Later
Thirty years after they were first exhibited at the Green Gallery in Manhattan, Richard Smith's paintings look as fresh as ever.
Before James Rosenquist and Claes Oldenburg had their first solo shows in that influential gallery, before George Segal exhibited his first plaster sculptures of the human figure there, the English-born Mr.
Smith displayed these marvelous works, which helped to signal the emergence of Pop Art in America.
They had titles like "McCalls," "Billboard," "Revlon" and "Chase Manhattan," and their brilliant colors brought to mind the glossy illustrations in fashion magazines and the exuberance of Times Square.
On view at Richard L. Feigen &amp; Company are 29 paintings in an exhibition called "Richard Smith, the Green Gallery Years, 1960-1963." Partly because Mr.
Smith returned to England later in the 60's and did not settle in New York again until 1978, he isn't widely known here.
But his reputation may also lag because his early paintings defy the conventional categories.
They are linked to Pop, but they also relate to Color Field painting, which was coming into its own as well in the early 60's.
At the same time, they are connected with various strands of postwar British abstraction -- a relationship underscored by a show currently at the Adelson Galleries featuring more than a dozen British abstract painters.


Germans to Buy Britain's Thomas Cook Chain
Midland Bank P.L.C. said today that it had agreed to sell Thomas Cook, one of the world's largest travel-agency chains and issuers of traveler's checks, to two German companies for $:200 million, or $364.6 million.
The company was founded in 1841 by Thomas Cook, a printer who was active in the temperance movement.
He was the Freddie Laker of his time: just as Mr.
Laker and imitators like People Express opened up air travel to the masses in the late 1970's, Mr.
Cook, the creator of the packaged holiday, opened up the world of international leisure travel to the middle class of the last century.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Whistle-Stops a la 1992: Arsenio, Larry and Phil
He wore cheap sunglasses.
He blew the saxophone.
He explained that he really wanted to inhale; he just didn't know how.
With his Secret Service entourage sitting stiffly in the front row, Gov.
Bill Clinton chatted with Arsenio Hall Wednesday night about his mistakes, his faults and his ideas for America's future.
It was not the kind of television performance Presidential candidates typically give, but it is not likely to be the last.


Critic's Notebook; And Then What Happened? Read the Sequel
CERTAINLY it's no secret that literature begets more literature.
"Ulysses" would not exist without "The Odyssey." "Mourning Becomes Electra" would not exist without the Oresteia.
The Greek legend of Pygmalion, told in Ovid's "Metamorphoses," was retold by John Marston and W. S. Gilbert before it was immortalized by George Bernard Shaw and, more recently, transformed into "My Fair Lady" and "Pretty Woman." "Romeo and Juliet" begat "West Side Story." And even "The Honeymooners" helped give birth to "The Flintstones."


Official Says Sununu Fought Census Adjustment
At a time when the Commerce Department was under a court order to keep an open mind on whether to adjust the 1990 census, John H. Sununu, then the White House chief of staff, called a top department official and expressed skepticism about any revisions in the census, according to sworn testimony by the official.
The official, Wendell L. Willkie 2d, the department's general counsel, gave the testimony in a deposition introduced as evidence last week in Federal Court in Manhattan, where 30 of the nation's most populous cities and states are seeking to have the census adjusted to include what they contend are at least five million uncounted persons, many of them members of racial minorities.


A New Insider-Trading Case Hits Major Business Figures
After a four-year investigation, the Securities and Exchange Commission filed insider trading charges yesterday against seven corporate executives and investors, including Edward R. Downe Jr., a former director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company and the husband of the automobile heiress Charlotte Ford.
Also charged were Martin E. Revson, co-founder of the Revlon cosmetics empire; Steven A. Greenberg, a New York public relations executive; Milton Weinger, a broker at Oppenheimer &amp; Company; Thomas Warde, a Los Angeles real estate investor, and David Salamone, a foreign businessman last located in London.
In addition, Fred R. Sullivan, former chairman of Kidde Inc. and a director of numerous public companies, including the Tyler Corporation, was accused of providing confidential information to Mr.
Downe.


With Denmark, European Ministers Play for Time
Trying to keep the image of unity from slipping away despite Danish voters' rejection of the treaty on European union, Foreign Ministers of the other 11 European Community countries decided at an emergency meeting today to proceed with the ratification process and hope the Danes work something out.
The treaty, laying the foundations for a common European currency as early as 1997 and urging a common foreign and security policy wherever possible, provides that it can only go into effect if all 12 countries ratify it.


WHITE HOUSE SNUBS U.S. ENVOY'S PLEA TO SIGN RIO TREATY
The chief American negotiator at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro made a last-minute appeal to the White House on Wednesday night to reverse its refusal to sign a treaty on protecting animals and plants.
But the negotiator, William K. Reilly, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, was firmly rebuffed today by top aides to President Bush, who rejected any effort to change the American position.


Care for Environment Doesn't Hurt Economy; Clean Is Profitable
To the Editor:
News coverage of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro has focused on concerns that the treaty on global warming could harm the United States economy by raising the cost of electrical power.
Yes, the United States produces almost one-quarter of the greenhouse gases, and accepting the Rio terms would require it to make a larger investment to reduce these gases to 1990 levels than any other country.


57 Suffolk Officers Retire Over Plan for 10% Pay Cut
A proposal to cut Suffolk County police salaries by 10 percent has led 57 officers to file for retirement this week to avoid a cut in pension benefits, the county's Police Commissioner said today.
At least 700 other officers in the 2,300-member department are eligible for retirement, having served 20 years, and could file for their pensions should the County Legislature adopt the pay cut as part of a plan to close a $90 million budget gap, the Commissioner, Robert Creighton said.


Not-So-Bad Boy of Biodiversity
Critics are quick to cast the United States again as an environmental bad boy for refusing to sign the biodiversity treaty today at the world environmental summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro.
But the Bush Administration should not be judged too harshly.
The treaty will start a valuable conservation effort but it contains subsidiary clauses that could erode important American interests going far beyond saving endangered species.
The best course now for the U.S. is to warmly embrace the goals and most provisions of the treaty -- and find ways to work around the nettlesome clauses.
There will always be time to sign the treaty later if U.S. concerns prove exaggerated.


Buchanan Schedules Heart Surgery


TV Weekend; The Power of Guns: Physical and Psychological
"America the Violent" is a punchy program about what Tom Brokaw calls the nation's gun fever.
This "Brokaw Report," at 8 tonight on NBC, focuses first on Oakland, Calif., where the police chief says, "People are killing each other for nothing." The interviews with young men known as gang-bangers suggest that guns give a feeling of power that may compensate for the powerlessness of their condition.
"They just don't know what to do," says a community worker, not excusing, just describing.
One gang member, whose trade is robbing and mugging, sounds grimly realistic about his prospects.
In his neighborhood, he says, people do not live long enough to die of cancer or heart attack: "My friends get shot."


At the Bar; An assessment of how lawyers dress: most are cut from the same cloth.
Charmaine McClarie-Cox makes her living by rummaging through lawyers' closets.
No, she is not a private eye from the state bar, nor an investigative reporter from The American Lawyer or The National Law Journal, nor a voyeur with peculiar taste.
She is a student of the clothes lawyers wear, and she does not like what she invariably finds.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidate; Perot Says Spending Is Tenth Of What Rivals Have Spent
Responding to stepped-up criticism from Republicans and Democrats that he would use his vast wealth to buy the election, Ross Perot said today that he had achieved parity with the major Presidential contenders while spending less than one-tenth of what they had.
"The Democrats have spent $17 million so far," Mr.
Perot told a crowd of about 3,000 supporters gathered at an abandoned bank building here.
"The Republicans have spent $17 million. All of you put together have spent $1.4 million."


Next Week, Another Camp for O'Brien
The Jets and Giants, who seem to be running more camps than the Boy Scouts, ended get-togethers for rookies and free agents yesterday.
The Jets will stage still another camp on Monday, this one for quarterbacks, that may include their reluctant returnee, KEN O'BRIEN.
The Jets retained exclusive rights to the 31-year-old passer last week by offering him his 1991 salary of $1.45 million.
That offer could go far to help him come to contract terms with the club as early as this weekend.


U.S. Suggests It Might Give Trenton Medicaid Funds, but Bond Raters Are Wary
New Jersey received some good fiscal news today with word that it still had a shot at obtaining most of the $450 million in Medicaid payments it thought it had been denied.
But any celebrations were tempered by the news that Standard &amp; Poor's, the bond rating firm, had placed the state on its credit watch, a move that could jeopardize its AA+ bond rating, the firm's second-highest ranking, and cost the state millions in interest charges.


Review/Film; No Recess For Excelling In High Jinks
The story is familiar, thanks to dozens of lily-white high school comedies along the same lines.
But the setting and casting are different, and therein lies the fun.
In "Class Act," Kid 'n' Play (the stars of "House Party"), engage in a mistaken-identity farce that casts Christopher (Kid) Reid, the nervous one with the mile-high fade hairdo, as a classic nerd named Duncan.
Meanwhile, his tougher partner, Christopher (Play) Martin, appears as Blade, who has the kind of rap sheet that makes both teachers and bullies quake when he appears.
The joke here is that Blade and Duncan's school records are accidentally switched, and that each gets a taste of the other's medicine.
And the film's sight gags go well beyond Kid's coiffure, which Play converts into mini-dreadlocks in an attempt to make his stand-in look a little more streetwise. (He also gives Kid his removable gold tooth.) One of the better visual gags concerns the layout of the school itself.
As "Duncan," who is supposed to have a 4.0 average and perfect S.A.T. scores, the school-hating Play finds himself escorted into a hidden classroom decorated with classical busts, and resonating with the sounds of Gregorian chants.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Listing Choices for No. 2, Cuomo Underlines the No
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York said yesterday that he had recommended the names of several possible Vice-Presidential nominees to Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign but that he did not expect to be on Mr.
Clinton's list himself.
Mr.
Cuomo said he was called in the last two weeks by Warren Christopher, who is directing Mr.
Clinton's search for a running mate.
He said he had recommended six names to Mr.
Christopher, five of which he mentioned to reporters today after giving a speech in Manhattan.


A New Service for Prodigy
The Prodigy Services Company, the joint I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck computer videotex venture, said yesterday that users would be able to electronically receive software provided by the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company.
Until now Prodigy has offered an on-line information and electronic shopping service.
The new Ziffnet service will permit Prodigy users to receive software, news and commentary and computer technical advice for an additional hourly fee.
The new service brings Prodigy a step closer to similar on-line services such as Compuserve, Genie and America Online, which charge users an hourly fee.
Many of these services have found that their most successful service is transmitting software electronically to personal computer users -- called "downloading" in industry jargon.


Review/Film; A 'Monster' Dense With Meaning
At the very beginning of his splendid new monologue film, "Monster in a Box," opening today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Spalding Gray sets the record straight.
Sitting at a table on an otherwise bare stage, as he did in his earlier "Swimming to Cambodia," he tries to clear up any questions about the title of this new film.
He doesn't want people to worry about the meaning.
He holds up the 1,900-page manuscript of his autobiographical novel, "Impossible Vacation," on which he has been working for four years, and the box in which he totes it around.
"This is the box," he says.
"This is the monster in it."


Beijing Journal; 3 Years After Tiananmen, Some Memories Fade
After army troops attacked pro-democracy protesters three years ago, charging at them with tanks and firing at them with machine guns, many citizens cursed their Government and adopted as their anthem the words of a popular song: "We will never forget!"
But these days, especially outside Beijing, many Chinese seem to have forgotten -- not the attack itself, but at least the fury that they once felt.
The crackdown is popularly known as "June 4," after the date in 1989 when most of the killing took place, but the anniversary today passed quietly, without any repeat of the minor incidents at Tiananmen Square on Wednesday.


A Public Relations Ploy Of Questionable Taste
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN is squawking about a "cynical" interpretation here last month involving its food product, the rap star Hammer, the "nation's hungry" and the Kentucky Derby.
Kentucky Fried Chicken demands a more balanced account because "we did a nice thing."
That's fair enough, especially since the growing involvement of corporations in all aspects of sport -- from simple hospitality tents at major events to the creation of those major events -- is worth keeping an eye on.
Now keep in mind that with booze, cigarettes and sugar snacks as the financial foundation of the New Sports Order, the finger-lickers at K.F.C. are not a horrible example; they are merely tasteless guys who asked for ink.


Postal Clerk Points to Rostenkowski
An obscure patronage employee at the House post office has emerged as a pivotal figure in a criminal investigation that has already embarrassed House leaders and now appears to threaten other powerful Democrats, like Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois.
The employee, James C. Smith, who worked in a basement office of the postmaster across the street from the Capitol, has told Federal prosecutors that he made cash payments from postal funds to Mr.
Rostenkowski and two other House Democrats whose office expense records have been subpoenaed in the Federal grand jury inquiry.
It is not clear whether he told prosecutors that he had given cash directly to Mr.
Rostenkowski or to an intermediary.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congressional Memo; Once a Favorite, Deficit-Cutting Proposal Hangs in the Balance
They were voting on health research and military programs and whether Florida would get enough money for drug programs.
But all over Capitol Hill today lawmakers were talking about using the Constitution to make themselves balance the budget.
At a Senate committee hearing, Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, said he supported it with misgivings and "real sadness." On the Senate floor, Robert C. Byrd, the West Virginia Democrat, scorned the proposal as "a magician's hat with no rabbit in it."


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 596 money market mutual funds increased by $803.5 million, to $493.03 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 219 institutional funds increased by $2.32 billion, to $178.71 billion.
Those of the 284 general-purpose funds were down by $1.55 billion, to $173.54 billion.
The 93 broker-dealer funds increased by $26.7 million, to $140.78 billion, the institute said.


Another Mushy Memorial, But Henke's Birdies Stick
Jack Nicklaus's best laid plans for a hard, fast course were again dampened by rain, and Nolan Henke took advantage of the soggy conditions and shot a seven-under-par 65 to lead after the first round of the Memorial Tournament.
Firing irons that stuck close to the pins like darts, Henke made eight birdies on the Nicklaus-designed Muirfield Village Golf Club course to lead Mark Brooks by two strokes and a logjam of nine golfers at 68 by three.


Pope Visits Angola, Urging Amity After Long War
Dismissing worries about his personal safety in this unsettled land, Pope John Paul II began a one-week visit to Angola today, celebrating its break with Marxism and urging reconciliation after decades of war that have left its economy in ruins and its people divided.
The Pope's visit, 13 months after a peace agreement between a Government once backed by the Soviet Union and Cuba, and rebels supported by the United States and South Africa, marked a dramatic reversal of Angola's earlier relations with the Roman Catholic Church.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  U.S. DISSENSION AT RIO
The chief American negotiator at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro asked the White House to make it possible for the United States to sign a treaty on protecting animals and plants.
He was firmly rebuffed.
A1  WORLD BANK SEEKS 'EARTH' FUND
The World Bank has proposed that the United States and other donor nations contribute $5 billion to a fund that would provide virtually free grants to help the world's poorest countries protect their ecological systems, officials said.
A6  12 SIGN TREATY TO CURB GASES
A dozen nations signed a climate treaty to curb gas emissions, and Austria, Switzerland and the Netherlands talked of stronger action.
A6  RUSSIAN AID STALLED IN U.S.
As election-year politics sap much of the enthusiasm for foreign aid bills, the Bush Administration's multibillion-dollar package for Russia is stalled in Congress.
Leaders say they don't know when -- or if -- it will be approved.
A1  NATO SEEKS NEW PEACE ROLE
Seeking a new role after the cold war, NATO agreed in principle to support peacekeeping operations in Eastern Europe or the former Soviet Union if asked to do so by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
A1  CHILL FOR EAST GERMAN HEARTHS
People in eastern German towns like Zepernick are near despair as houses are claimed by former owners or their descendants who now live in western Germany.
A3  12 ARRESTED IN SPYING CASE
Twelve people were arrested, including three officers of the former East German secret police, on suspicion of operating a ring in West Germany that killed hundreds of foes of the former Communist regime.
A7  OUTRAGED POLES OUST PREMIER
The Polish Parliament voted to dismiss the Prime Minister and his Cabinet after the Interior Ministry released a list of people it said had collaborated with the Communists.
The list included many lawmakers and some ministers.
A7  ANTICLIMAX IN YUGOSLAVIA
The Government of what remains of Yugoslavia said the ruling party had won the biggest bloc of the votes in parliamentary elections.
Drivers shrugged in mile-long gas lines.
A8  The European Community will keep pursuing its treaty on union.
A9  The Pope arrives in Angola to celebrate its break with Marxism.
A9  Beijing Journal: Fury has faded since the 1989 crackdown.
A4  National A10-18  BUSH AND PEROT
The President held a prime-time news conference in which he refused to be drawn into direct criticism of Ross Perot, declining to say even whether he would debate Mr.
Perot this fall.
A1
A transcript of the President's remarks.  A16
Perot counterattacked against the buy-the-election charge.  A18
A Senate panel on missing servicemen called Perot to testify.  A18
Nixon said he "wouldn't bet against" Perot.  A17
On the Trail: Debates would likely include Perot.  A17
Cuomo said he did not expect to run with Clinton.  A18
In a year of unconventional politics, unconventional forums too.  A18
Congressional Memo: The Constitution and electoral fear.  A14  BIG INSIDER-TRADING CASE
After a four-year inquiry, the S.E.C. filed insider-trading charges against six prominent corporate executives and investors, including Edward R. Downe Jr., a former director of Bear, Stearns, and Martin E. Revson, co-founder of Revlon.
A1  LOVE ME SLENDER
The people have spoken.
They prefer the younger, trimmer Elvis as the image on a new stamp, and the Postal Service will comply.
A10  SUSPENDED FATES
Tens of thousands of frozen human embryos, leftovers from high-tech fertility treatment, lie stored in tanks of liquid nitrogen throughout the country.
Their number is growing, and in many cases what will happen to them is uncertain.
A10  HAITIAN DETAINEES CHARGE ABUSE
Refugee advocacy groups say many of the 250 or so Haitians who are interned at a detention center in Miami are being abused and intimidated by guards there.
A10  A FOCUS OF THE POSTAL INQUIRY
An obscure patronage employee at the House post office has emerged as a pivotal figure in a criminal investigation that has already embarrassed House leaders and now appears to threaten other powerful Democrats, like Representative Rostenkowski.
A12  THE FALLOUT FROM FRIENDLY FIRE
Although the smoke from the Persian Gulf war has long since cleared, accidental allied casualties from American fire are still sending shock waves through the military.
A14  Sununu intervened in census deliberations, an official said.
A14  Law Page B8  Hocus-pocus?
Fraternal argot?
Why do lawyers write that way?
A black woman once barred by a law school claims her place as a regent.
At the Bar  Metropolitan Digest, B1 CONGRESSIONAL SNAKE
Slithering from upper Manhattan to Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn, the proposed new Eighth Congressional District would fuse the districts of two longtime Representatives into one new battleground.
A1  ASBESTOS AND TAXES
The cost of modernizing an obsolete building filled with asbestos can be used to reduce the building's property tax bill, under a ruling upheld yesterday by New York State's top court.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-30  The manners of moviegoing.C1  The sequel in literature.
C1  Fear and loathing in search of evil.
C1  Warning on global warming.
C26  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Yankees fall to Tigers.
B9  Pirates beats Mets, 7-2.
B9  Era ends in Miami.
B1o  Basketball: Teammate chides Jordan.
B12  Column: Vecsey on Jordan.
B9  Tennis: Seles and Graf rally.
B9  Obituaries B7  Patrick Peyton, Roman Catholic priest.
Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Bad boy of biodiversity?
Denmark and Europe.
A Mad world.
Doing politicians' work.
Letters A28  A. M. Rosenthal: Reality in Israel.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: Silver lining for Eurodoom.
A29  James Squires: When you see Perot, you see Perot.
A29  Louis J. Freeh: The mob claims a martyr.
A29


Judge Won't Pull Plug On Education Channel
A judge here today temporarily refused to bar a local high school from continuing to show Channel One, the Whittle Communications classroom television program of news with commercials, but he ordered the two sides in the lawsuit to return to court on Sept. 2 to resolve the issue.
State Superintendent of Public Instruction Bill Honig and a group of parents and teachers brought suit against the East Side Union High School District, which had allowed its William C. Overfelt High School to show the 12-minute program.
The lawsuit sought a preliminary injunction barring future broadcasts of the program on the grounds that school time and public funds are wasted when students watch commercials.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Hook-Superx Inc., Cincinnati, a drugstore operator, is offering $145 million in 10 1/8 percent senior notes due in 2002 at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. as sole manager.
Noncallable for five years, the notes are rated Ba-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BB- by S.&amp; P. *
Kaiser Aluminum Corp., Houston, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $75 million in convertible subordinated notes due in 2002.
Underwriters for the proposed offering include Merrill Lynch &amp; Co., First Boston Corp., and Paine Webber Inc. *
Louisiana Land and Exploration Co., New Orleans, has filed for for up to $300 million in debt securities. *
New Hampshire Business Finance Authority is offering $42.7 million in tax-exempt airport revenue bonds, which for some investors may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax, through Paine Webber Inc.
The state-guaranteed bonds, for a airport project in Manchester, are priced to a maximum yield of about 6.723 percent for a bond due in 2019, with serial bond yields ranging from 4.8 percent in 1995 to 6.45 percent in 2006.
Other long-term bonds are priced to yield 6.7 percent in 2022 and about 6.620 percent in 2010.
The financing is rated Aa by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P. Common  *
Almar Biosciences Inc., Sacramento, Calif., which makes disposable identification kits, has filed for an initial public offering of 850,000 units, each consisting of one common share and one common stock purchase warrant, through Paulson Investment Co. *
Bally Gaming International Inc., Chicago, a unit of Bally Manufacturing Corp., has filed for an offering of four million common shares through Salomon Brothers Inc. *
Netframe Systems Inc., Milpitas, Calif., which makes specialized computer systems, is making an initial public offering of three million common shares at $9 each through Lehman Brothers Inc.
*
Tosco Corp., Stamford, Conn., an independent refiner and wholesale marketer of petroleum products, has filed to amend the size of a public offering of common stock to 1.4 million shares from 2.4 million shares.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  ODDLY SHAPED DISTRICT SETS UP FIGHT
Drafted in haste and likely to be lamented at leisure, the new Eighth Congressional District, which slithers and snakes from upper Manhattan to Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn, is a textbook example of what can happen when a state's Congressional representation is forced to shrink.
The redistricting will likely pit two longtime members of the city's Democratic delegation against each other and shows why the Legislature agonized over the job.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  A NEW DRAIN ON THE CITY TREASURY?
The cost of modernizing an obsolete building, particularly one filled with asbestos, can be used to reduce its assessed value, under a court ruling that was upheld yesterday by the New York State Court of Appeals.
The ruling, in a case involving a lower Manhattan skyscraper, might be a boon to the real-estate industry if it enables owners of other buildings with asbestos to get reductions in their tax assessments.
A1.
LABOR TALKS FALL BEHIND


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; PRESIDENT AVOIDS DISCUSSING PEROT AT NEWS SESSION
Using a prime-time news conference a la Ronald Reagan to evoke an image of Presidential statesmanship, President Bush refused tonight to be drawn into direct criticism of Ross Perot.
But the effort, which underscored the alarm that Mr.
Perot's unexpected showing in recent polls has caused among Mr.
Bush's political advisers, was marred by the refusal of three of the four major television networks to carry the event live.
Mr.
Bush, who has held only one other prime time news conference in his tenure, was left beseeching the television reporters who were there to give him some attention.


On My Mind; Reality In Israel
At the Western Wall where the Temple stood, Jews were praying as they do all day, every day.
Then a chant rang over the great square -- Muslims being called to their own prayers from the overlooking minaret.
At that moment came another call -- bells from Christian churches.
At first I thought it must be some kind of holiday, the entering and mingling of the presence of all three religions.
Then I knew it was better than a holiday, that it was an everyday thing.


Imagine What It's Like to Go to the Movies in a Wheelchair
To the Editor:
I saw "The Waterdance" last night, a fine film about the wrenching adjustments men must make in rehabilitation hospitals to life in a wheelchair.
The difficulties of seeing this movie in a wheelchair will give you some idea of the adjustments that disabled people in New York City make every day.
My friend and I chose to see it at the Angelika Film Center, partly because it's one of the few Manhattan theaters to run an accessibility symbol with its ad.


Pop/Jazz; Music Imitates Life as a Life Imitates Music
Before Ingrid Caven made her entrance, her voice made its entrance.
From behind a closed door on the floor of the nightclub Laura Belle on West 43d Street in Manhattan, where a party was being held to celebrate a new German perfume, Joop (pronounced yewp), came a sound that was simultaneously timid and feminine, yet husky and insistent.
The voice phrased its German words with steely precision, yet allowed the glottal syllables to rise and fall with an unmetered romanticism.
There was authority in its delicacy.
It temporarily silenced the din of executives, advertisers and the social elite.
This voice had never been heard in America.
Miss Caven is a cult star on the European cabaret scene, and her performance at the party was a warm-up for her United States debut at the Ballroom.
The engagement opened on Tuesday night and will conclude on June 13.
When, slowly, the door next to Laura Belle's stage inched open and Miss Caven emerged into the spotlight, her figure embodied the complexities already demonstrated in her voice.
Red hair cascaded onto her shoulders.
A witch-black Yves Saint Laurent gown, with billows of fabric across its front and a deep open V-cut in the back, was hiked up to reveal a slender black-stockinged leg.
As she sang, Miss Caven threw her arm into the air with a melodramatic flourish.
She had arrived.


May Sales Up a Bit at Most Retailers
Sales in most of the nation's retail chain stores crept up last month, continuing the sluggish growth that began with a bang in January but has wound down ever since.
J.
C.
Penney &amp; Company and Wal-Mart Stores Inc. continued to confound the trend, posting strong sales increases.
But apparel-specialty store companies, like the Limited Inc. and Ann Taylor Inc., lost sales because of unusually cold, rainy weather across most of the country.


Review/Art; Childhood Without Sweetness
The view of childhood offered by Sally Mann's disturbing and powerful black-and-white photographs, in a show entitled "Immediate Family," at the Houk Friedman Gallery, is anything but simple.
Ms.
Mann depicts her three children, along with occasional adults as supporting characters, in dramatic, psychologically fraught poses, often posed nude in scenes evoking a precocious sexuality that remains gilded with innocence.
In "Modest Child No. 1" (1990), for example, Ms.
Mann's younger daughter, perhaps 5 or 6 years old, coyly covers her nipples with her hands while she gazes dreamily out of the frame.
Other pictures feature a blend of domestic and lyrical elements.
In one, a somewhat older girl dances nude in a shaft of sunlight on a picnic table, the blurry figures of other family members behind her.


Some Hereby Resolve: Let Plain English Prevail
Why does a Georgia state court subpoena warn: "Herein fail not on pain of $300"?
Why can't it simply say: "If you do not appear in court, you will be fined $300"?
This example illustrates why the average person finds reading legal documents a nightmarish journey into a foreign land without a translator.


On Stage, and Off
Roundabout's New Season
The Roundabout Theater, the Tony-nominated Broadway company that presents classic plays and musicals, has announced its new season.
Natasha Richardson is to make her New York stage debut in the title role of Eugene O'Neill's "Anna Christie," about a woman who tries to improve her life despite a questionable past.
Ms.
Richardson, who is Vanessa Redgrave's daughter, played the part recently in London.


Gerhard Closs Is Dead; Pioneering Chemist, 64
Gerhard Closs, a chemist and educator, died May 24 at his home in Palos Park, Ill.
He was 64 years old.
He died of heart failure, said a spokeswoman for the University of Chicago, where Dr.
Closs was chairman of the chemistry department.


Dinkins's New Economic Chief Finding Life in the Spotlight a Bit Unsettling
Barry F. Sullivan, the former high-powered banker who was appointed New York City's top economic development official five weeks ago, gave a news photographer here an uncomfortable frozen smile today as he demonstrated a French-made public toilet that New York City is considering leasing.
"I can see the headlines you're writing now," Mr.
Sullivan said under his breath to reporters.
"Well, I've done my part."


Service for William Gaines
A memorial service for William M. Gaines, publisher of Mad magazine, will be held at 2 P.M. today on the eighth floor of the Time &amp; Life Building, 1271 Avenue of the Americas, at 50th Street.
Mr.
Gaines, who founded the publication in 1952, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 70.


Review/Dance; Who Can't Act Like Dukes?
Kenneth MacMillan's staging of "The Sleeping Beauty" has settled in impressively at American Ballet Theater, making for an overall authority that was only promised when the production was new in 1987.
The complaint that American dancers do not know how to act like dukes and duchesses can no longer be voiced, and there is is a new stylistic unity among the soloists, especially in the fairies' variations in the Prologue.


Amati Chief Named At Lord, Dentsu
An executive with a lengthy resume in automotive advertising and marketing was named to head the new Amati automobile account at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles.
Paul Katzka, 37 years old, will become senior vice president and group director at Lord, Dentsu, which won the estimated $60 million account of Amati, Mazda Motor of America's forthcoming luxury line, in January.


Winning Isn't Even the Major Thing
The look on Roy Tarpley's face was what most struck John Lucas.
It was fear, unmistakable and real.
Here Lucas was telling Tarpley that the latter had received permission to play professional basketball again, albeit in the minor leagues, and all Tarpley could do was shake his head.


Art in Review
Michael Spano  Laurence Miller Gallery 138 Spring Street SoHo Through June 30
In the large works here, Michael Spano combines his longstanding interests in the life of the city and in unconventional photographic processes.
Mr.
Spano makes photograms by placing sections of tabloid newspaper pages onto sheets of film and exposing them directly to light, without using a lens.
He tones the resulting prints in various shades of pink, aqua, purple and so on, then tapes the prints together into grids that resemble large quilts.
By printing through the newspaper pages, Mr.
Spano combines whatever happens to be on the two sides, and by juxtaposing similar prints of the same page, he sets up repetitions of fragmented phrases from the black-type headlines.
The broken-up, overlapping words, from "GABBY GOTTI" to "HAITIAN HORROR AT SEA," form a kind of staccato poetry, while the different colors of the prints lend a blocky, mosaic quality to the overall pieces.
Occasionally the grids suggest more pointed meanings.
In one, a pale-gray cross appears against a background of nearly black prints; on the print at the center of the cross is the headline phrase "FREE AT LAST."


The Art Market
From Ancient Greece
In a high-stakes exchange of treasures, the Greek Ministry of Culture will send the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York sculptures from the fifth century B.C., the pinnacle of classical Greek civilization.
The works will be part of a show called "The Greek Miracle: Classical Sculpture From the Dawn of Democracy, the Fifth Century B.C.," which will include 22 objects, many of which have never before been allowed to leave Greece.
Other European museums will contribute nine works to the exhibition, which opens at the National Gallery on Nov. 22 and runs through Feb. 7.
The show will then be at the Metropolitan Museum from March 11 to May 23.
In the museum world, however, there's no such thing as a free statue.
In return for the Greek treasures, the National Gallery and the Metropolitan will send Athens more than 70 major paintings from their permanent collections for an exhibition opening in December at the National Gallery in Athens.
It is called "From El Greco to Cezanne: Three Centuries of Masterpieces From the National Gallery of Art, Washington, and the Metropolitan Museum, New York." The show will feature about 35 Old Master paintings from the Metropolitan and about 35 French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings from the National Gallery.


Corrections
A sports headline yesterday about the College World Series of baseball misstated Miami's standing after its first loss, to California-Fullerton.
Miami was not eliminated.


For Candidates, Some Unconventional Forums


Anguish of East Germans Grows With Property Claims by Former Owners
This pleasant town in the former East Germany seems like a fine place to live.
Houses are sturdy and handsome, trees line every street, and downtown Berlin is only 40 minutes away by train.
But behind the facade, Zepernick is facing a social and political crisis.
More than half the houses here have been claimed by former owners or their descendants who now live in western Germany, and many residents are depressed and angry at the prospect of being displaced.


'Fifth Generation' Became Japan's Lost Generation
A bold 10-year effort by Japan to seize the lead in computer technology is fizzling to a close, having failed to meet many of its ambitious goals or to produce technology that Japan's computer industry wanted.
After spending more than $400 million on its widely heralded Fifth Generation computer project, the Japanese Government said this week that it was willing to give away the software developed by the project to anyone who wanted it, even foreigners.
Machines That Would Think
That attitude is a sharp contrast to the project's inception, when it spread fear in the United States that the Japanese were going to leapfrog the American computer industry.
In response, a group of American companies formed the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a consortium in Austin, Tex., to cooperate on research.
And the Defense Department, in part to meet the Japanese challenge, began a huge long-term program to develop intelligent systems, including tanks that could navigate on their own.


Quotation of the Day
"How many districts are there in New York? Thirty-one. So how many districts do you have to draw? Thirty, because the 31st is whatever's left over." -- ALAN GARTNER, a consultant in the state's Congressional redistricting.  [ B2:1. ]


Our Porous Borders
To the Editor:
In "The Riots: Underclass vs. Immigrants" (Op-Ed, May 15) Edward N. Luttwak implicitly notes the major problem of illegal immigration, but does not complete the picture.
The seemingly endless flow of illegal immigrants affects more than the underclass; it has ramifications for the country at large.
Congressional redistricting is based on a 1990 census that includes millions of illegals.
California, where the major disturbances occurred, is bulging with illegal aliens; they not only displace citizen workers and claim valuable social resources, but without a vote they also change the composition of Congress.


Dr. Maury Leibovitz, Art Dealer And a Clinical Psychologist, 75
Dr.
Maury P. Leibovitz, a psychologist and an art entrepreneur who was also active in Reform Judaism, died on Sunday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 75 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his cousin, Albert Vorspan.


S.E.C.'s View On Big Salaries
The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission urged Congress today to reject legislation that would restrict the corporate tax benefits of large executive salaries.
Amid shareholder outrage over multimillion-dollar payouts to many executives, both the House and Senate are considering proposals to limit the deductibility on corporate income taxes for large salaries and benefits.


Mariners Rookie Wins 8th in Row
Mariners 10, Indians 3
CLEVELAND, June 4 (AP) -- Dave Fleming, a rookie, won his eighth straight decision and Kevin Mitchell hit two home runs, including his first career grand slam, as the Seattle Mariners overpowered the Cleveland Indians, 10-3, tonight.
Ken Griffey Jr. also homered twice for the Mariners, who ended their three-game losing streak and Cleveland's three-game winning streak.
Mitchell had five runs batted in, equaling his career high, and Griffey had four as the Mariners hammered Denis Boucher (1-1).


Sounds Around Town
Authentically Puerto Rican
"Somos Boricuas," the Rumsey Playfield, Central Park, midpark at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 529-1955.
A celebration of Puerto Rico's diverse music and culture, brought together by Citylore, an urban-folklore organization.
The music includes the salsa-meets-jazz of Manny Oquendo's Conjunto Libre, the bouncy rural jibaro, or hillbilly, music of Conjunto Melodi Tropical and the Afro-Caribbean drumming and singing of a bamba and plena group, Los Pleneros de la 21.
Masks, dolls and other crafts will be on display.
Sunday from 1 to 8 P.M.
Free.
Community and Change
Los Lobos, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Performing blues, rockabilly, folk-rock, Mexican-American norteno music, new songs about community and change, Los Lobos is an all-American band from East Los Angeles, with a repertory that moves from the smoothest ballads to the grittiest rockers with grace and gumption.
Tonight and tomorrow at 8 and 11 o'clock; tickets are $17.50.


CHRONICLE
The rehearsals are going on almost nonstop for "Sondheim: A Celebration at Carnegie Hall," which will bring together a cast that includes GLENN CLOSE, LIZA MINNELLI, BILL IRWIN, PATTI LUPONE, MANDY PATINKIN, REGINA RESNIK and the Boys' Choir of Harlem on Wednesday.
But SCOTT ELLIS, the director of the salute to STEPHEN SONDHEIM, said yesterday: "It is not a frenzy. The only way to do these things well is to be organized."
Though the show will run for only one performance, planning began a year ago, Mr.
Ellis said, with the assemblage of the artistic team, PAUL GEMIGNANI as musical director, SUSAN STROMAN as choreographer, DAVID THOMPSON as writer and KEN MARSOLAIS as executive director.


For Children
'Amerimusica'  Brooklyn Academy of Music Majestic Theater 651 Fulton Street Fort Greene (212) 226-0083 Recommended ages: 3 and up Tomorrow and Sunday
For 16 years, the inimitable Jacques d'Amboise, founder and artistic director of the National Dance Institute, has corralled 1,000 inner-city children each year into a dance corps, aiming to perform their arabesques and kick their legs at precisely the same time.
The children's annual recital is a gigantic event in which they can show off in a professional theater -- rickety-looking but grand -- with professional musicians what they have learned in front of mirrors and at the barre.
Francis de Sales School for the Deaf.
They dance mostly to original music written and conducted by David Amram, with jazz, ballroom, carnival, marching band, ragtime and folk.
When the children are not glissading across the stage, they are dancing the lindy, the Charleston, the mambo and hip-hop moves, making languid moments rare.


Fare War Is Coming To an End
After a tumultuous 10-day run, the curtain rings down at midnight tonight on the airline industry's smash hit -- the crowd-pleasing half-price ticket sale.
But those who have waited until now to book flights are likely to find a sold-out sign.
By yesterday morning American Airlines had sold its entire summer's allotment of sale seats, except on some flights that depart on Tuesdays or Wednesdays, and other carriers were equally overwhelmed by a demand that far exceeded industry expectations.


Ecology Fund Proposed
The World Bank has proposed that the United States and other nations give $5 billion to poor nations for their ecology, officials said.
Page A6.


Dinkins Negotiators Still Seek Longer Sanitation Routes
A month after a deadline to wrest work-rule changes from New York City sanitation workers, the Dinkins administration is still struggling to come up with a plan that would do that, forcing trash haulers to work longer days by extending their collection routes.
That agreement is important because it will serve as a model for reaching gains in worker productivity in the city's 59 trash-collection districts, a process that is supposed to be finished in a year under the contract.
Beyond that, it could serve as an example of the type of work-rule changes the city hopes to achieve with other unions as it begins negotiations with them this week.


Pepperdine Slam Eliminates Texas
A grand slam by Steve Rodriguez gave Pepperdine University a dramatic 5-4 victory over Texas in the College World Series tonight, eliminating the Longhorns from the double-elimination tournament and sending the seventh-seeded Waves to the championship game for the first time.
Rodriguez, a 5-foot-9-inch second baseman and leadoff hitter, had 3 home runs in the 56 games before the Waves reached Omaha.
The seventh-inning home run came after Texas had ended a Pepperdine streak of 24 consecutive scoreless innings, the longest from the start of a College World Series.
Pepperdine (47-11-1) will meet the winner of the game Friday between Miami and California-Fullerton in the final on Saturday afternoon.


Reginald Malcolmson, Ex-Michigan Dean, 79
Reginald Malcolmson, professor emeritus of architecture and former dean of the University of Michigan's College of Architecture and Urban Planning, died on Monday at the University of Michigan Hospital in Ann Arbor.
He was 79 years old and lived in Ann Arbor.
An announcement from the university said he died after a long illness.


Atlanta Airport Terminal Evacuated in Gas Leak Scare


U.S. Accused of Abuse Of Haitians at a Center
Haitians who are interned at a detention center operated by the Immigration and Naturalization Service here are being "abused, harassed and intimidated" by security guards and officials at the compound, say refugee-advocacy groups and immigration lawyers.
Affidavits collected from detainees by the Haitian Refugee Center, an advocacy group here, say that at least two Haitians have been "badly beaten" by guard since Saturday, when a fire broke out at the center, the Krome Detention Facility.


Sounds Around Town
Echoes of the Swing Era
George Gee Orchestra, the Song of Singapore Theater, 17 Irving Place, at 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 696-9737.
Five years ago George Gee's 17-piece band joined the stable of orchestras that play regularly for the weekly "Savoy Sunday" dances of the New York Swing Dance Society.
Using musicians experienced in swing-era styles, including several members of Lionel Hampton's current band and the trombonist Eddie Bert, who was featured by Stan Kenton and Benny Goodman and is now a member of the American Jazz Orchestra, Mr.
Gee plays the arrangements of swing bands, including those of the rarely heard Jan Savitt and Duke Pearson Bands and the classics of Count Basie and Goodman.
Three of Mr.
Gee's regular sidemen are also playing on Broadway, eight shows a week in "Jelly's Last Jam" and "Five Guys Named Moe." But on Sunday, their night off, they will be with Mr.
Gee.
The dancing starts at 8 P.M. and continues until midnight.
Admissions are $12, $8 for members of the Swing Dance Society, and $4 for the elderly. 25th Anniversary
Vikki Carr, the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
The year 1967 was important for Vikki Carr.
Her shows today, tomorrow and Sunday are at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
At the tables there are a $25 music charge plus a $5 minimum; admission to the bar is $15.
Ellington Fan
Mike LeDonne Trio, the Chestnut Room, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 873-3200.
Although Mike LeDonne, the pianist, is closely associated with swing-era styles through his work with the Widespread Jazz Orchestra, he has a much more specific connection with the music of Duke Ellington.
He has described himself as an Ellington fanatic, and with the least excuse -- or no excuse at all -- he will veer into anything Ellingtonian, particularly rarely heard tunes.
With John Webber on bass and Kenny Washington at the drums, he mixes his Ellington choices with songs composed by pianists like Hank Jones and Jimmy Rowles or selections to which he was introduced by other pianists like Tommy Flanagan and Barry Harris.
The trio plays today and tomorrow from 10 P.M. to 2 A.M.
There is a $10 minimum.


Fertility Advances Leave Trail of Ethical Questions
Tens of thousands of frozen human embryos, leftovers from high-tech fertility treatment, lie stored in tanks of liquid nitrogen throughout the country.
And the number is growing.
Though most couples and their doctors agree in advance what will become of their embryos, some cases have given rise to questions, disagreements and even lawsuits.
As the use of the technology spreads, ethicists and fertility experts say, the disagreements are bound to increase.


Care for Environment Doesn't Hurt Economy
To the Editor:
"Environment Laws Are Eased by Bush as Election Nears" (front page, May 20) highlights a phenomenon that Americans have seen before.
George Bush and Jimmy Carter both entered the White House as declared environmentalists, and both took some noteworthy steps.
It is troubling to see President Bush in a campaign year succumbing to the same temptation that befell President Carter some 12 years ago: blaming environmental protection for the country's economic problems.


Saving the Earth From Roasting
Is there yet time to save Earth from a catastrophic roasting that some experts now regard as virtually inevitable?
A new show at the American Museum of Natural History offers a rare opportunity for visitors to crystallize their thinking about this monstrous prospect.
The museum and its partner in the project, the Environmental Defense Fund, recently opened a spectacular exhibition aimed not only at demonstrating the possibly imminent danger of global warming, but also at suggesting the possibility of salvation, provided that people everywhere begin pitching in.


The Mob Claims a Martyr
At a time when many people around the world are expressing malaise about their public officials, the assassination last month of Italy's leading anti-Mafia investigator should be gravely noted.
Judge Giovanni Falcone was killed by a car bomb along with his wife, Judge Francesca Morvillo, as well as three bodyguards and several travelers on a Sicilian highway.
For the last 15 years, Judge Falcone led a crusade against the Mafia octopus, which has gripped his native Sicily for centuries.
In 1986 he engineered Italy's judicial assault on the Mafia in a mass trial that resulted in 350 Mafia members sentenced to long prison terms.
The powerful village and provincial Mafia leaders who ruled Sicily's underworld and exported death and terrorism throughout the world retreated.
It was the first time in several hundred years that the Mafia was thoroughly investigated and prosecuted.


Race Problem Is Addressed At Harvard
In his first commencement address, the new president of Harvard, Neil L. Rudenstine, talked about the problem of enabling different kinds of people to live and work harmoniously together.
"I am often asked why is it that ethnic, racial and other relations among students today seem to be so tense and even hostile on this campus," he said yesterday, addressing an afternoon ceremony in Harvard Yard where alumni joined graduates and their families for the university's 341st commencement.


In Carving Up of Districts, Some Share the Leftovers
It slithers and snakes from upper Manhattan to Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn, from Grant's Tomb to the Coney Island Cyclone, brushing past Times Square, Union Square and scores of lesser landmarks in between -- three squiggly blobs linked by three slinky slivers.
It is the proposed new Eighth Congressional District, and come September, if the New York State Legislature has its way and the Federal courts approve it, it will fuse the districts of two longtime members of the city's Democratic delegation, Ted Weiss of Manhattan and Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, into one new battleground.


Those 'Puzzling' Stock Run-Ups
Much like the celebrated insider trading cases that came to light in the 1980's, yesterday's revelation of a fresh round of insider charges suddenly offers a possible explanation for what had previously been an inexplicable series of stock price run-ups.
The price of the stocks had, for some reason, shot up before items of favorable company news were made public.


New York Court Reduces Tax Bill For Office Tower With Asbestos
The cost of modernizing an obsolete building filled with asbestos can be used to reduce the owner's tax bills, under a ruling upheld yesterday by New York State's top court.
The State Court of Appeals refused to hear an appeal by New York City of a case involving One New York Plaza, a 50-story skyscraper at Broad and Water Streets in lower Manhattan, which has been awarded a property-tax refund of some $30 million.
The refund was based in part on a finding that the presence of asbestos had reduced the building's value.


Warning on Airline Labor Relations
The tough tactics that airline managers used to gain huge cost savings from labor under deregulation in the last decade will haunt the industry in the future, a study of airline labor relations concludes.
As a result, the industry is facing at times hostile and increasingly determined union leaders across the bargaining table just when it needs to cut costs further.
A wary work force could also be worrisome to carriers that are now involved in broad expansions overseas, where they are competing with international carriers that have reputations for quality service. 'The Unions Survived'
Dr.
Peter Cappelli, a professor at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania who specializes in labor relations, said the airline industry faced a real problem.
He was the primary author of the study, which was commissioned by the Transportation Department.


Democrats Score a Point in Redistricting
Republicans immediately dubbed the episode Gerry-gate.
They said it was a sinister dark-of-night attempt by Democrats to seize control of the redistricting process and the gerrymandering that goes along with it.
They threatened to censure Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, perhaps even to make him move out of his office in the State Capitol.
The Democrats countered, in essence, that the Republicans should get a life and simply concede that their lawyers had been outgunned.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.68
3.82
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.69
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.81
3.83
5.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.97
6.97
8.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.86
8.42
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.80
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.64
7.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail
PANEL LIKELY TO INCLUDE PEROT IN DEBATES
WASHINGTON, June 4 (AP) -- Ross Perot is likely to be included in debates this fall with President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the likely Democratic nominee, under standards adopted by a bipartisan commission.
Referring to Mr.
Perot, Janet Brown, the executive director of the Commission on Presidential Debates, said, "If you assume his level of support is sustained at the level it is now, it's fair to assume he'd meet the standards."


Market Place; Chevron Stake Is Proving Troublesome for Pennzoil
When a share of Pennzoil is purchased, the buyer gets effective ownership of Chevron stock worth nearly $59, plus a stake in Pennzoil's businesses.
But Pennzoil trades for less than $50 a share.
Does that mean that the market thinks the rest of the company built by J. Hugh Liedtke is worthless?
Not exactly, but it is clear that Wall Street has big doubts that the Pennzoil Company will ever realize much benefit from its stake in the Chevron Corporation.


Diner's Journal
Scalinatella
Those who remember the jolly Irish pub below street level at Madison Avenue and 61st Street would be astonished to see its cool transformation into -- what else? -- a northern Italian restaurant.
Scalinatella, a name that is about as tricky as trying to whistle with a mouthful of linguine, is the creation of three former waiters at Vico and Sette Mezzo, both on the Upper East Side of Manhattan: Luigi Russo, Marco Pipolo and Alfio Ruocco.
The name means little staircase, like the one leading down to the dining room.
Scalinatella's chef, Errico Girraldo, worked at La Camelia before it closed.
The crisp white dining room has a shiny marble floor, stone walls and high-backed designer chairs.
The major drawback at a recent lunch was the staff's phlegmatic pace, which dragged out lunch to nearly two hours.
But much of the food merits another try.


COMPANY NEWS: Honey, I Dried the Shirts; Well Done, Please And Hold the Starch
It had to happen. Anybody who needs one clean shirt in a
real
hurry has considered taking it straight from the washer and throwing it into the microwave oven instead of the dryer.
Some people have even tried, and discovered it doesn't work very well.
But Rudy C. Pesci, after four years of tinkering in his garage, has made it work, according to a test administered by the United States Department of Energy.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Still Impressed Next Day
IT was all the sweeter because he had not planned it.
Michael Jordan had accepted two winters ago that he was not a great 3-point shooter, that he was no basketball god who could do anything he wanted.
"It was unknown territory," Jordan said yesterday with apparent humility on the morning after he had stunned himself by turning into a long-range shooter.


Orion Discloses Details Of Reorganization Plan
The Orion Pictures Corporation yesterday released the details of its complex plan to reorganize itself and remain an independent company.
Orion, which sought bankruptcy from its creditors last year, has 10 films ready for distribution, including "Robocop 3" and "Dark Half."


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO., Murray Hill, N.J., was awarded a $28.9 million contract for switching equipment by Telefonos de Mexico.
CORNING INC., Corning, N.Y., reached an agreement to acquire Biosym Technologies Inc., San Diego, Calif., a scientific software company.
Terms were not disclosed.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Prognostications; Nixon Tells Journalists He Wouldn't Bet Against Perot
Former President Richard M. Nixon, who prides himself on his political prognostications, told Russian journalists today that Ross Perot is "a formidable candidate" for the American Presidency, "and I wouldn't bet against him."
Mr.
Nixon then cautioned any Russians of a sporting mind that "I wouldn't bet the ranch" on Mr.
Perot, the Texas billionaire who has all but declared himself an independent candidate for President.


Philadelphia Electric's Sale
The Philadelphia Electric Company yesterday offered for sale $125 million in first- and refunding-mortgage bonds due in 2022 through competitive bidding won by the First Boston Corporation.
Underwriters said the securities carried an 8 5/8 percent coupon and had beenreoffered to the public at a price of 98.80 to yield 8.738 percent, or about 85 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Snappy Comebacks for Seles and Graf in Paris
The sunlight returned to the French Open today to bake some stability into the slippery center-court clay, but both Monica Seles, the defending champion, and Steffi Graf, a two-time champion now on the rebound personally and professionally, had to contend with a brief visit to the tennis twilight zone before extricating themselves from the semifinal round.
Seles, seeded No. 1, and Graf, the not-so-complacent No. 2, both of whom have suffered just one loss on clay this year, will meet on Saturday in the Grand Slam final.
But neither displayed abject invincibility today: they had to deal with three-set challenges, and both dropped serve six times.


F.D.A. Issues Warning on Jaw Implants That May Disintegrate in the Body
The Food and Drug Administration today warned manufacturers of jaw implants made of silicone and Teflon that some of the devices might be dangerous and that the companies would have to prove that their implants were safe or remove them from the market.
At a hearing today before the House Government Operations Subcommitee on Human Resources, which oversees the agency, an F.D.A. official, James Benson, said the agency had sent warning letters to the manufacturers ordering the recall of some implants and requesting additional safety information about others.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about college presidents misstated the retirement date set by Hanna H. Gray of the University of Chicago.
It is June 30, 1993, not this year.


Amid Mile-Long Gas Lines, Victory for Yugoslav Chief
As depositors descended on banks to withdraw cash and drivers inched their cars toward pumps in mile-long gas lines, the Government today announced the results of Parliamentary elections it had conceived to legitimize a reconstituted Yugoslavia.
But with the consequences of a United Nations trade embargo growing more apparent on an almost hourly basis, the vote tallies seemed anticlimactic and the officials who offered them did so without fanfare and without explanation for why it took four days to make the winners known.


Ex-Policeman Is Charged In Protection of Brothels
A former New York City police officer who had worked in the department's Internal Affairs Division was charged yesterday with promoting prostitution after an 18-month sting operation that began when a woman walked into the Mayor's Office of Midtown Enforcement and attempted to bribe a top official there, the Manhattan District Attorney said.
The former police officer, Joseph Fasano, was arrested along with six women who were indicted on charges of running massage parlors used for prostitution and paying more than $100,000 in cash and cocaine as bribes.
Mr.
Fasano had worked in Internal Affairs and in the District Attorney's office before retiring in 1988, the authorities said.


Miami's Coach Is Retiring But Not Taking Any Holidays
Jeff Alkire, the University of Miami's starting pitcher in the College World Series on Friday, remembered when Coach Ron Fraser's imminent retirement was finally discussed.
The Hurricanes coach had not mentioned the subject to his players since that emotional February clubhouse meeting when he first delivered the news.
More than three months later, with Miami in the losers' bracket of the Atlantic Regional tournament on the Sunday of Memorial Day weekend, the coach faced the end of his 30-year career at Miami as college baseball's Barnum.


Spotlight Falls On Dueling Hard Hitters
Maybe Jim Courier, the defending French Open champion, and Andre Agassi, last year's runner-up, will take to the court wearing flak jackets for their semifinal confrontation on Friday.
According to the two Americans, a mutual siege is in store, and neither can envision surrendering to the other.
Maybe 200th-ranked Henri Leconte of France, now 7-0 in five-set endurathons here after his quarterfinal comeback from two sets down against Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, can swashbuckle all the way to the final round.
Only seventh-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, the sole remaining seeded representative in the bottom half of the men's draw, stands in his way.
Korda advanced to his first Grand Slam semifinal today by completing the job he started on Wednesday evening against 34th-ranked Andrei Cherkasov, 6-4, 6-7 (3-7), 6-2, 6-4.


Inconsistencies Are Questioned In Au Pair Trial
The father of the baby a Swiss au pair is charged with killing acknowledged today inconsistencies on major issues that have become the central elements of the prosecution's case.
Under cross-examination by the defense lawyer in the arson murder trial, the infant's father, William Fischer, acknowledged giving different estimates at different times about the amount of flammable liquids in the house and about whether he had noticed that matches were missing after the fire on Dec. 2.


JUDGE DISMISSES INVESTORS' FRAUD SUIT AGAINST TRUMP
A Federal judge in New Jersey has dismissed a fraud suit filed against the developer Donald J.Trump by holders of bonds issued by his Taj Mahal casino, saying that investors had adequate warning of just how risky the bonds were.
Judge John F. Gerry said the suit could not proceed because the prospectus, issued when the $674 million in bonds for the Atlantic City casino were sold in 1988, gave numerous warnings of possible problems the casino would have in meeting its obligations.
The suit was filed after the casino filed for Federal bankrupty protection.


Russians Still Can't Get Much Justice
To the Editor:
"Two Novelties in Russian Courts: Defense Lawyers and Jury Trials" (front page, May 11) reports that there are 50,000 lawyers in Russia, about half of them defense lawyers, many of them graduated from military or K.G.B. institutes, and that there were 20 times more lawyers in Russia in 1913 than today.
In 1990, there were some 250,000 to 300,000 practicing lawyers in the Soviet Union; roughly 150,000 to 200,000 of them in Russia; some three to four times your figure.


For Bonilla, Old Haunts And a New Perspective
The first order of business was a visit to Fred Tate's.
"I had to get tightened up," Bobby Bonilla said.
"We just kicked it. That's a place you can go to and relax. All the guys go there. I was pretty fired up. They relaxed me."


Corrections
An article on May 25 about Columbia University misstated the extent of a cut in faculty positions next year.
It is a 2 percent cut, completing an 8.6 percent reduction since 1985.
The article also referred imprecisely to uncertainty about student financial aid.
Changes in the financial aid policy would not affect enrolled students already receiving such aid.


Excerpts From Rio Memo: A Plea for the Environment
Following are excerpts from a cable sent by William K. Reilly, director of the Environmental Protection Agency and acting head of the United States delegation at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
The cable, stamped "Confidential," was addressed to Clayton Yeutter, President Bush's domestic policy chief.


CHRONICLE
The one-woman show "JULIE HALSTON'S Lifetime of Comedy," was proceeding routinely on Wednesday evening as Ms.
Halston described the angst of her life as a woman "over 30, divorced and hormonally imbalanced." She was doing her routine of reading, verbatim, from wedding announcements from The New York Times when she came upon a large note that said: "Julie, will you please marry me? Love, Ralph."
Calmly, she proceeded.
"Oh, I've just received a wedding invitation from my boyfriend and actually on this night he's asked me to marry him."


Art in Revi8ew
Gretchen Faust With Kevin Warren  Pat Hearn Gallery 39 Wooster Street SoHo Through June 13
This show offers a perplexing mix of elements: a quietly dramatic physical presence and an unfinished set of ideas.
The gallery is set up as if for a performance, with a few props placed here and there.
A plain wooden chair faces a blank wall; an easel holds a beveled mirror.
One corner of the space has been enclosed with floor-to-ceiling walls to form a separate room.
A statement by the artists explains the concepts and experiences these "situational elements" are intended to suggest.
The mirror on the easel is titled "Portrait," although the fact that it reflects shifting images deliberately contradicts the static nature of portraiture.
The wall-facing chair invites the viewer to sit and gaze until the white wall itself changes into "pure perception of ever-changing light." The empty room is titled "No Radio," after the signs in car windows which announce that there is nothing in the car to steal.
Ms.
Faust and Mr.
Warren write that "there is nothing of value in this show because each viewer already possesses the content of each work."


Review/Art; Homage to One of Italian Art's Great Draftsmen
The Drawing Center in SoHo typically features the work of young and unknown artists who are pushing at the limits of the medium.
"Marking Time," a group show seen at the center in the fall, presented big installation pieces that took drawing into three-dimensional space.
And in March a show called "Darkness Visible" followed the medium into popular culture, displaying the efforts of professional cartoonists alongside those of cartoon-oriented artists.
But each season, the center mounts at least one show that has its feet planted in the past, and that underscores the breadth of this small, exemplary institution.
This year the offering is "Guercino: Drawings From Windsor Castle," an often exhilarating display of 60 sheets by the 17th-century Italian Baroque painter that should appeal to anyone interested in drawing and its traditions.


Some Big Marketers Join Audience for Infomercials
MADISON AVENUE could not laugh derisively enough when television stations began showing infomercials in the mid-1980's.
No one took seriously program-length commercials that were cleverly, sometimes deceptively, crafted to mimic entertainment programming.
Even today, the infomercial remains the Rodney Dangerfield of advertising, shunned and doubted for many reasons: state and Federal investigations of infomercial producers, complaints about product performance and, most crucial, a belief that a lengthy commercial disguised as a conventional program -- like a talk show complete with host, theme song and studio audience -- unfairly masks what is nothing more than a sales spiel.


Bolcom Opera Postponed
The New York premiere of "Casino Paradise," a cabaret opera by William Bolcom and Arnold Weinstein, originally scheduled for Sunday, has been postponed because of an injury to one of the cast members.
The opening is to take place on June 14 at 7 P.M. at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
The opera tells the story of a developer's attempts to turn a quiet North Carolina town into a gambling resort.
Information: (212) 244-3005.


Teacher Programs Faulted
A Connecticut Board of Education committee has placed the University of Bridgeport's teacher-preparation programs on probation.
The probationary status sends a signal that more must be done before Jan. 31, when it has its next review, to correct deficiencies found previously.
School trustees have approved a takeover of the university by the Professors World Peace Academy, which gets most of its funds from the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church.


Blazers Will Give Jordan His Space, But Not Too Much of It
Plan A didn't work for the Portland Trail Blazers against Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls on Wednesday night.
So Portland spent today working on Plan B.
The Trail Blazers were dominated during Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals, won by Chicago, 122-89, at Chicago Stadium.
It was the kind of loss that forces a team to adjust, and the Trail Blazers had plenty of adjustments to make.


Masur to Offer Dvorak In Parks Concert Debut
The New York Philharmonic begins it's 28th season of free Concerts in the Parks on Aug. 3 at 8 P.M. on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
Kurt Masur, the orchestra's music director, will make his first Parks Concerts appearances, leading the Philharmonic in works by Dvorak, Ravel and Beethoven.
The program will be repeated at Van Cortlandt Park in Riverdale, the Bronx, and Westchester Community College in Valhalla, conducted by Mr.
Masur, and at Heckscher State Park in East Islip, L.I., under the Philharmonic's assistant conductor, Samuel Wong.


Europeans Agree to Honor Arms Pact by Old Blocs
Former adversaries of the East and the West formally agreed here today to keep to the terms of a treaty drastically reducing conventional weapons held by NATO and the countries of the now-defunct Warsaw Pact.
But they failed to reach a consensus on supporting possible NATO peacekeeping missions in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union.
Modification of the treaty on conventional forces in Europe, which was signed in Paris in November 1990, became necessary after the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union fell apart.
The accord's application has been delayed by squabbling among their successors about how to divide obligations.


Jazz Concert to Benefit Performing-Arts School
The Fiorello H. La Guardia High School for the Performing Arts will have a benefit jazz concert tomorrow featuring some of the school's distinguished alumni and current La Guardia jazz students.
Performers are to include Keith David, who was nominated for a Tony Award for his role as Chimney Man in "Jelly's Last Jam"; Marcus Miller, a Grammy Award-winning bassist, and Michael Leonhart, a trumpeter and La Guardia senior who this year became the first recipient of the new Grammy for outstanding high-school musician.
Among the other La Guardia graduates scheduled to perform are the drummers Kenny Washington and Omar Hakim; Andy and Jerry Gonzalez of the Latin band Fort Apache; Jimmy Owens, a trumpeter; Larry Willis, a pianist, and Frank Owens, leader of the Apollo Theater band.


Troubling Questions on New York Sludge Plan Go Unanswered
To the Editor:
"New York Sludge Disposal Respects Environment and Budget" by Albert F. Appleton, the city's Environmental Protection Commissioner (letter, May 11), responding to my April 23 letter, which criticizes the billion-dollar contracts for the city's interim sludge management plan is illuminating more for what it omits than what it contains.


Wal-Mart's Late Founder Still Stirs Stockholders
The voice and visage of Sam Walton were displayed here today in big-screen video remembrances and recalled in song, as Wal-Mart Stores Inc. turned its annual stockholders meeting into a tribute to its founder and former chairman, who died two months ago.
Typically a rambling carnival that honors employees of all ranks, reviews the company's remarkable growth in sales and profits and cheers the rising wealth of Wal-Mart shareholders, the assemblage today was punctuated by quiet moments when Mr.
Walton's image appeared on three huge screens at one end of an arena on the campus of the University of Arkansas.


Concert to Benefit Riverside Park Fund
The Riverside Symphony is to perform at a benefit on Tuesday evening for the Riverside Park Restoration Fund.
The concert, at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall, is to feature the violinist Victor Schultz in works by Bernstein, Honegger and Mozart, with George Rothman conducting.


Effort to Sell Canary Wharf Finds Few Are Eager to Buy
The court-appointed administrators controlling the Canary Wharf project of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. said today that they had begun preliminary talks with investors interested in buying all or part of the bankrupt East London office development.
But they indicated that they were not being overwhelmed with serious inquiries.
While noting the process has just begun, one administrator, Nigel Hamilton, said, "I suspect there will be not more than a half-dozen worldwide" seriously interested in bidding.


Corrections
An article yesterday about accusations of White House interference in the 1990 census process identified the general counsel of the Commerce Department incorrectly in some editions.
He is Wendell L. Willkie 2d.


Pentagon Plans One-Year Delay Of 'Star Wars'
The Pentagon is delaying the planned deployment of a $35 billion "Star Wars" antimissile system by at least a year so that more tests can be done in an effort to avoid any costly and crippling defects.
In disclosing the new schedule to a Senate subcommittee late Thursday, Donald J. Atwood, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, said that the planned operation of land-based interceptors would slip from 1997 to 1998 because top Pentagon officials found the plan too risky in its current form.
Nunn Angry Over Schedule
The delay in deployment could possibly be longer if the revised plan is also found to be too risky, Mr.
Atwood implied in his testimony.
Congress had set a goal of 1996 for initial deployment.


Time for a Getaway


Cardinal to Lead March Against Abortion Clinic
Carrying his church's anti-abortion message into the streets of New York for the first time, John Cardinal O'Connor will lead a large gathering of demonstrators in a march and prayer vigil at a Manhattan abortion clinic next Saturday, a spokesman for the Archdiocese of New York said yesterday.
The spokesman, Joseph G. Zwilling, said the Cardinal and other demonstrators, after a Mass at a midtown church, would march to the Eastern Women's Center Abortion Clinic, at 38 East 30th Street, to recite the Rosary.
He said they would remain behind police barriers outside and would not argue with or try to block women entering the clinic.


Finns Hope Technology Will Fill a Market Gap
The Finnish Government, seeking new trading partners to replace those lost when the Soviet Union collapsed, sent its Ambassador to the heart of New Jersey's high technology strip today to drum up investment from New Jersey businesses.
About 100 technology concerns sent representatives from New Jersey, whose 7.5 million residents outnumber Finns by 2.5 million.
The companies hoped to arrange joint ventures, subsidized by New Jersey or Finland, in part to help the state economy out of its slump and in part because they believe that in the long run Finland will be the gateway to doing business with the Russians.


Britain and Japan Split With U.S. on Species Pact
Britain and Japan indicated today that they would sign a treaty to protect plants and animals, breaking with the United States and deepening American isolation on an accord that was to be one of the main achievements of the Earth Summit.
The British and Japanese actions left the United States as the last holdout among the major industrial nations on the treaty.
American officials also said that the United States delegation was further embarrassed by the earlier disclosure that the White House had rebuffed a proposal by the chief delegate, William K. Reilly, to accept certain modifications in the treaty's language and sign it.


Carbon Tax: Green Twist on Oil Price
Preparing for the Earth Summit that opened in Rio de Janeiro this week, representatives of the European Community's 12 nations proposed a carbon tax -- a tax tied to the amount of carbon dioxide that burning the fuel creates.
That step reopened an old dispute over the pricing of oil: When the importing nations talk of raising prices to hold down consumption, exporting nations threaten to do the job for them and keep the revenue for themselves.


Rainbow Not Needed For Heart and Courage
THIS old world spins so fast you're lucky if you catch the headlines, much less the stories.
So we miss what's most interesting, the stories behind the stories.
Take the three-week-old strike at the fabled Rainbow Room.
The facts are straightforward: 140 workers, a bit less than half the staff, are on strike for better wages, benefits and working conditions.


Observer; Stressed All Over
The voters are saying, "In your face, Bush!"
They are saying, "In your face, Clinton!"


CHRYSLER TO END PRODUCTION OF JEEP COMANCHE
The Chrysler Corporation said it would end production of its slow-selling Jeep Comanche pickup truck at its Toledo, Ohio, plant next week after eight model years of production.
Chrysler, which acquired the American Motors Corporation and its Jeep operations in 1987, had been building about 12 Comanches a day.
The Toledo plant now makes about 720 Cherokee sport-utility vehicles a day.


U.S. BEGINS TALKS ON OUTSIDE FORCE TO STABILIZE HAITI
Bush Administration officials said today that they have begun talks on a plan that, for the first time, would involve the dispatch of an international peacekeeping force to Haiti as part of a political settlement restoring the Government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The initiative being discussed with Caribbean and Latin American leaders would require the opposing forces in Haiti to commit themselves to the return of Father Aristide, who was overthrown by the military last September.


Patents; Hanging in a Tree To Watch Wildlife
In another approach to the challenge of concealing one's identity from animals and wildlife, a retired hairdresser in Ipswich, Mass., has patented a portable enclosure for hunters, bird watchers and other nature lovers that allows them to hang from a branch above the ground.
The blind was invented by Constantine Tzavaras, a longtime hunter and sportsman.
It is based on the principle that deer and other animals are more likely to detect human odors if a person is on the ground at the same level as the animal's nose.


Classical Music in Review
North/South Consonance Christ and St. Stephen's Church


In This Comeback, The Joke's on Drexler
In the midst of a happy Portland locker room, Danny Ainge and Buck Williams joked with reporters about the turning point of tonight's game, in which the Trail Blazers overcame an 8-point deficitand defeated Chicago, 115-104, in overtime.
"The turning point of the game?" Ainge said, repeating a question. "When Clyde left."





U.N.L.V. Liable for Tarkanian's Legal Fees
In another court ruling, U.N.L.V. has been ordered to pay $196,000 in legal fees incurred by the former basketball coach JERRY TARKANIAN in his long, bitter battle with the N.C.A.A.


Patents; A Beach Towel Tracks the Sun
In Annapolis, Md., Alan H. Swing has patented a beach towel that features a kind of sundial to promote what he calls symmetrical tanning and, at the same time, to help sunbathers keep track of the time spent soaking up rays.
The idea, according to Mr.
Swing, is to help tanning enthusiasts keep their bodies lined up with the direction of the sun's rays as the day progresses.
Thus, the towel comes with a short rod that is placed in the sand and pokes up through the towel at one end.


Blazers Beat Bulls in Overtime to Even Series
Faced with a seemingly hopeless situation, the Portland Trail Blazers pulled off an escape that would have impressed Houdini.
Winning a memorable playoff game, the Trail Blazers stunned the Chicago Bulls, 115-104, in overtime, tying the National Basketball Association finals, 1-1.
How stunning was it?
Portland's best player, Clyde Drexler, fouled out with 4 minutes 36 seconds remaining in regulation and Chicago leading, 92-82.
The Bulls led by 6 with 2 minutes left in regulation.
And Michael Jordan, the game's best player, missed a 14-foot jumper that could have won the game with 3 seconds left in regulation.


New York Telephone Submits A Proposal to Overhaul Rates
New York Telephone proposed a sweeping overhaul of its telephone prices yesterday that would increase rates for homes and small businesses while cutting them for big corporate customers.
Monthly charges for an ordinary residential telephone line would nearly double over the next four years, from about $10 today to as much as $17.
But the company said much of this increase would be offset by declines in charges for individual phone calls.
Over all, the company estimated, a typical home would see its bill climb about 60 cents a month.


Judge Rules in Favor of N.C.A.A.
A Federal judge handed the National Collegiate Athletic Association a victory yesterday in its efforts to regulate college athletics, ruling against a Nevada law that gives due-process rights to member schools under investigation by the association.
United States District Judge HOWARD McKIBBEN enjoined Nevada from enforcing the law, which would have forced the N.C.A.A. to make major alterations in enforcement procedures.


Howe Will Plead Guilty to One Charge
Kris McLean, the Federal prosecutor in the Steve Howe case, confirmed today from the United States Attorney's office in Great Falls, Mont., that the Yankees relief pitcher would plead guilty on Monday to attempted possession of cocaine in exchange for dismissal of a second charge against him, possession of cocaine.
But Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner, remained reluctant to comment on what action, if any, he planned to take when Howe's legal situation is finally resolved.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House Memo; Bush's War With Congress Suddenly Shifts to Fickle Romance
After six months of relentlessly attacking Congress as the obdurate, free-spending root of America's woes, President Bush suddenly has come up against a vexing political problem.
Polls show that voters are apparently sick of finger pointing and are looking instead for leadership.
So this month, Mr.
Bush is trying a somewhat different tack.
He is saying nice things about Congress, hoping it will pass some of his legislation.


Space-Saving Home Laundries
With space a rare commodity in many city apartments and smaller homes, appliance makers have introduced a variety of new space-saving clothing washers and dryers.
There is a surprising dearth of reliable research on the bewildering array of models, how they operate and how their features compare.
Buyers hoping for guidance from organizations like Consumers Union will come up dry.
That independent organization has not tested or rated space-saving machines in recent years.


Your Money; Should Children Collect Insurance?
MANY people who would not think of handing over hundreds of thousands of dollars, or a million or more, to their college-age children have inadvertently paved the way for doing just that.
What's more, if it happens, they will not be in a position to correct it.
The issue is life insurance.
It is quite common for people who have life insurance to name their spouse as primary beneficiary and their children as contingent beneficiaries.
Stuart Kessler, a partner in Goldstein, Golub, Kessler &amp; Company and head of personal financial planning for the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, said last week that that was the case with participants in seminars he has conducted for corporate and professional groups.


Corrections
A brief report on Monday about Bucknell University's commencement misidentified the United Nations position held by the commencement speaker, Joseph Verner Reed.
He is the Under Secretary General and Special Representative to the Secretary General for Public Affairs.


Wet Shoes and Traffic Delays: A Most Blustery Day
Last weekend ended with a daylong downpour.
This weekend started with one, leaving the Friday evening rush a blustery, squishy, waterlogged mess that tied up traffic, triggered flood alerts and pushed area commuters to the edge of their endurance.
When a pair of subway delays conspired to fling several hundred commuters at the window of a transfer agent at the 59th Street station, he ignored the crush and yelled that as far as he was concerned the trains were running on time.
"I can't give out transfers," he shouted.
"I'll call the police and tell them to bring shotguns." A few people shouted back.
Most just trudged up the stairs to face the elements.


Special Corner For Stephens
At Belmont Park yesterday, Woody Stephens donated his five Belmont Stakes trophies and 30 others from his long career as a trainer, and presided over the opening of what will be known as Woody's Corner.
The 78-year-old Stephens, who trained horses that captured five consecutive Belmonts from 1982 to 1986, is being honored with a permanent display just to the left of the clubhouse entrance.


It's Race, Not Money, Says Bonds
"It's a black thing," said Barry Bonds.
Bonds, the Pittsburgh left fielder, was speaking today about the hostile, and dangerous, reception Bobby Bonilla of the Mets received here Thursday night in his first game back at Three Rivers Stadium since he left the Pirates.
Bonds would not elaborate much on his contention that the booing and mistreatment of Bonilla, who had objects thrown at him in right field, was related to race.
But he laughed off the notion that the hostility was primarily fueled by the size of the $29 million contract that Bonilla signed with New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidate; Perot's Vision: Consensus by Computer
Twenty-three years ago, Ross Perot had a simple idea.
The nation was splintered by the great and painful issues of the day.
There had been years of disorder and disunity, and lately, terrible riots in Los Angeles and other cities.
People talked of an America in crisis.
The Government seemed to many to be ineffectual and out of touch.


Jesus and Peter Never Sought Priestly Celibacy
To the Editor:
The love affair of Eamonn Casey, who resigned as Roman Catholic Bishop of Galway, Ireland (news article, May 7), would not be such an uncomfortable situation for Annie Murphy and her son if we returned to the sources of life in the apostolic church.
The Bishop would not have to live out his years as a "fallen priest."


Lyme Disease Victims Can't Laugh About It
To the Editor:
I was extremely disturbed by your May 5 column from Easton, Conn., treating the tick-borne Lyme disease as grist for the television sensation mill of "the hottest, sexiest, scariest stories of the year," with your headline about "8-Legged Vampires of Doom!" I am not sure if your intentions were to make fun of this serious disease, but your style was offensive to those who have been battling this disease for many years.


Where Markets Are Never Super; Some Urban Neighborhoods Fight Absence of Major Chains
The names are nothing but nostalgia now -- A.&amp; P., Pathmark, Food Pageant, Grand Union -- a roll-call of supermarkets filled with glistening vegetables and fresh cuts of meat that were once as much a fixture of suburban life in southeast Queens as the neat rows of wood-frame and Tudor houses.
But that was 20 years ago.


Council Leader May Ask Albany to Do Away With Budget Office
The leader of the New York City Council is considering whether to ask the State Legislature to do away with a provision in the City Charter that calls for the creation of an independent budget office.
The commission that revised the Charter in 1989 created the new office, under the theory that an independent budget agency could provide objective information and analysis on the city's finances.
The Council, the mayor and the comptroller have long had offices that perform detailed budget analysis.


Court in Ohio Orders New Review for Man Extradited as a Nazi
A Federal appeals court in Ohio today ordered the reopening of a case involving the extradition of John Demjanjuk, who has been sentenced to death in Israel as "Ivan the Terrible," the barbarous executioner at the Nazi's Treblinka death camp.
Acting on its own initiative, a three-judge panel for the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, said that the extradition warrant, which authorized Mr.
Demjanjuk's removal to Israel from the United States in 1986 to stand trial as the murderous Ivan, "may have been improvidently issued because it was based on erroneous information." Evidence From Soviet Union
Coming as the Israeli Supreme Court is hearing arguments in Mr.
Demjanjuk's appeal of his conviction and death sentence, the appellate court's order seemed to lend judicial weight to the long-held assertion of the retired Cleveland auto worker that he was not Ivan, but the victim of a case of mistaken identity.


Malawi Needs Assistance and Sympathy
To the Editor:
Re "Facing Down Malawi's Tyrant" (editorial, May 22): Malawi was one of the first countries in independent Africa to reject Communism, or its variations, as the path to development.
Malawi has pursued a free market path to development.
In the late 1960's, in the 1970's and 80's this stand effectively denied Malawi any form of bilateral technical assistance.
Is it to suffer the same fate now for holding onto these positions?
The mainstay of Malawi's economy is agriculture; which is 85 percent rural-based smallholder farming, and 15 percent estate farming.
The country has no minerals to speak of.
Its real gross domestic product growth was 4 percent in 1990 and 7.8 percent in 1991.
This performance has been achieved despite the sacrifices made in a decadelong implementation of the World Bank-International Monetary Fund structural adjustment program.


A Stranded Ship
Nineteen miles off the tip of Manhattan lies a ship without a port -- a 500-foot freighter sitting motionless near the entrance to New York Harbor, like a giant buoy pointing the way to a city it cannot enter.
Since last Saturday the East Trader and its 25 crew members have sat anchored in the choppy waters of the Atlantic, without enough money to enter the port and dwindling supplies of food and water.


William E. Smith, 62, An Editor and Writer
William Edgett Smith, a journalist for Time magazine for 35 years, died on Thursday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of carcenoid syndrome, a rare cancer, his family said.


Dinkins Returning from Europe, Hoping Investment Will Follow
Wrapping up a five-day European trip in which he sold New York City to business leaders as a once and future financial center, Mayor David N. Dinkins heads home Saturday with few firm commitments but encouraging signs that European businesses are willing to invest more money in New York.
In London, the Mayor spoke to Conrad M. Black, owner of The Daily Telegraph and the leading prospective buyer of The Daily News.
In Paris, he was warmly greeted by Mayor Jacques Chirac, a conservative whose remarks were seen as blessing directed toward the business community.


New Aid for Golfers in Search of a Perfect Swing
Learning how to play golf comes largely with knowing how to hit the ball properly.
While a teacher can explain how to swing a golf club, mastering the technique requires practice.
A training device invented by Robert Fitch, a former golf coach at Indiana University, recently became available as a swing aid for use at home.
The device, the Coach, produced by Golf Training Systems Inc., controls the way a person swings a golf club by guiding movements through an imaginary arc.


Israeli Officials Keep Gaza Sealed and Worry About the Cost
As Israel kept the Gaza Strip sealed off for a 12th day, the longest period since the gulf war last year, Government leaders differed among themselves today over how long and at what political price they could keep the closing in effect.
The action, which produced a United Nations protest this week, prevents about 40,000 Arab laborers from traveling to jobs in Israel, and is causing further economic hardship in the occupied coastal area, home to 750,000 Palestinians, many of them already poor.


Review/Dance; A Dracula That Draws Blood, Not Derision
One thing deserves to be made clear at the outset about Stuart Sebastian's "Dracula," which the American Repertory Ballet Company presented on Thursday night at the Haft Auditorium of the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Mr.
Sebastian wasn't kidding.
Over the years, several choreographers have been inspired by Bram Stoker's vampire novel of 1897.
But most of their adaptations have been spoofs.
In contrast, Mr.
Sebastian's "Dracula" is a serious thriller.


METRO DIGEST
TANGLED FINANCES STRAND SHIP AT SEA
Since last Saturday the ship the East Trader and its 25 sun-baked crew members have sat anchored in choppy waters 19 miles off the coast of Manhattan, with dwindling supplies of food and water and no money to enter the Port of New York.
Exactly how they got there is a story of the tangled financial dealings of multinational shipping companies and the conundrums of international law.
Page 27.
NEW YORK CITY CARDINAL TO PROTEST AT ABORTION CLINIC
Carrying his church's anti-abortion message into the streets of New York for the first time, John Cardinal O'Connor will lead a large gathering of anti-abortion demonstrators in a march and prayer vigil at a Manhattan abortion clinic next Saturday, a spokesman for the Archdiocese of New York said yesterday.
Page 27.
UNEMPLOYMENT RISES IN REGION
In a persistent sign of economic weakness in New York and New Jersey, unemployment rates increased in both states in May, the Labor Department said.
New Jersey's rate hit 9 percent, and New York's 7.9 percent.
Page 44.
A REPUBLICAN SLOWDOWN FALLS APART
In a fit of pique over a Democratic lawsuit that threw out their legislative redistricting lines, the Republican-controlled Senate held a brief work slowdown today, canceling a number of meetings and refusing to discuss any of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's program bills.
Page 26.
NEW BUDGET OFFICE IS RECONSIDERED
The leader of the New York City Council is considering whether to ask the State Legislature to do away with a provision in the City Charter that calls for the creation of an independent budget office.
The theory was that an independent budget agency could provide objective information on the city's finances.
Page 27.
New York Telephone asks rate increase for homes. 29.
REGION LESS JUNK MEANS LESS BUSINESS
Sam Gershowitz has been recycling abandoned cars for almost 30 years, grinding them into metal chunks about the size of a coffee can and feeding them back into a world market that regards the United States as the Saudi Arabia of scrap.
But for Mr.
Gershowitz and others in the business, the recession has brought hard times.
Page 29.
DENIAL IN THE AU PAIR CASE
The man the defense has tried to cast as an alternate suspect in the murder trial of the Swiss au pair denied under oath today that he had anything to do with the arson fire that killed 3-month old Kristie Fischer.
The witness -- the boyfriend of the infant's sister -- was the first person to arrive at the burning house.
Page 29.
DELUGED WITH CALLS
Like thousands of other harried travel agents across the country, the staff of Travel Trends in Fort Lee, N.J., this week found itself at the center of a frenzy of calls and walk-in customers after the lowest air fares in years.
Page 37.
BUSINESS CARDS TRADE HANDS
The Finnish Government, seeking new trading partners to replace those lost when the Soviet Union collapsed, sent its Ambassador to the heart of New Jersey's high technology strip today to drum up investment from New Jersey businesses.
Page 28.
About New York by Douglas Martin Page 26.


Ballet School Awards
The School of American Ballet has given its 1992 Mae L. Wien Award, which honors outstanding teachers, to Stanley Williams, a longtime teacher at the school.
Recipients of the Wien Award for students were Ana Liceia and Emily Cotes.
The three winners will receive $10,000 each.
The annual award was established in 1987 in memory of Mrs.
Wien, an arts patron and balletomane.


Why Cities?; How to Rebuild Los Angeles
Peter V. Ueberroth, head of Mayor Tom Bradley's panel to rebuild Los Angeles, has described his job as "the chance to dramatically impact a major inner city positively." Brave words.
But while public discussion has focused on enterprise zones, tax incentives and community policing, one important question has received scant attention: How should South-Central Los Angeles be rebuilt?
The rioting that followed the Rodney King verdict destroyed or seriously damaged more than 5,000 buildings.
These could be put back as they were: predominantly one-story commercial buildings backing onto large parking lots, situated on long, dreary blocks bounded by extremely wide, high-speed roads.
Shopping strips over here, houses over there; it's the kind of planning that is the hallmark of most American cities, the kind of planning that only a traffic engineer could love.


Sports of The Times; Climbing Up Jacob's Ladder
ERIC MANUEL leaned against an iron fence and waited with 10 other players for the bus that would take them from the gymnasium to their hotel.
Manuel said he was tired from three days of back-to-back scrimmages, although the expression in his eyes said that he was also weary from a lengthy uphill climb that had taken him from his home in Macon, Ga., to Lexington, Ky., to Oklahoma City.


92d Street Y Plans a Season of Firsts
Premieres of works by Arvo Part, David Diamond and Stephen Albert and what is believed to be the first complete Schubert piano sonata cycle in the United States are among the highlights of the 1992-93 season at the Tisch Center for the Arts of the 92d Street Y. The Schubert cycle, to be played by Andras Schiff, is the central part of the center's fifth annual Schubertiade series.
Several series that the center was reportedly thinking of canceling have survived, most notably the New York Chamber Symphony concerts, directed by Gerard Schwarz, and the Distinguished Artists recital series, which has faced stiff competition from similar series at other halls.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a climate treaty being signed at the Earth Summit included incorrect information from the Austrian delegation about the title of an Austrian official, Hugo Haider.
He is deputy director general of the Federal Ministry of Environment, Youth and Family, not the Minister of Environment.


Building a Democratic Forum


Graf Wants to Reacquire Seles's Slam-Bang Feeling
They have both won here twice before, so novelty will not be a distracting factor on Saturday when Monica Seles attempts to defend her French Open title and Steffi Graf tries to conjure the Parisian version of a Grand Slam feeling she has failed to duplicate here since 1988.
Seles has won the French Open -- and every other Grand Slam she has entered -- for the last two years.
She prevailed everywhere last year but at Wimbledon, where her failure to compete made her a headline distraction.
This year, the No.-1 ranked player has already successfully defended her Australian Open title.
If she defeats Graf on Saturday, the Yugoslav turned Floridian will become the first woman to win consecutive French Opens since Hilde Sperling of Germany from 1935 to 1937.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the New York Stock Exchange tables in some copies of Business Day yesterday reflected Wednesday's trading rather than Thursday's.
Readers wishing copies of the correct tables may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Woman Slain in Bedroom
A 67-year-old Manhattan woman, her throat slashed, was found dead last night in her Greenwich Village apartment, the police said.
The body of the woman, who was not identified pending notification of relatives, was discovered by the building's superintendent just before 9 P.M. last night, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.


Rain Gives Yankees a Rest
The weary Yankees and their tired pitchers received a rest last night because their game with the Detroit Tigers was postponed by heavy rain and was rescheduled as part of a doubleheader, on Sept. 22 at 4 P.M.
Scott Kamieniecki (1-2, 3.40 earned run average) and Bill Gullickson (6-3, 2.88 e.r.a.), who were supposed to pitch last night, are scheduled to start tonight's game at the Stadium.


Companies Lose Millions In Wire Fraud
The president and owner of a New Jersey check-cashing company was charged yesterday with stealing more than $25 million from prestigious clients like the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the New York Stock Exchange and Pepsi-Cola by promising to cash employees' paychecks and then walking away with the companies' payrolls.


AMES STORES POSTS A DEFICIT OF $37.7 MILLION
Ames Department Stores Inc. reported a first-quarter loss of $37.7 million, disappointing news for the discounter after having ended 1991 with its first profitable quarter since filing for bankruptcy protection two years earlier.
In the period a year earlier, the company had a $47.8 million loss.
Sales for the quarter ended April 25 were $482.1 million, compared with $640.2 million for the period a year ago.


COMPANY BRIEFS
JOH.
A.
BENCKISER G.m.b.h., Danbury, Conn. has completed the purchase of the Coty fragrance and cosmetic division, a unit ofPfizer Inc., New York, the pharmaceutical concern.
CLEARLY CANADIAN BEVERAGE CORP., Vancouver, British Columbia, has expanded its bottling capacity to 40 million cases a year with the addition of a new contract withKemmerer Bottling Group, Joliet, Ill.
HOLIDAY INNS INC., Memphis, has reached an agreement in principle to sell its Memphis-based hotel furnishings operations to a group of private investors for undisclosed terms.
INDEPENDENT ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC., Los Angeles, a distributor of television programs, has signed a letter of intent to acquire all assets of theICOM Group Inc., a competing pay-per-call service bureau, in exchange for a combination of cash, notes and common stock.
MORRISON-KNUDSEN CORP., Boise, Idaho, the construction and engineering concern, acquired a five year, multimillion-dollar contract from I.B.M.
Corp., Armonk, N.Y., to perform maintenance and chemical operations at two of its facilities in San Jose, Calif.


Mets Share The Blame In Loss To Pirates
It could be charged to a failure of offense in the ninth inning or to a failure of pitching in the 10th.
There wasn't any dispute, though, about the night's final cost.
It was an excruciating 5-4 defeat to the Pirates at Three Rivers Stadium.
"And it was one of those games," said Bobby Bonilla, "that was in our grasp."


Dream Fares for Fliers Are Nightmare for Agents
"It's been completely out of control," said Bonnie Scheck, the vice president of Travel Trends, a small travel agency here.
Judging by the shambles of what used to be her sedate office, that was an understatement.
"These messages," she said, pointing to inch-high stacks from customers lucky enough to get through on the telephone.
"You can't get back to the people."


Stars Allow Clarke to Talk to Flyers
BOB CLARKE, general manager of the Minnesota North Stars for the last two seasons, has been given permission to talk to the Philadelphia Flyers about returning to an executive position there.
He was the Flyers' general manager from 1984 to 1990 after ending a Hall of Fame career as a player with Philadelphia.


Travel Bargains to Continue, As Half-Price Air-Fares End
Vacation travelers can count on price cuts when they shop for transportation and lodging in the months ahead.
Even though the most recent domestic and foreign airline fare war ended yesterday, experts predict that travel companies will continue to offer discounts in an effort to stimulate summer leisure travel.


White House Enters Fight Over Medicaid Payments
New Jersey Republicans took credit today for enlisting the White House to avert financial calamity by giving $412 million in retroactive Medicaid payments to the state, while Democrats charged that the Bush Administration was blatantly politicking.
But Federal health officials, differing with both sides, said that the funds were not only still uncertain, but in any event could not be available by July 1, when by law the state's budget must be balanced.


Saints' Heyward Fined in Plea Bargain
New Orleans Saints fullback CRAIG (IRONHEAD) HEYWARD was fined $250 and given a suspended sentence in Metairie, La., yesterday in connection with charges arising from an altercation with two women outside a lounge last October.


George Bush, in the Arms Bazaar
It's no secret that the Bush Administration helped build up Iraq militarily before going to war against it.
In his news conference Thursday, Mr.
Bush acknowledged that his policy of accommodation had flopped.
Nevertheless his bureaucracy continues to sell arms to the volatile Middle East.
All the talk about restraining arms trafficking remains mostly that -- just talk.
Last week the U.S. and the four other permanent members of the U.N.
Security Council -- who also happen to be the five leading arms merchants to the Middle East -- produced modest but useful guidelines to restrain nuclear, chemical and biological arms.
But they did nothing to institute guidelines, agreed to earlier, that could slow the sale of conventional arms.


Patents; A Pleasanter Way To Handle Worms
For people who like fishing but are squeamish about handling squishy worms, two brothers in St.
Louis have developed what they call a "Worm Klamp" to reduce the unpleasantries.
The clamp looks a little like the long-toothed combs used by people with curly hair.
The clamp's user presses some of the teeth forward and places the clamp over the worm.The worms are trapped when the forward teeth return to their normal position.
From there, the worm can be threaded directly onto a fishhook.


The Smooth Move
Moving day can be traumatic whether you are going across town or across the country.
But it can be made easier by planning and by knowing the limits of a mover's services.
Rates Rates for interstate moves should be fully negotiable.
However, 39 states, including New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, regulate rates for moves within the state.
Virtually all rates are based on weight and distance, so it may pay to get rid of large or heavy pieces.
Insurance Since most homeowner policies do not cover household goods in transit, it is usually wise to accept the coverage offered by the mover.
There are several options.
Probably the best value is the coverage that pays the cost of replacing a damaged or lost item, after a one-time deductible of at least $250.
Preparation Lessen your workload by leaving soft items like clothes inside drawers, and tape the drawers shut.
Consider having the mover pack the breakables.
Number all boxes, keep an inventory of their contents and give the mover a plan of the new home with the box numbers applicable to each room noted.
Inventory Control Assign a family member or friend to check off each item as it is loaded onto the truck and again as it is unloaded.
Prohibited Items Movers are unlikely to accept perishable foods or combustibles like cleaning fluids, paint or firewood.
Valuables and irreplaceable items like jewelry, coin collections and family photos should be moved by you.
Handy Box Pack a box of essentials like bed linens, favorite toys, paper plates, a coffeepot and easy-to-prepare snacks and load it onto the van last.
This will help get you through the first few chaotic days. (Sources: American Movers Conference. The Relocation Report, published by Runzheimer International)


Review/Pop; A Blur of Flashing Lights and Cacophony
For new British bands on tour, standard equipment now includes strobe lights, moire pattern generators and enough electronic boxes to turn guitar sounds into aural mayhem.
Curve, performing on Thursday night at Manhattan Center, ran true to form but showed just what all the paraphernalia is good for.
Surrounding well-made, well-played songs, the visual and sonic barrage turns disorientation into pure euphoria.
Curve's focal point is its singer, Toni Halliday.
As Debbie Smith, Alex Mitchell and Dean Garcia hunched over their guitars, now and then moving aimlessly amid the flashing lights, Ms.
Halliday prowled the front of the stage, casting baleful eyes on the crowd and half-dancing to Steve Monti's relentless drumbeat.
In the days before punk-rock, her airy mezzo-soprano would have carried tender tidings, but Ms.
Halliday is an heir to Siouxsie Sioux of the Banshees and the Pretenders' Chrissie Hynde.
Her lyrics are accusations, challenges, vows of revenge.
On stage, they dissolve into the music's pounding drone; singing "ah, ah, ah" or "ooh la lala," she is just as eloquent as she is when she warns, "I've come to crush your bones."


College Series Final an All-California Affair
Ron Fraser's 30-year career as coach at the University of Miami came to an end tonight, one victory short of a chance to play for the championship of the 46th College World Series.
The Hurricanes committed an uncharacteristic number of mistakes, both in the field and on the bases, in an 8-1 loss to California-Fullerton that eliminated Miami from the double-elimination tournament.


Navy Plans Training to Fight Sexual Harassment
The Navy's senior admiral, alternating between repentance and frustration, today described a wide-ranging program to end sexual harassment by officers and sailors.
The officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, trying to heal a service rocked by a long series of accusations of rape, sexual assault, striptease acts and other unofficially tolerated offensive acts, said Navy men and women would have to go through a new training program by the end of the year to make them sensitive to the problem.


For Monet's U.S. Disciples, a Home of Their Own
For more than a century, the charming village of Giverny, perched on a hillside overlooking the Seine 45 miles northwest of Paris, has been a magnet for art lovers.
The main reason is that Claude Monet settled there in 1883 and built the lush gardens that became the inspiration for his late series of water-lily paintings.
Around him gathered a circle of disciples, many of them Americans who painted in an Impressionist style unashamedly indebted to the master.
When the Monet house and gardens were refurbished and reopened to the public in 1980, the major financial support for the project came from the United States.
The Monet shrine has brought an inundation of tourists, some 500,000 during a season that lasts from April 1 through October.


Bolivia Grant By Morgan
Bolivia's President, Jaime Paz Zamora, announced yesterday that J. P. Morgan &amp; Company had agreed to donate $11.5 million in Bolivian debt for the benefit of environmental conservation.
Under the "debt for nature" swap -- the largest private bank debt donation ever made to a single country -- the Bolivian Government will commit $2.8 million in local currency to support the efforts of the Fundacion Amigos de la Naturaleza, a private conservation group, and its two American partners, the Nature Conservancy and the World Wildlife Fund.


Graceland Gravy
Elvis Presley fans spent $214,495.37 to mail in more than a million postcard ballots for the commemorative "Elvis" stamp to be issued on his birthday next January.
The choice was between two portraits of Elvis, young and slender versus older and porkier.
The younger Elvis won by a wide margin, 3 to 1.
The Postal Service stands to do even better.
Publicity for the balloting and for the stamp itself will cost more than $1 million.
But the prospect of an eventual $20 million profit demonstrates the merit of a promising new approach to trimming postal deficits -- tapping into the grand old hobby of stamp collecting.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.5
6.25-6.5
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.78
5.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.67
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.81
5.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.92
6.97
8.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.87
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.77
8.81
9.52
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.62
6.64
7.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


4 Women Slashed in Brooklyn; Suspect Is Caught After a Chase
A man wielding a box cutter slashed four women, including one with a baby, during a crazed spree in Brooklyn yesterday morning but was captured after swinging a bottle at a police officer who chased him into a dark subway tunnel, the police said.
"I can't impress on you enough that this city police officer, Alexis Anderson, is a hero in every sense of the word," said Al O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.
"This is not just a chase, but a chase into an extremely dangerous environment."


P.S.A.L. Awards Team Title to Clinton
BILL WAGNER, the track coach at DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx, was a happy fellow yesterday as members of his team participated in the trials of the two-day New York State high school outdoor track and field championships in Kingston.
Wagner had been informed earlier in the week that Clinton had been officially declared the winner of the boys' Public Schools Athletic League outdoor team title after two rulings by P.S.A.L. officials following last Saturday's championships at Columbia University's Wien Stadium.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Still All Wet Nolan Henke and Joey Sindelar, two golfers who have been struggling all season, fed off each other's sudden excellence again yesterday to share the lead at the Memorial Tournament in Dublin, Ohio, after an incomplete second round.
Rain interrupted the tournament for the second straight day.
Play was suspended twice in the late afternoon before finally being stopped for the day at 6:22 P.M. with 33 players still on the back nine.
Henke and Sindelar, who were paired together for the first two rounds at the Muirfield Village Golf Club course, are tied at 10-under-par 134.
Their closest pursuer among the players who have finished 36 holes is Don Pooley at 136.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Columbus Avenue between 86th and 96th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Upper Columbus Avenue street fair.
TOMORROW
Park Avenue South between 14th and 23d streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Park Avenue South street fair.
Madison Avenue between 23d and 26th streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M. for the Philippine street fair.
Madison Avenue between 26th and 45th streets will be closed between 11 A.M. and 2 P.M. for the Philippine Independence Day parade.
MONDAY
Because of the second day of Shabuoth, the Jewish Feast of Weeks, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Riding AIDS Roller Coaster: Hope, Horror, Hope
"If" is a fragile word to hang a life on, but the hundred people infected with the AIDS virus who gathered in an auditorium here on a recent night do exactly that every day: If only a cure for AIDS can be found.
If only they can hold on until it is.
Still, there were no crybabies at the meeting, no whimps allowed.
Marcus Conant wouldn't hear of it.
When the 56-year-old AIDS doctor entered the auditorium, it came to attention, like a roomful of high school football players confronted by their coach.


AIDS Benefit Concert
The second concert in the 802 Fights AIDS/The Actors' Fund Chamber Music Series will take place at 7 P.M. tomorrow at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan.
The benefit concert, featuring the Composers String Quartet and Evelyne Crochet as guest pianist, is dedicated to the memory of Karl Bargen, the quartet's violist, who died of AIDS in December 1990.
On the program are Puccini's Elegy "Crisantemi"; "Langsamer Satz," by Webern; "La Oracion del Torero," by Joaquin Turina; Hugo Wolf's "Italian Serenade," Mozart's Piano Quartet in G minor and the String Quartet in D by Tchaikovsky.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 221-7300.


Board to Discuss Ziegler's Fate
John Ziegler's future as president of the National Hockey League will be discussed at a meeting on Monday between Ziegler and a five-member committee of the league's Board of Governors that has been appointed to study the question of replacing him.
Ed Snider, the owner of the Philadelphia Flyers and chairman of the committee, said yesterday, "I met personally with John Ziegler this week, and the committee as a whole will be meeting with him this coming week."


New Scandal From Old Issue on Wall St.
A new Government case charging the existence of a large insider trading ring has raised fresh doubts about whether the behavior on Wall Street has really changed despite years of sensational insider trading prosecutions, tougher securities laws, larger prosecutorial staffs and better computer surveillance of the financial markets.
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed insider trading charges on Thursday against seven corporate executives and investors, including a former director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company who is the son-in-law of Henry Ford 2d, and a co-founder of the Revlon cosmetics empire.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The nation's unemployment rate climbed to 7.5 percent in May, its highest point since 1984, from 7.2 percent in April, as young people and other job-seekers flocked into a labor market with relatively few openings, Labor Department figures showed.
The report was the first broad indicator of business conditions last month.  [ Page 1. ]  The rate increased in both New York and New Jersey, where it surged to 9 percent from 7.8 percent in April.
Economists said the jump clouded other evidence that the two states, which were among the first to enter recession, were approaching bottom.  [ 44. ]
The audacity and scope of a new insider trading case filed by the S.E.C. against seven corporate executives and investors, including a former Bear, Stearns director, have raised fresh doubts about Wall Street behavior after years of sensational prosecutions.  [ 37. ]
The Pentagon lifted its four-day-old ban on new contracts for General Electric's aircraft-engine division after the company agreed to greater Government oversight of its operations.  [ 37. ]
Chemical Bank raised its prime lending rate to 6.5 percent from 6.25 percent, ending its parade with no followers.  [ 41. ]
Travel agents' offices resembled scenes from Steve Martin movies as the frenzied half-price air ticket sales ended.  [ 37. ] International
Canary Wharf said it was talking with possible investors.
Hanson P.L.C. said it was exploring a joint offer with Bechtel, the American construction giant, for Olympia &amp; York's bankrupt East London office development.
But Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation was said to have lost interest.  [ 37. ]
Britain's Lloyds Bank dropped its $6.6 billion bid for rival Midland.
The parent of Hongkong and Shanghai Bank previously raised its bid, which Midland managers backed, to $7.1 billion.  [ 41. ] Markets
Stocks slid on the unexpectedly weak jobless news, with the Dow Jones industrials giving up 1.04 points, to 3,398.69.  [ 40. ]
Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates dropped amid questions of whether the big jump in unemployment would lead the Federal Reserve to cut short-term interest rates.  [ 40. ]
The dollar was mostly lower, and gold rose a bit.  [ 46. ]
Soybean and corn futures prices tumbled as rain soaked Midwestern fields, promising plentiful harvests.  [ 46. ] Companies
The spirit of Sam Walton lived on as 15,000 Wal-Mart shareholders assembled in a huge University of Arkansas arena, to be inspired by big-screen videos of the late company founder.  [ 39. ]
Ford plans to make its popular Explorer sport-utility vehicle at a second site by 1995, by converting its St.
Louis plant.  [ 39. ]
Banc One reached into West Virginia, with plans to buy Key Centurion Bancshares for stock valued at $536 million.  [ 39. ]
Chrysler is shipping its powerful Dodge Vipers to showrooms at last, opening with a $56,600 price, but would-be buyers are having to up the ante if they wish to drive one.  [ 39. ]
New York Telephone, raising the ire of consumer advocates, proposed a sweeping rate overhaul with rises for homes and small businesses and cuts for big corporate customers.
Prices for individual calls would drop, partly offsetting the higher rates.  [ 29. ] Today's Columns
Many people would give college-age children control over large sums, albeit inadvertently, by making them contingent beneficiaries of life insurance policies.
Jan M. Rosen: Your Money.  [ 38. ]
A bow hunter has a breath-taking invention to throw deer off the scent of human predators.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ 38. ]


Classical Music in Review
New York New Music Ensemble The Kitchen


Jesus and Peter Never Sought Priestly Celibacy; All Sides Need Data
To the Editor:
Your May 16 Religion Notes refers to "A Secret World: Sexuality and the Search for Celibacy," a book I wrote, as if it were a treatise against clerical celibacy.
It is simply an ethnographic description of the celibate-sexual practice, process and achievement of Roman Catholic priests in the United States between 1960 and 1985.
Like other objective studies, it can be used in the defense of the celibate tradition as well as against it.
The study is part of a research project on celibacy and involves experts in comparative literature, psychiatry and sexual behavior.
None of our team are interested in polemics.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6 U.S. BROACHES UNIT IN HAITI
Bush Administration officials said they had opened talks on a plan that would involve sending an international peacekeeping force to Haiti.
The proposal would require Haitians to commit themselves to restoring the deposed President to power.  1  OVERTURE FROM BELGRADE
Portraying himself as an unjustly vilified leader, President Milosevic of Yugoslavia said he was eager to address the concerns of the United Nations to avert the effect of sanctions.
He insisted his Government was not abetting the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  1  BREAKTHROUGH IN SARAJEVO
Muslim Slavs lifted a blockade of a barracks in the war-torn Bosnian capital and allowed 800 Yugoslav soldiers and their families to leave, stirring hope among United Nations negotiators.
A pact was also reached to reopen the Sarajevo airport for the arrival of relief supplies.  4  U.S.
GROWS MORE ISOLATED AT RIO
Britain and Japan indicated that they would sign a treaty to protect plants and animals, breaking with the United States and deepening American isolation on an accord that was to be one of the main achievements of the Earth Summit.  1  The Bush Administration outlines flaws in the biodiversity treaty.  6  President Bush defends his embattled environmental envoy.  6  FARMER IS POLISH PREMIER
Waldemar Pawlak, a relatively unknown 32-year-old farm party leader, was approved by Parliament as Poland's fourth Prime Minister in less than three years.  3  TEST FOR CZECH POET-POLITICIAN
More than two years after he took over as President, Vaclav Havel's political future is on the line as voters in Czechoslovakia elect national and provincial parliaments.  3  OLD BLOCS AFFIRM ARMS CUTS
Former adversaries of the East and the West formally agreed in Oslo to keep to the terms of a treaty drastically reducing conventional weapons held by NATO and the countries of the now-defunct Warsaw Pact.  5  BARRIERS GO UP IN AUSTRIA
Vienna Journal: Europe's strictest asylum law and the deployment of thousands of border guards have put Austria at the forefront of Western European countries seeking to limit an influx of refugees.  2  GAZA'S PAINFUL QUARANTINE
As Israel kept the Gaza Strip sealed off for a 12th day, Government leaders differed over how long and at what political price they could extend the ban.  2  National 7-10  UNEMPLOYMENT RATE CLIMBS
The nation's unemployment rate rose three-tenths of a point last month, to 7.5 percent, its highest level in eight years.
Economists viewed the development more as a political threat to President Bush than as evidence that the economic recovery was in jeopardy.  1  PEROT AND PEOPLE POWER
Beyond the glossy promise of Ross Perot's vision of an "electronic town hall" lies a question: Would the power it placed directly in the hands of a television audience help to solve the nation's problems or instead make them worse?  1  White House Memo: From Bush, an olive branch to Congress.  8  COURT REOPENS DEMJANJUK CASE
A Federal appeals court said the extradition warrant that authorized John Demjanjuk's removal from the United States to Israel six years ago might have been "based on erroneous information." The court's action lent weight to the longtime assertion by Mr.
Demjanjuk, now under an Israeli death sentence as a war criminal, that he is a victim of mistaken identity.  1  CONGRESS MOVES ON URBAN AID
Increasing pressure on the Administration, House-Senate negotiators agreed on a $2 billion emergency urban-aid package.
The White House threatened a veto but hinted that it might compromise.  7  NAVY ACTS ON SEX HARASSMENT
The Chief of Naval Operations ordered training for all naval personnel to heighten sensitivity to sexual harassment and said commanders would end longtime practices like painting suggestive names and pictures on aircraft.  7 DELAY FOR 'STAR WARS'
The Pentagon is postponing the deployment of an antimissile system by at least a year, to 1998, so that more tests can be performed.  1  The House approved $270 billion for the military next year.  9  DOCTOR AND ROLE MODEL
"If" is a fragile word to hang a life on, but the 100 people infected with the AIDS virus who gathered in an auditorium in San Francisco on a recent night do exactly that every day.
Still, there were no crybabies at the meeting, no wimps allowed.
Their doctor, Marcus Conant, wouldn't hear of it.  7  Beliefs: After 49 months, yes, they rested.  10  A new inquiry on Huey Long's killing reached the old conclusion.  9  Dr.
Space-saving home laundries.
A golf-swing training machine.
Obituaries 11  Max Lerner, writer and educator.
Ricardo A. Caminos, scholar of Egyptian hieroglyphics.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  Fate of the frozen embryos.
Bush, in the arms bazaar.
Graceland gravy.
Soft on crime in New Jersey.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: Stressed all over.  23  Lewis H. Lapham: Why Cities?
Fear of freedom.  23  Michel Noir: Cities -- factories of exclusion.  23  Witold Rybczynski: How to rebuild Los Angeles.  23


CHRONICLE
Another diabetes-related event will take place Monday evening when SALE, WOODY and CASEY JOHNSON celebrate the publication of their book, "Managing Your Child's Diabetes" at the Jim McMullen restaurant in New York.
Robert Wood Johnson 4th, the great-grandson of the founder of Johnson &amp; Johnson, and his wife, Sale, learned four years ago that their daughter Casey, now 12, had insulin-dependent diabetes.
"It was like being hit by Mike Tyson," Mrs.
Johnson said.
"We knew nothing about diabetes. Doctors bombard you with medical information that the normal person can't understand. So we decided to write a book in the language of the everyday person."


Chemical Banking Pushes Prime Rate Back Up to 6 1/2%
The Chemical Banking Corporation yesterday increased its prime lending rate to 6 1/2 percent from 6 1/4 percent, moving back to the level at other large banks across the country.
When Chemical reduced its rate to 6 1/4 percent on April 13, it was the only large bank in the country to move the lending rate so low.
The new rate of 6 1/2 percent, as did the old rate of 6 1/4 percent, applies to both Chemical Bank and the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, two bank subsidiaries of Chemical Banking, which are scheduled to merge and begin operating under the Chemcial name later this month.


Thomas A. McGrath, Psychologist and Priest, 73
The Rev.
Thomas A. McGrath, a psychologist and professor emeritus of psychology at Fairfield University, died last Sunday in a one-car accident in Westport, Conn., a university announcement said.
He was 73 years old and lived on campus in Fairfield, Conn.
Father McGrath, a native of Quincy, Mass., entered the Society of Jesus in 1937, was ordained a priest in 1950 and held a Ph.D. in psychology from Fordham University.
He joined the Fairfield faculty in 1957 and headed the psychology department for 11 years in the 1960's and 1970's.
He became a full professor in 1969 and retired three years ago.


Quotation of the Day
"The great story of 1992 is the degree to which voters feel disconnected from their political system by the insulation of a professional political class, comprising politicians, the press and the pressure elite. People are yearning to be part of a democratic conversation with their Government." -- WILL MARSHALL, director of the Progressive Policy Institute in Washington.  [ 8:1. ]


Pentagon Lifts Ban of G.E. Unit
The Pentagon lifted its ban on new contracts for the General Electric Company's aircraft-engine division yesterday after the company agreed to steps including greater Government oversight of its operations.
In lifting the suspension just four days after it was imposed, the Pentagon's Defense Logistics Agency said General Electric had responded quickly to the Government's concerns about the management of the engine division.
The division and some of its executives are the subject of civil and criminal investigations into a bribery and fraud scandal involving the sale of military jet engines to Israel.


Suspect in 2 Slayings at Club Kills Himself
A 17-year-old member of an Asian gang shot and killed two fellow gang members in a Chinatown social club on Thursday night and a few hours later turned the same gun on himself, the police said.
At 10:30 P.M.
Thursday, Norman Chan, 17, and Michael Yu, 20, were each shot once in the head after a dispute inside the social club of the Tong On Association, at 27 Division Street, said a police spokesman, Detective Joseph McConville.
Ten men were seen fleeing the shooting, he said.


Yugoslav Denies Involvement Of Belgrade in War in Bosnia
Portraying himself as the unjustly vilified leader of an unjustly besieged state, the President of Yugoslavia said today that he was eager to address the concerns of the United Nations to avert the effect of sanctions.
But he insisted that his federal Yugoslav Government was neither involved in nor abetting the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"We don't want to confront the United Nations, we want to cooperate," said the President, Slobodan Milosevic, in a nearly two-hour interview today in which he appeared to be reaching out beyond the isolation of sanctions to foreign leaders.
While repeatedly saying his Government was willing to accommodate the United Nations, he also declared, "We cannot say we will agree to withdraw our army from Bosnia when we already did that." Letters to U.N.
The 50-year-old President who is both a former Communist and former international banker, said the only contact his Government had with the United Nations since sanctions were approved last Saturday was to send letters to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali "clarifying our position and seeking to make the situation one of greater trust."


At Au Pair's Trial, Man Denies Role in Fire That Killed Baby
The man the defense has tried to cast as an alternate suspect in the murder trial of a Swiss au pair denied under oath today that he had anything to do with the arson fire that killed 3-month-old Kristie Fischer.
The witness, John P. Gallagher 3d, who is the boyfriend of the infant's 22-year-old half sister, was the first person to arrive at the burning house last Dec. 2.
From the start of the case against the au pair, Olivia Riner, the police said that they interviewed Mr.
Gallagher, but that he was never a suspect.


COMPANY NEWS: $56,600 and Up, Up, Up; Viper Might Sell Itself, But Dealers Won't Let Go
After months of fanfare, the Chrysler Corporation is finally delivering new Dodge Vipers to the public.
Well, not exactly.


Havel's Future on Line in Parliamentary Elections
More than two years after he took over as President of Czechoslovakia, Vaclav Havel, a playwright and poet turned politician, remains his nation's most celebrated public figure and an enduring symbol of the reform movement straining to reshape Eastern Europe.
But while his name does not appear anywhere on the ballot, Mr.
Havel's political future is also on the line here today and Saturday, as voters across Czechoslovakia choose new national and provincial parliaments.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Signed Timothy Belk, Jeff Ashton, infielders, and Chad Fox, William Sullivan, and Cecil Pickett, pitchers.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Optioned Chris Haney, pitcher, to Indianapolis of the American Association.
Called up Pete Young, pitcher, from Indianapolis.
NEW YORK METS -- Sent Dave Gallagher, outfielder, to Tidewater of International League on a rehabilitation assignment.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Optioned Steve Scarsone, infielder, and Julio Peguero, outfielder, to Scranton Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Sent Steve Searcy, pitcher, to Scranton Wilkes-Barre.
HOCKEY National Hockey League  NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Replaced Tom McVie, coach, with Herb Brooks.


The Belmont May Be Mud, Mud, Mud, Mud Whirl
Rain replaced the rail yesterday as the chief complication on the horizon for the 11 colts primed and waiting for the 124th running of the Belmont Stakes today.
More than 60 thoroughbreds will race in 6 stakes on the Belmont Park program, New York's biggest day of racing in 1992, with a total purse of more than $1.5 million.
In the main event, there will also be the honor of winning the third jewel in the Triple Crown plus a shot at the $1 million bonus for the best overall performance in the three American classics: the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont.


To U.S., Treaty's Flaws Outweigh Its Benefits
A treaty to protect animals, plants and other natural resources has been the subject of negotiations for two years, but although the Bush Administration favors the central provisions on conservation, officials say that the treaty has other serious flaws that render it unacceptable.
The Administration objections focus on the treaty's mechanism for providing money for conservation projects and on what the United States argues are inadequate protections for companies that hold patents on technology that would be transferred to third-world countries.


Corrections
A chart on May 27 with an article about recycling in New York City referred incorrectly to the percentages listed.
They represented the percentage of recyclable trash that was actually recycled in the year ended November 1991, not the percentage of households participating.


Review/Music; The Whole Surpassing Its Parts
The "AIDS Quilt Songbook: 1992," which had its premiere at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night, reconstitutes in sound and in microcosm the almost six and a half acres of individual memorials that have been sewn together and displayed around the country during the last few years.
It is a 90-minute patchwork by invited composers who have used AIDS-related themes or who have the disease themselves.
William Parker is one of the latter.
The American singer thought up this cycle, and he was one four lyric baritones to present it on Thursday.
Some of the poems were read by their authors.
Many of the 16 composers were accompanists.
Others were in the audience.


Men's Mismatches: Courier and Korda Roll
First the French Open's defending champion, Jim Courier, slashed Andre Agassi from the dwindling cast of survivors at this monumental Grand Slam in three sets today in a decidedly less than monumental semifinal.
The 6-3, 6-3, 6-2 victory allotted Courier, now undefeated in all four Grand Slam semifinals he has reached, safe and expedient passage to his third consecutive Grand Slam final and a possible second major title for 1992.
But if the lopsided result of the first semifinal was somewhat shocking to the crowd at Roland Garros, the result of the second, under an appropriately leaden cloud cover, was a veritable tear jerker.
The glorious run of Henri Leconte, 200th-ranked and a wild card here, was ended in front of 15,000 center-court cheerleaders in a 6-2, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3 loss to seventh-seeded Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia.


Classical Music in Review
John Kelly Multimedia Artist Weill Recital Hall Through tomorrow


Patents; Outpouring Of Devices For Outdoors
WHETHER it be electric bug-zappers or bungee-jumping devices, Americans have always been prolific inventors of devices intended to make outdoor recreation more thrilling, more fun or simply less work.
With the prime outdoor season here, recent weeks have turned up inventions intended to improve pastimes ranging from sunbathing and bird watching to hunting and fishing.


BASEBALL: National League; Daulton Packs a Punch As Phillies Rally to Win
Phillies 7, Cardinals 5
PHILADELPHIA, June 5 (AP) -- Darren Daulton drove in five runs with two home runs, including a three-run shot in the eighth inning that rallied the Philadelphia Phillies to a 7-5 victory against the St.
Louis Cardinals tonight.
Daulton's seventh home run of the season spoiled Cardinals reliever Todd Worrell's bid for his first save since Aug. 28, 1989.
Barry Jones (4-2) pitched one scoreless inning for the victory, and Mitch Williams pitched a nerve-racking ninth for his 10th save.
With the Phillies trailing, 5-4, Dave Hollins opened the eighth with a single off Worrell (2-2) and John Kruk followed with a single.
Daulton then hit the first pitch from Worrell for his second home run of the game and the second five-r.b.i. game of his career.
Cubs 10, Expos 4 Expos 6, Cubs 2
MONTREAL (AP) -- Danny Jackson won for the first time in almost a year as Chicago beat Montreal in the first game of a doubleheader.
The Expos came back to win the nightcap as Chris Nabholz allowed two runs on 10 hits in seven and one-third innings.
John Wetteland got the final five outs for his ninth save.
Moises Alou drove in three runs for the Expos in the second game with a triple, double and groundout after going 3 for 4 with a run batted in in the opener.
Greg Maddux (5-6), the losing pitcher, gave up six hits and five runs in six innings.
In the first game, Jackson (1-7) allowed three runs and eight hits in six innings for his first victory since June 14, 1991.
He is 2-12 in 26 starts with the Cubs since signing a three-year contract worth $10.6 million in the 1990-91 off season.
Braves 3, Padres 2
SAN DIEGO (AP) -- Jeff Blauser hit a game-tying home run leading off the ninth inning and Greg Olson drew a bases-loaded walk from San Diego reliever Mike Maddux, lifting Atlanta over the Padres.


Ricardo A. Caminos, 76, Scholar Of Egyptology and Hieroglyphics
Ricardo A. Caminos, a longtime Brown University professor who was a leading scholar of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics and writings, died on May 28 at his home in London.
He was 76 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Beliefs
In the beginning, Rabbi Visotzky created the Genesis seminar.
He gathered together a group of novelists, poets, dramatists, essayists, screenwriters, critics, a few Biblical experts and scholars of religion and musicians.
On Sept. 16, 1987, they set out to read the first book of the Bible.
Last Wednesday, they finished it, almost 5 years and 49 monthly meetings later.
They had begun with Chapter 12, God's summoning of Abraham, and month after month they had studied and puzzled and argued their way through the stories of Sarah and Hagar and Ishmael; of Sodom and Gomorrah; of the birth and near sacrifice of Isaac; of Rebecca, Jacob and Essau; of Rachel and Leah; of Joseph and his brothers and the migration to Egypt.


It's a Boy for Magic Johnson and His Wife
COOKIE KELLY, the wife of retired Los Angeles Lakers star MAGIC JOHNSON, gave birth to the couple's first child Thursday, spokesmen for Johnson and Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles announced.
Mother and son were in excellent health after the delivery, said their obstetrician, Dr.
SCOTT SERDEN.
Neither was infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, Serden said.


Drug Is Recalled by Maker After Being Tied to 3 Deaths
The Food and Drug Administration said tonight that the anti-infection drug Omniflox had been linked to three deaths in recent months and that its manufacturer, Abbott Laboratories, had voluntarily recalled it.


INSIDE
Navy Acts on Sex Abuse
The Navy's top officer said all personnel would undergo sex-harassment sensitivity training.
Page 7.
Pentagon Lifts Ban on G.E.
The Pentagon lifted its ban on new contracts for General Electric's aircraft-engine division.
Page 37.
Charges in Payroll Scheme
The owner of a New Jersey payroll company was charged with stealing $25 million from clients.
Page 25.
Blazer Rally Ties Series, 1-1
Portland caught Chicago in the final minute, then won in overtime, 115-104, to even the N.B.A.
Finals.
Page 31.
Max Lerner Is Dead at 89
Max Lerner, educator, journalist, student of American mores and New York Post columnist, died.
Page 11.


Bridge
Westchester County lost one of its leading bridge personalities when Shirley Silverman of White Plains died on May 29 at the age of 64.
She was formerly chairwoman of the American Contract Bridge League's Board of Governors and president of the Westchester Contract Bridge Association, and held many other administrative posts.
She wrote a series of teachers' manuals and student texts that sold more than a million copies, and was vice president of the world's largest bridge mail-order house, Barclay Bridge Supplies.
She had many playing successes, and could be an imaginative bidder, as demonstrated by the diagramed deal, played two decades ago during a national championship in Cincinnati.
As East she decided that the vulnerability favored a sacrificial effort when the opponents headed for a vulnerable game in spades: North's three no-trump response showed opening values and a spade fit.


G.O.P. Irked, But Gives Up Slowdown
In a fit of pique over a Democratic lawsuit that threw out their legislative redistricting lines, the Republican-controlled Senate tried briefly to hold a work slowdown today, canceling a number of meetings and refusing to discuss any of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's program bills.
But the slowdown, which the Republican leadership denied ever took place, fell apart soon after lunch when the Republicans apparently thought better of it and said the meetings could take place.
They hastily rescheduled everything and issued a statement saying they did not want to let their anger get in the way of the "important issues that must be resolved."


Runner Sues Over Suspension
DELISA FLOYD, a middle-distance runner, filed suit in United States District Court in Denver seeking to force the International Olympic Committee to lift her four-year suspension from competition.
Floyd, 30, of Houston, was suspended for amphetamine use at the 1991 World Championships in Tokyo.
She lost an appeal for reinstatement May 31 by the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
In the suit, Floyd claims that she took a drug called sydnocarb on the advice of the United State Olympic Committee's Drug Hotline, believing it was a carbohydrate supplement.
The suit says the drug turned out to have "amphetamine qualities." (AP)


Max Lerner, Writer, 89, Is Dead; Humanist on Political Barricades
Max Lerner, an educator, journalist and student of American civilization who was for many years a syndicated columnist for The New York Post, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 89 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Southampton, L.I.
He died of a stroke, said his son Stephen, of Washington.


PRESIDENT DEFENDS U.S. ENVOY IN RIO
President Bush today defended William K. Reilly, the head of the American delegation to the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, and attacked an unidentified member of his Administration who made public a confidential memorandum in an attempt to embarrass Mr.
Reilly.
"Mr. Reilly, a top environmentalist, has my full support," Mr.
Bush said at a White House news conference this morning.
"He conducts himself the way he should, with great dignity and great decency. That a document that he prepared properly was leaked, I find terribly offensive."


The Fate of the Frozen Embryos
Ideally Mr. and Mrs.
Junior Lewis Davis would have agreed, in advance of undergoing their in vitro procedure, on what should be done with the fertilized eggs if their marriage ended.
But they didn't, which is why the Tennessee courts have had to wrestle with the question for three years.
The eight-cell embryos' immediate fate -- whether they are to be destroyed or remain in storage -- is still in question.
But this week the Tennessee Supreme Court handed down a remarkably wise decision.
It ruled that a divorced man could prevent his former wife from using or donating the embryos, which had been fertilized with his sperm and then frozen for future use.


BASEBALL: American League; Sutcliffe and Ripken Give Blue Jays the Slip
Orioles 1, Blue Jays 0
BALTIMORE, June 5 (AP) -- Cal Ripken drove in the game's only run with an eighth-inning single and Rick Sutcliffe pitched eight scoreless innings as Baltimore beat Toronto, 1-0, tonight.
The victory propelled the Orioles into first place in the American League East, percentage points ahead of the Blue Jays.
The teams have the best records in the majors.


Bentsen Gives Clinton Support
It had happened too late for the evening newscasts and too late for the primary season, but Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas finally endorsed Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas for President tonight.
By adding his name to the long list of Texas Democrats who have actively supported Mr.
Clinton for months, Mr.
Bentsen appeared to eliminate himself from the final dregs of speculation that he would yet make himself available for a last-minute convention draft should Mr.
Clinton falter.


Review/Pop; Still Waiting by the Phone For Her Dream Man to Call
Vikki Carr achieved a pop immortality of sorts 25 years ago with "It Must Be Him," a camp classic whose narrator waits desperately by the telephone to hear from an elusive boyfriend.
The song builds to an almost operatic peak in the final verse when the phone rings and the caller proves not to be her dream lover.
Its final words proclaim a triumphant sobbing masochism: "And then I die!"
"It Must Be Him" was the inevitable centerpiece of Miss Carr's show on Wednesday at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, where she is appearing through tomorrow with a group led by the pianist Bob Florence.
She prefaced the song with the story of how she rode on a float at the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade many years ago and was besieged by fans begging to know, "Has he called you?"


Soft on Crime in New Jersey
In 1990, New Jersey's Legislature fended off the National Rifle Association and enacted a reasonable bill restricting sale and possession of military assault weapons.
The gun lobby fought back and this year succeeded in pushing a repeal of the ban through the State Assembly.
The measure insults the popular will and common sense.
Assault weapons, designed for military combat, spray bullets rapidly from large magazines.
Since Federal law severely limits fully automatic machine guns, assault weapons sold to civilians in the U.S. are modified to fire semiautomatically, requiring a trigger pull for each shot.
Though such guns make up less than 1 percent of firearms in civilian hands, research suggests that they account for 10 percent of gun crimes.


A Dog Who Taught the Lesson of Hope
To the Editor:
Last April, a friend and I found a battered dog in East Harlem.
The dirty, matted Shepherd-Labrador mixture ambled aimlessly up the block and then stopped, weary, seeming in too much pain to continue.
When he turned, we saw the face of misery; a horror mask of scars, a bloody pulp where an eye had been.


Devils Hope Brooks Spins Meadowlands Miracle
Herb Brooks, who coached the United States Olympic hockey team to a gold medal in 1980, was hired by the improving New Jersey Devils as head coach today in hopes of taking them to the upper level of the National Hockey League.
The 54-year-old Brooks, who coached the New York Rangers for four years after a year in Switzerland following the triumph in the Olympics, received a three-year contract.
He replaces Tom McVie, who guided the Devils to their best regular-season record, but fell a victory short of eliminating the Rangers in the playoffs this spring.


Farm Party Chief Is New Polish Premier
A 32-year-old farm party leader was approved by Parliament today as Poland's fourth Prime Minister in less than three years.
The new Prime Minister, Waldemar Pawlak, is a relatively unknown politician, but he had the support of President Lech Walesa, the country's dominant political figure.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Monday, about E. J. Kahn Jr. and his long writing career with The New Yorker, misstated the date of E. B. White's death.
It was Oct. 1, 1985.


Vienna Journal; Guards Now Patrol the Other Side of the Frontier
It is 2 A.M. on a chilly, clear night, and Pvt.
Johann Koller is halfway through his watch at post 213 on Austria's border with Hungary.
Standing on a wooden tower near the Austrian border town of Schattendorf, he raises the $30,000 night vision binoculars to his eyes and slowly scans a fallow Hungarian field that begins just yards away, searching for people trying to sneak across what was once the Iron Curtain.
"Doesn't look like any illegals tonight," said Private Koller.
Indeed, this night there is only the occasional rush of a freight train, whose passing rocks the watchtower and interrupts the hooting of a nearby owl.


Fuss-Free Products Made for Children
Parents of infants and toddlers welcome anything to make tending to the children easier.
A Buffalo company, Sheridan Infant Products, has designed items to do just that.
Merri-Shades are sunglasses with frames made of brushed tricot and filled with foam.
Their cloth headband has an adjustable Velcro closure for a comfortable, snug fit.
The sunglasses are water-resistant and spring back to their original form if squeezed or rolled.
The lenses block 95 percent of UV-A and UV-B rays.
Merri-Shades come in four color combinations, including yellow and lavender, and green and yellow, and sell for $6.99.


Review/Dance; A Myth in Modern Clothes
The two works by Jerome Robbins to music by Debussy that the New York City Ballet presented Wednesday night at the New York State Theater took modern looks at ancient Greece.
The faun in Mr.
Robbins's version of "Afternoon of a Faun" is no mythological beast but a 20th-century dance student rehearsing in a studio.
And the nymph he encounters is a fellow student to whom he is romantically attracted.


JOBLESS RATE ROSE TO 7.5% FOR MAY, HIGHEST SINCE 1984
The nation's unemployment rate climbed to 7.5 percent in May from 7.2 percent in April, as young people and other job seekers flocked into a labor market with relatively few openings, Labor Department figures disclosed today.
The report was the first broad indicator of business conditions last month.
The sizable increase, which puts the jobless rate at its highest point since 1984, was quickly seized on by Democrats to attack the Bush Administration and to press for a bill to overhaul the unemployment insurance system.
The bill is expected to pass handily in a House vote scheduled for next week.


Comes a Hunk of Junk, Goes a Chunk of Steel
Sam Gershowitz warns visitors to his recycling center to park their cars outside the gates.
Otherwise, their cars could end up in the shredder.
"Believe me, it's happened," said Mr.
Gershowitz, who is 52 years old and has been recycling abandoned American dream machines for almost 30 years.
He grinds them into metal chunks about the size of a coffee can and feeds them back into a growing world market that regards the United States as the Saudi Arabia of scrap.


U.S. Bond Prices Rise on Mixed Jobs Data
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates declined yesterday after the Government released May employment statistics that painted a mixed picture for the economy.
After looking at the data, traders and analysts said the report had elements of both strength and weakness.


CHRONICLE
MARGARET THATCHER will return to government as a member of the largely ceremonial House of Lords, it was announced yesterday.
The Associated Press reported that the former prime minister headed the list of 21 new peerages drawn up by her successor, Prime Minister JOHN MAJOR, and approved by QUEEN ELIZABETH.
Her new title, for life, does not pass to her son, MARK THATCHER.


Employment Data Weak In Region
In a persistent sign of economic weakness in New York and New Jersey, the Labor Department said yesterday that unemployment rates increased in both states in May, with New Jersey's rate rising to 9 percent from 7.8 percent in April.
Economists in the region, who were surprised by the jump in unemployment, said it clouded other evidence that the two states, which were among the first to enter recession, were approaching bottom.
They said they were particularly surprised by -- and could not account for -- the increase in New Jersey.


Ruth Cohen Sherman; A Businesswoman, 68
Ruth Cohen Sherman, a Connecticut businesswoman, died on May 31 at Norwalk Hospital.
She was 68 and lived in Westport.
Mrs. Sherman died of complications from breast cancer, said her son, Robert Cohen.


Another Weekend, Another Storm


CHRONICLE
Fund-raisers take note: here comes ALLISON REDDINGTON.
The 10-year-old Manhattan resident has insulin-dependent diabetes.
She has broken records for fund-raising in the annual American Diabetes Association Fitness Afoot Walk-a-Thon, to be held in Central Park tomorrow.
Ali, as she is known, raised $15,447.


Roy Anthony, 83, Dies; Worked in Marketing
Roy Anthony, a retired marketing consultant, died last Sunday at Saint Joseph's of the Pines nursing home in Pinehurst, N.C.
He was 83 years old and a former resident of Scarborough, N.Y.
Mr.
Anthony worked for 30 years at the Quaker Oats Company and at the Pillsbury Company, where he became sales-promotion manager, before striking out on his own in New York in 1960.
Working with his wife, the former Loy Standish, he founded Sales Promotion Counselors.
One of the selling points he claimed to his credit was to insert pieces of china into boxes of Fab laundry detergent.


John J. Flaherty, 64, Appliance Executive
John J. Flaherty, an executive in the home appliance industry, died on May 29 in Chicago, where he was attending the annual Consumer Electronics Show.
He was 64 years old and lived in West Hartford, Conn., and Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.
He helped introduce many new products, including popcorn poppers, hamburger makers and hand-held, battery-operated sewing devices.


Jesus and Peter Never Sought Priestly Celibacy; What Opus Dei Is
To the Editor:
Your May 18 report on the beatification of Msgr.
Jose Maria Escriva de Balaguer, Opus Dei's founder, is typical of 50 years of misrepresentation.
As I know from 33 years of experience, Opus Dei is none of the things you attribute to it: a powerful and sinister secretive cult that stirs bitter arguments because of the undue influence it exerts in high religious and secular circles on behalf of its hidden agenda in the Roman Catholic Church, business and politics.


A Few Good Men and Women
The 49 heroes interviewed in RESCUERS: Portraits of Moral Courage in the Holocaust (Holmes &amp; Meier, cloth, $49.95; paper, $29.95) are Christians who risked their lives to save Jews during the Holocaust.
This important book of photographs by Gay Block and interviews by Malka Drucker, an author of children's books, shows that these heroes share a streak of independence, as well as compassion, empathy, the ability to endure risk and an intolerance for injustice.
Marion P. van Binsbergen Pritchard went to prison in Amsterdam for violating a Nazi curfew, shot and killed a Dutch policeman, smuggled Jewish children out of a German nursery and hid children, and sometimes entire families, in her basement; she saved more than 150 Jews from the Nazis.
Now a 72-year-old psychoanalyst who lives in Vermont, she credits her liberal upbringing for her courage: "I was treated with respect and consideration from the day I was born." During the war Irene Opdyke, a nurse born in Poland in 1921, took a job as a housekeeper for a Gestapo major and hid 12 Jews in his attic and cellar.
When he discovered the fugitives, she agreed to sleep with him if he kept her secret.
Now living in California, she says she and her four sisters always cared for those in need and her mother "never turned away anyone from her doorstep." Dr.
Ivan Beltrami was born in Marseilles in 1920.
He joined the French Resistance in 1942 without telling anyone in his family.
His older brother turned out to be the chief of another resistance network.
Dr.
Beltrami hid Jews in infirmaries and hospitals.
He also killed Nazi collaborators, for which he says he has no regrets.
His brother was arrested, tortured and almost killed, but when people congratulated him on his bravery, Dr.
Beltrami recalls, their father said, "Don't congratulate him; it was his duty!"


Money and Art: A Producer Discusses His Role
IF Broadway is having a banner year, why should Off Broadway suffer?
It's Jonathan Scharer's premise that the much-publicized resurgence of Broadway is cutting into the take of shows on the fringe of Manhattan's theatrical marketplace, and in regional theaters as well.
So why is Mr. Scharer suffering?


A 'Hershiser Double' Paces Pepperdine to Title
Orel Hershiser won the World Series today. At least, it looked like him.
Patrick Ahearne looked just like Hershiser, from his No. 55 to his slender frame, to his softspoken mannerisms, to the rigid posture as he searched for the sign, to the identical way he tucked his left foot behind his right leg during his delivery, to that loose arm motion.


Mismatch Looms for Men
Maybe the center-court clay at Roland Garros won't actually be slanted in defending champion Jim Courier's direction Sunday afternoon for the French Open men's title match.
But that's a big maybe.
Because of circumstances beyond the challenger's control, the men's final has the potential to be a miserable mismatch.
Even Vladimir Zednick, the on-again, off-again coach for Petr Korda, the Czechoslovak who will be making his debut in a Grand Slam final as a confirmed underdog, couldn't avoid the awful truth when he was asked to describe the chilling efficiency lately displayed by Courier, the top-ranked male tennis player in the world.


Perot Tells It His Way - Take It Or Leave It
In dealing with the slings and arrows of an outrageous press corps, Ross Perot is, as he is in so many political ways, unconventional.
Faced with questions about impolitic things they may have said or done in the past, most presidential candidates build careful constructs of caveats and explanations and not-quite-denials.
Hemmed by cameras and microphones, they run from one end of the country to the other, answering the same impolite questions, offering the same tired rationales and weak apologies, as if by the wash of verbiage to make everything clean again.


Perot Presidential Race Began in Tennessee
To the Editor:
"Ross Perot: Where's the Beef?" (editorial, May 29) states that Ross Perot "announced his 'availability' on 'Larry King Live' in March." But Mr.
Perot publicly discussed a draft for President before that interview, which took place Feb. 20.


Double Exposure: Saudia Arabia's Man in Washington
Prince Bandar bin Sultan, recovering from back surgery at a French mountain resort, was avoiding the telephone messages from Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
The American Secretary had just left Jidda where he had tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade King Fahd that Saudi Arabia should attend the Arab-Israeli peace conference that Baker was organizing in the wake of the Persian Gulf war.
It wasn't that the King was saying no, he just wasn't saying yes.


At City Ballet, Premieres to Feast Upon
The New York City Ballet's recent Diamond Project sounded like something of a yawn when it was originally announced by Peter Martins, the company's artistic director.
Eleven choreographers, including guests who were unknown and company members whose past efforts had been more respectable than distinctive, would create new works for an intensive five-day series.
Surprise!
It was a great idea.
New ballets are food for dancers, as was once noted by Lincoln Kirstein, co-founder of the City Ballet with George Balanchine, and this menu, it turns out, was clearly well chosen.


Down The Middle; Perot's Appeal to the Mainstream Keeps Two-Party Politics Off Stride
All week, the candidacy of Ross Perot was like a tidal wave roaring across the big island called Two-Party-Politics-as-Usual.
For the moment, the Republicans, the Democrats and their newly minted nominees are following a strategy dictated by the situation.
That is, they are lashing themselves to the palm trees and hoping that something can be salvaged from the backwash.
What is driving the Perot wave?
For weeks, President Bush and his advisers have believed it was pushed by a freshet of discontent that would blow itself out once the economic barometer rose a bit.
Bill Clinton and the Democrats have been hoping that this was another of those hot blasts from Dixie that would raise a lot of dust but do little real damage, as was the case with Huey P. Long, Strom Thurmond and George C. Wallace.


Let's Disperse the Family Values Smokescreen; Hope and Pride
To the Editor:
As one who helped develop poverty programs in Anacostia and other hard-pressed Washington neighborhoods in the 1960's, I was appalled by Marlin Fitzwater's unsubstantiated accusations about those helpful programs (front page, May 5).
It is outrageous for the Administration spokesman to assert that these programs led to the Los Angeles tragedy.


With Clock Ticking, A Wonder of Blunders
WITHOUT time clocks, we'd be biting our nails or maybe even drumming on the table in exasperation if an opponent took two hours for a move, as some did a century ago.
On the other hand, the clock can turn a well-played game into a mishmash of errors.
If we look at the encounter on May 8 between the grandmasters Alexander Ivanov of Massachusetts and Alonso Zapata of Columbia in Round 8 of the Fifth Saint Martin International Open Tournament in the French West Indies, we see a logical course of pressure and resistance suddenly degenerate into a series of awful blunders.
Lack of time was the culprit.


Wall Street; Will Alexander's Prove the Short Sellers Wrong?
The stock of Alexander's department stores has climbed a staggering 75 percent since May 15, when the company filed for Chapter 11.
"It's a classic little short squeeze," said Michael Murphy, editor of the Overpriced Stock Service in Half Moon Bay, Calif.
He is one of many investors who are shorting Alexander's shares -- that is, selling borrowed shares, hoping to replace them later with cheaper shares.


Notes With Pleasure
The Persistence of Dreams
Our image of the past, Michael Kammen reminds us, is shaped and reshaped as much by myth and tradition as by fact.
This is from "Mystic Chords of Memory: The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture" (Knopf).


Bath House
To the Editor:
I was very distressed to see that the City of New York is auctioning off an abandoned public bath house  [ "Bath House at Auction," April 26 ] .
Why?
It's very nice to say that "everyone" has a private bath these days but what about all those homeless cluttering our streets?
They don't have a home or a bath.


School Helps Parents Say Goodbye to Seniors
THIS was supposed to be the easy part.
First there had been the treks up and down the Eastern Seaboard to visit prospective college campuses.
Then there were the anxiety-inducing conferences with high school guidance counselors to determine where the offspring should apply.
And who could forget the frantic late-night revisions of personal essays to meet college-application deadlines?
Or the heart-stopping, throat-clutching trips to the mailbox in mid-April to find out whether the offspring had been admitted to the desired college?
Now, less than a month before graduation at Horace Greeley High School in Chappaqua, the seniors knew where they would be headed next fall.
Their parents had come to terms with how much of their income would be earmarked for college tuition.
Both groups knew they were supposed to enjoy the home stretch that these last few weeks of high school represented.


Beth Beller, Thomas Cirone
Beth Beller and Thomas Joseph Cirone, assistant district attorneys in New York, were married yesterday in Middle Island, L.I.
Associate Justice Lawrence J. Bracken of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court, Second Department, performed the ceremony at the Middle Island Country Club.
Mrs.
Cirone, 33 years old, graduated from New York University and received her law degree from St.
John's University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Beller of Port Jefferson, L.I.
Her father is a chemical engineer at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Her mother, Marilyn Beller, who is retired, was a social worker at the Middle Country School District in Centereach, L.I.


A Collection Preserves Frontier Indian Artistry
The birdlike object hurtling down toward Bull Lodge as he lay in the Montana grass on a summer day more than a century ago was a feathered war shield emblazoned with a red-and-white target.
Later, reporting the incident to his daughter Garter Snake, the holy man of the Gros Ventre tribe said he was ordered that day by a Thunderer's voice to duplicate the shield.
And then, he recalled, the image was gone, sucked back into the sky by the wind.
Bull Lodge's copy of that shield, made in the 1860's, is one of 152 painted, carved and beaded items in "Art of the American Indian Frontier: The Collecting of Chandler and Pohrt," an exhibition at the National Gallery of Art here through Jan. 24, 1993.
Over 65 years of collecting, Richard A. Pohrt has owned some 3,000 American Indian artifacts, of which the shield is his favorite.


Is Pornography to Blame?
To the Editor:
In the course of a wildly diverse 18-year career as a writer and editor, I've contributed to a number of so-called pornographic magazines.
In working for magazines like Swank and Stag, I've never dealt with material that involves "bondage, branding, maiming, lynching." Though I'm sure much of this material exists, it does not exist in the mainstream.


Freight Line To Restore Passengers
Even in its glory days as a commuter train in the first half of this century, the New York, Susquehanna &amp; Western Railway was an innovator.
Tim Stuy, head of the railroad's historical society, says that in 1943 it was first to switch from coal-fired to diesel-powered commuter trains.
Seven years later, it was the first to provide air-conditioned coaches.
In its waning days a generation ago, it broke new ground again, offering its last handful of passengers $1,000 each to stop riding so it could become a profitable, freight-only hauler.


Croton Fights State Over Incineration of PCB's
RESIDENTS say they are fighting for their lives in their attempt to prevent the state from bringing in a portable incinerator to burn the PCB's at a toxic waste site here.
They argue that the plan, which includes burying the ash at the site, is more dangerous than the problem it is intended to solve and that toxic emissions would be scattered over a 25-mile area.
The lagoon storing the toxic wastes is almost adjacent to the Croton train station, which 8,000 commuters use daily.
It is a few hundred feet from a condominium development and the Hudson River and less than a mile from an elementary school.


Christine A. Bequary, Brian R. McGovern
Christine Ann Bequary, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Bequary of Litchfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Brian Richard McGovern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. McGovern of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Galligan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Anthony of Padua Church.
Mrs.
McGovern, 24 years old, is an elementary-school teacher in the Litchfield school system.
She graduated from Fordham Univerity and received a master's degree in education from Southern Connecticut State University.


Portland Uses Poise To Lead Bulls Astray
Faced with a desperate situation in Game 2 of the National Basketball Association finals Friday night, the Portland Trail Blazers were courageous enough to win.
And the Chicago Bulls were careless enough to lose.
As the two teams prepared today for Game 3 on Sunday (Channel 4, 7 P.M.), the tenor of the four-of-seven-game series, tied at 1-1, had changed dramatically.


Tapes Take a Quiet Step Forward
"Except for the package, they all look alike," complains a tape manufacturer.
"So customers think one tape is as good as another."
Because no difference in quality is outwardly apparent, most users remain unaware of advances in tape technology.
Yet within recent months, leading tape makers in the United States and Japan have radically reformulated their product.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Cranbury 153,000
9 Pineybranch Road  4-bedroom, 1.5-bath, 22-year-old colonial; professionally landscaped, patio, large yard; taxes $4,268.
Fair Lawn 323,000
37-02 Morlot Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; c/a, central vacuum, 2-car garage; taxes $6,640.
Flemington 185,000
29 Maple Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 100-year-old Victorian colonial; 1-car garage, wrap-around-porch, full basement; taxes $3,044.
Ho-Ho-Kus 262,000
163 Blauvelt Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; fireplace, screened porch; taxes $3,547.
Montclair 190,000
48 James Street  7-bedroom, 3-bath, 69-year-old colonial; modern eat-in-kitchen, full basement, large rooms; taxes $6,218.
Peapack 337,500
8 Pfizer Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; family room, wooded property, full basement; taxes $3,614.
OTHER AREAS Enfield, Conn. 134,000
357 George Washington Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old ranch; pool, patio, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,397.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 417,500
11 Flag Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, den, cathedral ceilings, deck, family room, pool, 1 acre; taxes $9,941.
East Northport, L.I. 143,000
87A Daly Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, family room; taxes $2,400.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Apr. 92
Apr. 91
Change
New York
349.5
476.7
-27%
New Jersey
145.1
156.5
- 7%
Connecticut
99.9
70.9
+41%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.84
8.77
9.69
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.00
5.98
7.32
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.69
8.64
9.52
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.78
5.77
7.24
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.74
8.66
9.56
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.78
5.77
7.05
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.92
8.89
9.88
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.43
6.34
7.71
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.27
4.12
6.13
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.14
8.14
9.24
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Repairing and Replacing the Many Types of Siding
SEVERAL styles of wood siding are popular.
They include shingles, shakes, clapboards, lap siding, plywood panels and boards and battens.
Properly applied and either sealed or painted about every five years, each kind should last at least 30 years.
But damage to wood siding has to be repaired promptly to prevent worsening, especially in new houses that lack wood sheathing behind the siding.


Networking; Privacy in E-Mail? Better to Assume It Doesn't Exist
It's illegal for an employer to listen in on a person's telephone conversations even if those conversations take place on a company-owned phone.
But there are no such clear privacy rules for the electronic mail that moves on a company's computer network.
If fact, most legal experts in the field are concerned by just how far the law trails the technology.
"I don't think that employees should have any expectations of privacy," said Mark Mahoney, co-chairman of the Committee on Technology for the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.
Dealing with the legal and ethical questions of privacy will have to be addressed sooner or later as the use of E-mail, both inside and outside company computers, is only going to grow.
The failure of companies to develop clear policies on the issue and communicate those rules to employees will only lead to confusion and litigation.


A Trout Tryst: Waiting for You Is the Big One
EVERY once in a while, when the religion and incense hawkers around Times Square become too much and the unmuffled scent of New York City shish kebob threatens to cling to the clothes forever, I do what so many other urban anglers do.
I flee.
I head out to a dream of a stream, to a place in Suffolk County, Long Island, that is filled with gentle forest creatures, a bewitching green refuge that feels like a scene out of "Bambi" (if you ignore the ticks).
Anglers, not unlike criminals, tend to return to the place where they've caught fish.
For me, that place is (usually) the Connetquot River State Park Preserve in Oakdale, a crystalline spring-fed stream less than an hour-and-a-half drive from the city.


MADE TO MEASURE
Lucy Ferriss writes, in her essay "Made to Measure" (Hers, May 17), that breasts "define us in accepted ways as women -- nurturing and sexual, abundant, playful, mysterious." Frankly, I, as a young woman of the 1990's, would prefer to be seen as intelligent and witty.
It's not as if the size of your brain depends upon the size of your breasts -- or is it?


Powell Backs Weinburger Testimony
Lawyers for Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary, have supplied Iran-contra prosecutors with sworn statements from former and current Pentagon officials, including one by Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint of Chiefs of Staff, strongly defending the Reagan Cabinet member's actions in the affair.
General Powell's statement has been turned over to Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra prosecutor, in an effort to avert possible criminal charges that Mr.
Weinberger misled Congress about his knowledge of the affair.


Technology; The Rules of Evidence Are Being Rewritten
Despite the high drama portrayed in "L.A. Law" and a spate of recent courtroom movies, most people in the legal profession spend the bulk of their time grappling with paperwork.
But that may be changing.
In the last few years, software and computer systems have emerged that are altering the ways lawyers gather and manage the evidence in their cases.
For a few hundred dollars, lawyers can buy software that helps organize information.
And for close to $5,000, they can obtain multimedia technological systems to manage evidence and speed research.


Quotation of the Day
"One might ask the question not why am I leaving, but why did I stay so long?" -- MICHAEL I SOVERN, resigning as president of Columbia University.  [ 1:4 ]


Turn Left, Then Right at the Botanical Garden in the Bronx


SYMPATHY FOR THE DEVIL
In his article "Sympathy for the Devil" (April 5), Lawrence O'Toole expresses regret that practically the only record of Ian McKellan's acting career remains in people's memories.


In China, Capitalism and Friendship for West Grow Side by Side
To the Editor:
I was stunned by "Roots of Hostility" (letter, May 19), in which Ted Pritikin argues that the next generation of Chinese will be more imbued with nationalism and therefore more hostile to Western capitalist countries, particularly the United States.
Even more outrageous, he tries to lend credence to this assertion by referring to his two years in China.


Susan Strecker, John Richard
Susan Linnea Strecker, the editorial director of the Baby Talk magazine group in New York, was married yesterday to John Floyd Richard, a managing director of AJT Inc., a financial consulting company in Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
James C. Gertmenian officiated at the Northfield Congregational Church in Weston, Conn.
Mrs.
Richard, 50 years old, graduated from Southern Methodist University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Strecker of Aurora, Ill.


In Quest of a Classic Quencher
DEEP blue skies and scorching sun.
The streets are half empty now that the weekend crowd is out of the city.
The stores aren't crowded, there are tables in restaurants, you can find a cab, even a parking spot.
You're enjoying one of the unheralded pleasures: summer weekends
in
Manhattan.
What's missing from this picture?
Lemonade, that's what. And it's no less than a scandal.


THE PROBLEMS WITH RUSHING HEADLONE TO 'TOTAL QUALITY'
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Ronald Ashkenas and Robert Schaffer, management consultants, wrote, "Like lemmings marching to the sea, many North American corporations are rushing headlong to a destination called 'total quality.' " Many companies' efforts are doomed, they wrote, because of fundamental flaws in the way they manage their quality programs.
The authors went on to suggest that managers often do not demand enough of their subordinates or help them to achieve results quickly.
They cited a survey by the Public Agenda Foundation that 62 percent of high-level white-collar workers believed they were not being asked to work at their full potential.


James McGraw 4th And Jane V. Love
Jane Vaughn Love, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard M. Love of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to James Henry McGraw 4th, a son of Mr.
McGraw 3d of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Virginia S. Parker of Chatham, Mass.
The Rev.
Arthur McNulty officiated at St.
Michael's of the Valley Episcopal Church in Ligonier, Pa.
Mrs.
McGraw is a financial advertising sales executive at Institutional Investor magazine in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman and chief executive of National Intergroup Inc., a Pittsburgh steel maker and pharmaceuticals distributor.
She is a granddaughter of Mrs.
George A. Vaughn of New York, whose late husband was a World War I flying ace and a founder of the College of Aeronautics in Flushing, Queens.
Her paternal grandfather, the late George H. Love, was the chairman of the Chrysler Corporation.


Sarah O. Hoit, Burke Whitman
Sarah Overton Hoit, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger O. Hoit of Hingham, Mass., was married yesterday to Burke William Whitman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Homer W. Whitman Jr. of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Robert B. Edson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of Mrs.
Theodore Achilles in Chatham, Mass.
Mrs.
Whitman, 25 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is a graduate business student at Harvard University.
Her father is the president of the architectural firm of Strekalovsky &amp; Hoit in Hingham.


Three Variations on a Theme Of Summertime Potato Salad
I DON'T think I have ever met anyone who didn't like potato salad.
For me, it is one of the best parts of a summer meal.
For years, I made it the same way: tossing cooked potatoes and chopped scallions in a rich mayonnaise made with egg yolks and olive oil.
Now that raw eggs are regarded, like raw chicken, as too dangerous to eat, I've had to look for other ideas.
Recently, I spent a weekend at a friend's house where she made a dressing using horseradish, yogurt and olive oil.
I am not one of those people who thinks yogurt does the job when you want the rich taste of egg yolks or cream, so I was a bit skeptical, until I tasted it.
It was superb.


Corrections
A table on the Money page on May 3, titled "Mutual Funds: General Equity," misstated the assets of the Vanguard Index Trust 500 Portfolio Fund.
On March 31, its assets were $4.86 billion, an amount that placed the fund sixth among all equity funds.
Lipper Analytical Services, supplier of the table, has since corrected the data, and a revised version appeared on May 31. (A letter from Vanguard dated May 4 pointed out the May 3 error but was misdirected at The Times.)


Got a Perot Headache? 8-Way Relief: DEMOCRATS; Outsider's Vision
Americans always have had a love affair with the strong, tough-talking outsider who will come into town, scare off the bad guys and then leave just at sunset.
Does Ross Perot come across as this quintessential outsider?
Some like his tough talk, but no one has seen his walk and no one has voted for him yet.
He is the product of expensive marketing.
Ratings points, not votes, determine his current success.


Karen Ziegler, Michael Kelly
Karen Elizabeth Ziegler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Ziegler of Chatham, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael David Kelly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Kelly of Chatham.
The Rev.
James T. Mahoney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Corpus Christi Church.
Mrs.
Kelly, 30 years old, is a trust officer at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received an M.B.A. from Pace University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Willcox &amp; Gibbs in New York, a national distributor of electrical and mechanical parts and supplies.


Greene to Remain Out
Phillies right-hander TOMMY GREENE, who has not pitched since May 12 because of a sore shoulder, was placed on the disabled list after a bone scan showed he was suffering from tendinitis in his rotator cuff.
He is expected to be out for at least six more weeks. (AP)


A Jug of Cocktails, a Slice of Lime and Thou
HOW many times will you be involved in this exchange this summer?
"What are you drinking?"


Focus: Philadelphia; Empty Banks: Imposing, but Hard to Use
DARKENED bank branches in huge and inefficient but architecturally magnificent buildings in this city's former financial district pose a challenge to real estate brokers.
The question is how to reutilize the space.


POSTINGS: Keeping the Faith; It's Penn South's 30th Birthday
Sponsored by the International Ladies Garment Workers Union and dedicated by President John F. Kennedy, the enormous Penn South co-op housing project is marking its 30th anniversary today.
Although much has changed since 1962, David Smith, the president of the Penn South board, believes that the project has remained true to its mission of providing affordable housing for people of modest means.
"Penn South co-operators kept the faith by voting overwhelmingly in October 1986 to remain a limited-equity, nonprofit cooperative and reject the practice of unbridled greed by 'going private,' " Mr.
Smith declared.
While taking the project private might have meant large profits for owners on resales, it would also have considerably increased carrying charges.


Money Earned Can Be Money Burned
Many of them still don't get it.
Although more than 200 major league ballplayers earn more than $1 million a year, and even the salaries for the once lowly paid football players have soared to an average of $500,000, athletes are still getting into financial trouble, often frittering away hundreds of thousands of dollars they will never again be able to amass.


.. . So Here's to the C.R.A.
To the Editor:
Contrary to Professor White's suggestions, no bank or thrift failure has ever been linked to C.R.A. compliance.
In fact, many banks with the most outstanding Federal regulatory CRA ratings, such as Citibank, Bank of America, Chase and Chemical, are well diversified and profitable.
They were among the 9 percent of the 6,700 banks I surveyed nationwide on C.R.A. which received an outstanding rating.


Empty Banks: Imposing, but Hard to Use
Darkened bank branches in huge and inefficient but architecturally magnificent buildings in this city's former financial district pose a challenge to real estate brokers.
The question is how to reutilize the space.


POSTINGS: For Building Managers; Helpful Tips on Operating Costs
With operating costs on the rise and apartment values still stagnating, the job of managing co-op and condominium buildings has never been tougher.
But building managers, board members and apartment owners can pick up management and financial planning tips from the experts at a forum on Tuesday at the Roosevelt Hotel, 45th Street and Madison Avenue, in midtown Manhattan.
The event is sponsored by The New York Cooperator, a newspaper covering co-op and condominium issues.


Barbara Kuck, Stephen Close
Barbara Wilson Kuck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Kuck of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Stephen Condit Close, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur C. Close of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
William S. Shillady performed the ceremony at the Mamaroneck United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Close, 25 years old, is a loan officer at the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father, who is retired, was an electrical engineering manager for the Singer Corporation in Totowa, N.J.


A Prescription of Hot Novels for the Sun-Dazed
CONSPIRACY theorists, think about this: why do most of the hottest and best novels of the summer have tabloidy two-word titles?
"Love Junkie." "Volcano Lover." "Hideous Kinky." What are the odds of those books' appearing in the same season as "Impossible Vacation," "Black Water," "Brightness Falls"?
Where do "Summer Rain" and "Rising Sun" fit in?
The pattern could be a coincidence, but I don't think so.
My favorite theory is that publishers have created an ingenious game in which readers can use this summer's titles to invent their own trashy novels.
One might begin: The hideous kinky love junkie and her volcano lover took the train to Brightness Falls.
As they swam in black water, the love junkie said, "This is an impossible vacation. Thank you, darling."


National Parks
To the Editor: The article "National Parks: Great Travel Bargain" (March 15), for the most part contained information the park visitor needed to make a more informed decision on a visit.
I would like to make some additional points.
The Golden Eagle Passport does not cover user fees, e.g., for cave tours, at those parks that have them.
Also, the only national parks mentioned on the Mistix phone reservation system were Acadia, Grand Canyon, Great Smoky Mountains, Rocky Mountain, Sequoia-Kings Canyon, Shenandoah, Yellowstone and Yosemite.
Mammoth Cave National Park also uses the Mistix system to book cave tours.
In addition, these areas are on Mistix: Assateague Island National Seashore, Cape Hatteras National Seashore, Death Valley National Scenic Riverways and Whiskeytown National Recreation Area.
JOSEPH R. MCGOWN Mammoth Cave National Park, Kentucky


A Danish Earthquake Shakes Europe
Statesmanship is not a characteristic widely associated with the current crop of politicians, on this or any other continent.
But there is one area where the politicians clearly have been trying to do what they are convinced is the right thing.
That area is international economic integration.
Whether in Europe or the Americas, national leaders have been willing to push for freer trade despite the possibility that such moves will damage local interests.
And few national political parties have chosen to seek cheap gains by inflaming local emotions.


Kelly's Too Old For Comparison
To the Sports Editor:
After five undistinguished years Roberto Kelly is off to a fast start, batting .335 in something short of one-third of a season.
This is sufficient for Jack Curry to write "his name may some day belong in the vaunted company of Mantle and DiMaggio" and that "at 27 years old, Kelly has arrived at the doorstep of stardom and seems ready to blast the door off its hinges."


MAY 31-JUNE 6: Denmark; Close 'No' Vote Sends A Message That Unsettles Europe
Asked whether they approved the ambitious European Union treaty laying the groundwork for a more federal European state and a common currency by the end of the decade, Danish voters surprisingly said no last week, voting 50.7 to 49.3 percent against it in a referendum and throwing the entire 12-nation European Community into turmoil.
The treaty has to be ratified by all member states before it can go into effect in any one of them, so if Denmark's rejection sticks it could prevent Europe from becoming anything more than a glorified multinational trading bloc of sovereign states without internal tariff barriers.


Taylor Baldwin, Thomas Purdy
Taylor Ann Baldwin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David B. McKane of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Keith Purdy, the son of Harold Purdy of Pompano Beach, Fla., and Jacquelyn Purdy of New Iberia, La.
The Rev.
William Bryant officiated at Greens Farms (Conn.) Congregational Church.
Ms.
Baldwin, 25 years old, graduated from Barnard College.
Her stepfather is the chairman of McKane Robbins &amp; Company, a New York investment firm.
Her mother, Wilson L. McKane, is a vice president of Sedgwick James, an insurance brokerage in Darien, Conn.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Public Broadcasting: Vote on an amendment to a bill authorizing funds for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting that would have frozen financing at the current level of $825 million.
Rejected 75 to 22, June 3.
2.
Public Broadcasting: Vote on passage of a bill providing a $1.1 billion three-year authorization for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
Approved 84 to 11, June 3.
3.
N.I.H.
Funding: Vote on passage of a bill that reauthorizes funds for the National Institutes for Health and that lifts a ban on Federal spending for research that uses fetal tissue derived from induced abortions.
Approved 85 to 12, June 4.
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
Y
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present. House
1.
Defense: Vote on an amendment to a fiscal 1993 military budget bill that would reduce spending by $3.5 billion by cutting funds for U.S. troops in Europe, Japan and South Korea.
Approved 220 to 185, June 3.
2.
Nuclear Weapons Tests: Vote on an amendment to a fiscal 1993 military budget bill that provides for a one-year ban on all testing of American nuclear weapons.
Approved 237 to 167, June 4.
3.
Star Wars: Vote on an amendment to a fiscal 1993 military budget bill that would reduce spending on the Strategic Defense Initiative to $3.3 billion from President Bush's proposed level of $5.4 billion.
Rejected 211 to 161, June 5.
4.
Defense: Vote on passage of a $270 billion military budget for fiscal 1993.
Approved 198 to 168, June 5.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
A
N
N
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
N
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
A
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
A
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
N
N
N
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
N
A
A
5. McGrath (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
Y
A
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
A
A
A
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
Y
A
A
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
A
Y
Y
N
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
N
N
N
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
Y
A
A
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
17. Weiss (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
26. Martin (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
N
N
N
A
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
N
N
N
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Grappling With the Revaluation Problem
IN the final week of the Connecticut legislative session last month, a bill was passed giving municipalities a one-time extension to Oct. 1, 1993, for revising property revaluations made in the later-80's boom market.
The measure will give towns that rejected their mandatory 10-year revaluations -- made by companies they hired -- more time to re-examine lower market prices.


Eve M. Kahn, Bradley Kulman
Eve Marya Kahn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Kahn of Stamford, Conn., was married in New York yesterday to Bradley Grant Kulman, a son of Peyton Kulman of Boca Raton, Fla., and Margot Green of New York.
Judith Wank, an assistant leader with the New York Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Mrs.
Kulman, 30 years old, is the architecture critic of The Wall Street Journal.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a child psychlogist in Stamford.
Her mother, Renee Kahn, is an adjunct professor of art and architectural history at the University of Connecticut.


Jamie Seidner, Jonathan Rubin
Mrs.
Judith Seidner of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Jamie Reed Seidner to Jonathan David Rubin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Rubin of New Rochelle, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Seidner, 28 years old, is an assistant marketing manager for Estee Lauder Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, the late Abraham Seidner, was a lawyer in private practice in New York.
Her mother is a vice president of Abraham &amp; Strauss in Brooklyn.


Hispanic Officeholders to Oppose Redistricting
The loudest objections to the Congressional redistricting plan expected to pass the New York State Legislature this week have come from incumbents who stand to lose their seats.
But there are also protests from other groups, including Hispanic elected officials and abortion rights proponents.
A coalition of 17 Hispanic officeholders, including Bronx Borough President Fernando Ferrer and Representative Jose Serrano, a Bronx Democrat, plans to hold a news conference in Manhattan today to lobby against the redistricting proposal.
Mr.
Ferrer and Mr.
Serrano expect to be joined by Hispanic members of the Legislature and the City Council.


Laura M. Pearlman, John R. Kaufman
Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Pearlman of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Michelle Pearlman, to John Robert Kaufman, the son of Jane Fishman and James Kaufman, both of New York.
A May 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pearlman, 25 years old, is a teacher at the Birch Wathen Lenox School in New York.
She graduated from Cornell Unviersity, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of Stuart Pearlman &amp; Company, a corporate communications consulting firm in New York.
Her mother, Regina Pearlman, is the vice president and the chief financial officer there.


Up and Down, Bike and Foot
For people who would like to bicycle the ROCKIES but are wary of the steep stretches, a Colorado company has organized a five-day guided tour that it says is almost entirely downhill.
The tour starts in Leadville, Colo., an old mining town, and follows the downstream course of the Arkansas River.
The route is just east of the Continental Divide and there is a concentration of peaks 14,000 feet and higher along the way.
Participants will ride about 15 miles a day and spend the nights in inns along the route, ending at Mount Princeton Hot Spring Resort near Buena Vista.
Trips are July 3 to 8, Aug. 15 to 20 and Sept. 5 to 10.
The cost of the trip is $795 a person (based on two in a room), which includes five nights' accommodations, all meals and van support.
Bike rental is $80.
More information: Roads Less Traveled, Post Office Box 18742, Boulder, Colo. 80308; (303) 530-7350.


MAY 31-JUNE 6: China; As Usual, the President Favors the Trade Benefits
Since 1989 it has become a rite of spring in Washington, as dependable as the cherry blossoms: President Bush renews for another year the Most-Favored Nation trade benefits for China, Congress fulminates and threatens to block the move, but in the end the President wins.
The ritual began again last week.
True, White House officials acknowledged, China has not exactly been on its best behavior, having just tested a giant underground nuclear bomb, harrassed American reporters and failed to make any significant improvement in human rights.
But, officials insisted, these were only signs that a "world-class power struggle" was under way in Beijing, with hardliners trying to sour relations between China and the United States and reformers trying to hold the line.
It was incumbent on Washington, taking the long view, to support the reformers.
Stuff and nonsense, said Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell.
The President has made the same argument since the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacres, and nothing has changed.
It's time for Congress to slap some trade sanctions on China, he added.


Perspectives: Condominiums in TriBeCa; Shedding the Landlord Role, Gradually
HER specialty is design and marketing.
His is construction and finance.
There was financial backing in the family.
That amalgam made developers of not a few young couples in New York City in the 80's.
Among them were Virginia Alexander Millhiser and Timothy M. Millhiser.
They never foresaw a joint career when they were married in 1981, but three years later they bought a vacant six-story building at at 542 La Guardia Place, between Bleecker and West Third Streets in Greenwich Village.
They rebuilt it into 10 fully finished apartments and sold them all within six months at an average price of $358 a square foot.


On The Street
Here is a sampling of fairs, festivals and parades planned in New York City this summer.
Many dates and times are tentative, since some events require permits from the Mayor's Office.
Some parade routes were not available at press time.
Major holiday parades are listed on page 21.
Today
PARK AVENUE SOUTH SPRINGFEST, Park Avenue South between 14th and 23d Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Ecology and Self-Esteem At Fresh Air Fund Course
Dumar Wade faced a daunting task.
On a recent sunny Saturday morning, he set out to teach 37 children, aged 11 to 15, something about everything from classified advertisements to the ozone layer.
The leaves beyond the open windows whispered temptingly in the summer breeze and the children contemplated an afternoon sail on the Hudson.
Mr.
Wade was sweating, just a little.
But he managed to get the children's attention by trying to poison one of them.


Meetings With Aristide Emphasize Human Rights
Amid reports of discussions of a new hemispheric initiative for resolving the Haitian political standoff, American human rights experts have begun meetings with Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to discuss weaknesses in his human rights record and help devise plans to smooth his eventual return.
Participants said the meetings have involved detailed discussions of what Father Aristide's critics call human rights abuses during his nearly eight-month tenure in office, as well as talks about internationally brokered peace plans in other badly torn countries like El Salvador, which the human rights experts said could provide useful models for Haiti.


Design; Remembered Rooms
TAKE AN INVENTORY OF A HOUSE, leaving out the visuals.
Count the closet's dull odor, the floor's wooden crack, the smug smell of cleanser around a sink.
Every house has a Hansel-and-Gretel trail of these sensory bread crumbs that lead from the front door to the attic.
It doesn't take a supernatural, fairy-tale awareness to pick up on this dimension of a house: it's a perception built right into the subconscious.
Those familiar smells and sounds, rather than the room's appearance, detonate the memory.
Designers should quake before the fact that their best efforts are fleeting.
No matter how artful the paint job, how plump the sofa cushions and how piled the carpeting, sound and especially scent rank as the most powerful experiences.
A room ripe with the odor of roses or even Lemon Pledge will be firmly wedged in the mind, regardless of its decor.
Remodel a house, installing new floors and walls, and inhabitants can lose their bearings as the twin landmarks of scent and sound are obliterated.


RUSSIAN BACKLASH IS FORCING A DELAY IN APPROVAL OF AID
A backlash against President Boris N. Yeltsin's economic reforms is forcing a delay of several months, and perhaps much longer, in the approval of an aid package intended to give Russia at least $24 billion in Western assistance, Russian and American officials say.
The delay comes as there are strong signs in Washington that Congress has lost its enthusiasm for giving money to Russia to help finance the International Monetary Fund package that is threatened by the Moscow backlash.


Holidays
Here is a sampling of holiday activities this summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
June 14
FLAG DAY PARADE, City Hall to Pearl Street, lower Manhattan. 11:30 A.M.
Sponsored by Fraunces Tavern Museum.
July 3
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT CONCERTS, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan.
A weekend of free performances, featuring swing music by the Kit McClure Band (July 3 at 6 P.M.); Skitch Henderson and the New York Pops (July 4 at 7:30 P.M.) and the United States Coast Guard Band (July 5 at 5 P.M.).
Information: (212) 669-9400.


Sports of The Times; Heart of the Matter For Bill Parcells
ONLY three days after heart bypass surgery at Temple University Hospital, the patient was up and around.
He had ridden a stationary bike for 10 minutes and walked two laps around the corridors.
Now, wearing a navy blue bathrobe with red-and-white piping on the lapels and cuffs, the patient touched the sleeve to his brow.
"I'm glad I'm sweating," he said. "It makes me feel good."


Karen Engelke, Richard Lee
Karen Anne Engelke, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Engelke of Jericho, L.I., was married yesterday to Richard Y. C. Lee, a son of Ronald K. Lee and Susan T. Yoshinaka, both of Honolulu, at the Leeds Pond Preserve in Port Washington, L.I.
Dr.
Charles F. Magistro, a Unitarian minister, officiated.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about an oral history project in White Plains misidentified the woman with fourth graders at the Ridgeway School.
She was Theresa Frazier. (Florence Sandler was another adult participant in the project.)


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) In Ms.
Tan's second novel, a Chinese-American woman learns the history of her mother, who endured abandonment by her mother, a brutal first marriage and the loss of three children.
"This is a chronicle not only of a woman's victimization, but of the unwitting conspiracy within society to ignore and therefore perpetuate the condition," Robb Forman Dew said here last year, calling the book "greatly satisfying."
MEMOIRS, by Andrei Sakharov.
Translated by Richard Lourie. (Vintage, $16.) This book is itself testimony to the will of the author, a man who was largely responsible for the development of the Soviet hydrogen bomb and yet became one of the fiercest critics of the nuclear arms race and his country's repressive policies.
Despite K.G.B. interference, Sakharov spent 11 years writing these memoirs, which chronicle his life until 1986, when he was allowed to return to Moscow from exile in Gorky.


Susan Hunter, Gary Garyfallou
May 1993 wedding plans for Susan J. Hunter and Garyfallos T. Garyfallou, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Garyfallou of Beaverton, Ore., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Morgan V. Hunter of Vero Beach, Fla.
Miss Hunter, 24 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She heads the antique furniture department at C. G. Sloan &amp; Company Auctioneers in North Bethesda, Md.
Her father retired from the Marketing Corporation of America in Westport, Conn., where he was the chairman of MCA Advertising and a managing partner of Marketcorp Ventures.


Diversified Lending Means Lower-Income Clients . . .
To the Editor:
While I find much with which to agree in Lawrence J. White's article "Don't Handcuff the Healthy Banks" (Forum, May 17), I must take issue with many of his comments regarding the Community Reinvestment Act.
The act was intended to insure that regulated financial institutions help meet the credit needs of their entire local community, including low-to-moderate-income areas.


Circus Pays Tribute To Coney Island
THE Big Apple Circus, with its trucks, horses, elephants, clowns, daring performers and giant white tent in tow, is on its annual tour through the New York metropolitan region.
Last week, it took a touch of sparkle to Prospect Park in Brooklyn.
From Thursday through June 16, it will be adding a bit of glitter to the Tilles Center in Brookville.
Every year, the circus customizes its show around a theme.
This year it celebrates local history by exploring the glory of Coney Island.
The annual theme is, of course, a justification for coordinating the costumes and colors of the serious circus performers and the Big Apple's nonthreatening and genuinely funny clowns.


Aztec Show Heads West
Visitors to the Denver Museum of Natural History this fall and winter will walk through a re-creation of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan, the city founded in the central valley of Mexico in the 14th century.
An exhibit opening Sept. 22, "Aztec: The World of Moctezuma," will present daily life from the agricultural outskirts to the great marketplace and the heart of the city, the Great Temple.
Museum officials say that it will be the most comprehensive show ever presented outside Mexico on the Aztec people and that it will include nearly 300 national treasures from Mexico illustrating life in Tenochtitlan just before the arrival of the Spanish explorer Hernan Cortes in 1519.


Annette Chin, Alan Sean Chu
Annette May Lan Chin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lung King Chin of New York, was married yesterday to Alan Sean Chu, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Chu of Hyde Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Sally Norris, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Riverside Church in New York.
Ms.
Chin, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is a program associate at the Dewitt Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father and her mother, Faye Chin, both retired, worked in restaurants and factories in New York.


Nothing Can Stay These Couriers
Humor and originality, as in turning plastic trash bags into survival gear, added typical New York bravado to the spirit of optimism that prevailed in the annual AIDS Walk New York fund-raiser last Sunday.
About 20,000 people trekked the six miles in drenching rain to benefit Gay Men's Health Crisis.
Aside from the usual weekend wear, plastic bags were tied over shoes, only to spring leaks before the first mile.
White Nikes, the prevailing footwear, were waterlogged and mud-spattered, and umbrellas were part of a balancing act as people maneuvered around puddles.


Brasilia String Quartet in Recital Today
THE first Music Mountain matinee of the season is at 3 this afternoon, when the Brasilia String Quartet is joined by Luis de Moura Castro, a chairman of the piano department at the Hartt School (and a native of Rio de Janeiro) for the Faure Piano Quartet and a Quintet for Piano and Strings by Oswald.
"I believe that the Brasilia Quartet is one of the best in South America," said Mr.
Castro, "and the most representative of Brazilian culture." For driving directions to Music Mountain, call 824-7126 or 496-2596.


Mexican Women, Doffing Old Ways, Join Exodus
When the husband of Esther Alvarez left their home in the northern city of Hermosillo to look for work in the United States, she took her first job, as a janitor, and told her two young children to expect their father back soon.
"He was going to go and make some money," Mrs.
Alvarez said.
"I don't know if he ever did."


IN SHORT: FICTION
OVER THERE By Thomas Fleming. HarperCollins, $20.


Abortion Protests In Massachusetts and Kansas


Government Is Replaced in Poland
The Polish Parliament last week elected a new Prime Minister -- Waldemar Pawlak of the Polish Peasants Party, receiving congratulations at right -- hours after dismissing Jan Olszewki because he had distributed a list of suspected agents of the former secret police.
The list, whose accuracy is in doubt, included names of members of Parliament. (Reuters)


From Rosenquist, A Pleasing Look At Early Pop
With so much art today derived from Pop, a steady flow of exhibitions looking back on the movement's roots is inevitable.
No show has been more ambitious than "Pop Art," the disorderly survey organized last year at the Royal Academy in London, now in Madrid and opening at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts in October.
And none has been more pleasing than "James Rosenquist: The Early Pictures," at the Gagosian Gallery, at 980 Madison Avenue in Manhattan, through July 11.
Mr.
Rosenquist's paintings were among the standouts of the rambling London blockbuster.
And the display at Gagosian of nearly two dozen paintings, along with some of the magazine advertisements on which they were based, is further confirmation of the exceptional quality of these works from the early 60's.
It was partly the flat, seemingly uninflected way in which Mr.
Rosenquist painted, based on his experiences as a billboard artist, that critics derided when the pictures were first exhibited.
Coming on the heels of Abstract Expressionism, with its premium on surging emotions, they seemed especially cold and banal and a crude betrayal of the heroic ideals of 50's art.


Laura Whitman and David Downie
Dr.
Laura Mariette Whitman and David Leonard Downie were married yesterday in Ann Arbor, Mich..
The Rev.
Harvey H. Guthrie performed the ceremony at St.
Andrews Episcopal Church.
Dr.
Whitman, who is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from Duke University and received her medical degree last month from Case Western Reserve University.
She is the daughter of Drs.
Robert F. Whitman and Marina v .N.
Whitman of Ann Arbor.
Her father is a professor emeritus of English at the University of Pittsburgh.
Her mother is the group vice president for public affairs and marketing at General Motors Corporation in Detroit.
The bride's late grandfather, the mathematician John von Neumann, was an early developer of the computer.


That 'New' Composer, Nietzsche
In 1871, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche sent a birthday gift to Richard Wagner's wife, Cosima: a composition for piano, four hands.
The music quoted the "Siegfried Idyll" and bore the rather Wagnerian title "Echoes of New Year's Eve, With Processional Song, Peasant Dance and the Pealing of Bells." When Cosima played the work with the conductor Hans Richter, Wagner fidgeted through the performance.
Before it ended, he left the room.
A guest found "the Master" lying on the floor, overcome with laughter.
That reaction was mild compared with the way the conductor Hans von Bulow -- whom Cosima had left to marry Wagner -- judged a composition that Nietzsche sent him the following year.
Bulow told Nietzsche the work was a joke, even a crime: "It is more terrible than you think."


Early Celebration for New Orchestra
NEXT season marks the 10th anniversary of the New Orchestra of Westchester, but the kickoff celebration comes this month with a concert at the State University of New York at Purchase.
"We were in the right place at the right time in the musical development of the county," said the founding conductor, Paul Lustig Dunkel.
"By meeting the need for a first-rate professional organization, we have had a growth curve exceeding that of any orchestra in the country. We are especially proud of our educational outreach program, which is where all profits from the concert will be going."


World Markets; Toronto-Dominion's Special Instinct
It's not one of the lemmings.
While other Canadian Banks were scrambling to buy investment dealers, the Toronto-Dominion Bank decided it could add more value by building that capability from within.
When it was fashionable to expand in the London Eurodollar market, Canada's fifth-largest bank decided its future was superregional, not multinational.


Seek and Ye . . .
To the Editor:
Having just returned from a weeklong visit to Southern California, I was astonished to read the letter of May 24 in response to Wilfrid Sheed's article  [ "To the Barricades in Defense of American Classics," May 10 ]  complaining about the absence of a WNEW-type station in Los Angeles.
Spinning the dial of my car radio while driving on the Santa Monica Freeway, I discovered KPCC -- 89.3 on the FM dial -- a public-radio station that plays all the good stuff we grew up with.
In one morning I heard, to name just a few, Billie Holiday, Woody Herman, Hal Kemp and a terrific rendition of "Sugar" featuring Louis Armstrong and Bing Crosby.
And there were no commercial interruptions.
RICHARD COHEN New York


Safety in Kenya
To the Editor: The State Department may be reluctant to comment on the letter from the president of Abercrombie &amp; Kent on tourist security in Kenya (April 19), but I am not.
My husband and I spent three wonderful weeks in Kenya and Tanzania earlier this year, and we are eager to return.
While my husband attended meetings at the United Nations offices outside Nairobi, I went alone to downtown Nairobi to shop and sightsee.
I never had the slightest fear for my safety.


'Lustration' Loses in Poland
A potentially explosive crisis in Poland has been turned to democracy's benefit by President Lech Walesa.
Ten days ago, the lower house of Parliament voted to expose the names of politicians, judges and civil servants who were police informers under Communism.
It looked as though Poland, like Czechoslovakia, would succumb to a frenzy over "lustration," a Latin term revived in Prague to describe a purification rite.
Fortunately, President Walesa not only opposed the law but exposed its absurdity when one deputy righteously announced that Mr.
Walesa, too, was listed as an informer.
The hero of Solidarity, who was sitting in the gallery, grinned, shook his fist in the air, and bowed to tumultuous applause.


American Snapshot, the Next Generation
Picture This.
It's Christmas morning 1992 at the Jones house, Anywhere, U.S.A., and the kids are beaming at the big present Mom and Dad have put under the tree: a CD player with a fancy new twist.
Besides playing music, this machine plays CD's filled with photographic images, displaying them on a television or computer screen.
The pictures can even be edited on screen -- enlarged, cropped or turned on their heads.
Best of all, the images can be captured by regular cameras on regular film and transferred later into CD form.
In short, the Jones family photo album can now come out of the closet and take its place on the CD shelf next to Michael Jackson and Madonna.


Their Dinner With Pancho
CUTTING STONE
By Janet Burroway. 404 pp. Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company.


Clemens, as Usual, Has Indians in Check
Red Sox 5, Indians 1; Indians 3, Red Sox 1  BOSTON, June 6 (AP) -- After Roger Clemens (9-3) won his sixth straight start with a 5-1 victory for Boston today, Charles Nagy (7-3) won his third in a row for Cleveland in the 3-1 nightcap of a doubleheader.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 245,000
32 Fleetwood Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, 2-car garage; taxes $5,100.
East Islip 162,000
81 Fawn Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, dining room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,800.
East Northport 143,000
87A Daly Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, family room; taxes $2,400.
Glen Cove 3.9 million
Crescent Beach Road
7-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, 60-year-old Normandy-style mansion; 9 fireplaces, 8.5 acres, formal gardens, 2 cottages; taxes $60,000.
Hauppauge 180,000
6 Heller Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old splanch; eat-in kitchen, dining room, family room, fireplace, pool; taxes $3,400.
West Islip 162,500
413 Capri Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath 33-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $4,600.
OTHER AREAS Fair Lawn, N.J. 323,000
37-02 Morlot Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; central vacuum, 2-car garage; taxes $6,640.
Enfield, Conn. 134,000
357 George Washington Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old ranch; pool, patio, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,397.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 417,500
11 Flag Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, den, cathedral ceilings, deck, family room, pool, 1 acre; taxes $9,941.


Image Abroad Pleases Dinkins
As he returned to New York City yesterday after a week in Europe seeking foreign investment, Mayor David N. Dinkins basked in the warm reception he had received from European political and business leaders and said he believed the trip had smoothed his rocky relations with the New York business community.
During an interview in the first-class cabin as he flew home, sipping a cognac and wearing a baseball cap with a bright African design, the Mayor reflected on the irony that at home he is often harshly criticized, but abroad he is treated with tremendous respect.


Topics of The Times; Home Run
Politicians need to be flexible, especially in a reapportionment year when the political map is subject to sudden and radical shifts.
A case in point is Representative Stephen Solarz of New York, who saw his district change dramatically this past week.
Because the State Legislature failed to reach agreement on redistricting, a Federal court assigned an expert to draw a plan.
That plan, released two weeks ago, pitted Mr.
Solarz against a prominent Brooklyn colleague, Representative Charles Schumer.
But Mr.
Solarz was quick to assert a home advantage.
"I think it's a terrific district," he said, "including not only my home but . . . neighborhoods that I have represented for 18 years."


Surge Beats Out Orlando For World League Title
The World League, professional football's spring league with an international spin, got all it bargained for in its second annual championship game, the World Bowl, between the Sacramento Surge and the Orlando Thunder at Olympic Stadium tonight.
There was the political rancor of a province that wants to secede from a country, displayed by boos from Montreal citizens rained upon the singer of the Canadian national anthem.
There was technical wizardy played out of the helmet camera strapped to the head of Orlando linebacker Rick Andrews.
And there was zaniness when two fans ran onto the field at the start of the fourth quarter.


33 Retirees in House Are Eligible for $8.6 Million
A legal provision that allows 33 departing members of the House of Representatives to keep more than $8 million in unused campaign contributions has embarrassed their colleagues in a year when Congressional perquisites have already roused voter pique.
The 33 members who are retiring from Congress or running for the Senate or were defeated in their party's primaries, are eligible to keep, collectively, $8.6 million.
Twenty-eight of them say they plan to donate the money to political parties or charities, although some retirees who have made such statements in the past have pocketed the money.


Caroline Siderowf, William Graham
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Siderowf of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caroline Beck Siderowf, to William Charles Leval Graham, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William G. B. Graham of Charlotte, Vt.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Siderowf, 24 years old, graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in education from Tufts University.
Her father is a first vice president of Prudential Securities in Westport.
Her mother, Topsy Siderowf, is an assistant editor of Golf Digest magazine in Trumbull, Conn.


Lili Abir, Richard C. Regen
Dr. and Mrs.
Isaac Abir of Huntington Valley, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lili Abir, to Richard Craig Regen, a son of Barbara Gladstone of New York and the late Elliot B. Regen.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Abir, 26 years old, is a set decorator in New York.
She graduated from the University of Delaware.
Her father is a pediatrician in Bucks County, Pa.
Her mother, Sarabeth Abir, owns Serapi Antiques, an antique shop in Huntington Valley.


Defiantly Incorrect
The parade of personality disorders, all the men who hate women and the women who love them, marches on in the talk shows of America.
Each day brings new revelations, darker and more embarassing than the previous ones, the kind of details that were once confined to an analyst's couch but now fuel the self-confession racket practiced by Oprah, Geraldo, Donahue and a half-dozen others.
John Callahan sits in his small basement apartment in Portland, Ore., his television tuned to the so-called reality shows, and he is inspired.
He draws a small, streetside restaurant, the door shut, no one inside.
And in the window, he puts a sign: "The Anorexic Cafe, Now Closed 24 Hours a Day."


Ms. Pride, Peter Glover
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter E. Pride of South Plainfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Martha Pride, to Peter Endicott Glover, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bryce E. Glover of Portland, Me.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pride, 27 years old, is a senior accountant at M. R. Weiser &amp; Company, an accounting firm in Iselin, N.J.
Mr.
Glover, 26, is a senior consultant with the systems integration division of Andersen Consulting in Florham Park, N.J.


Convention Chief's Job: Power to Grant Wishes
The meeting had been called to discuss the Democratic National Convention.
When Alexis M. Herman walked in, the man in whose office the early-morning strategy session was to be held shook her hand and smiled.
"We're waiting on the C.E.O.," he said.
"Have a seat, dear."
What he did not realize was that Ms. Herman
was
the C.E.O.: the chief executive officer of the Democratic National Convention, which opens July 13 at Madison Square Garden.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; PEROT HAD HARSH WORDS FOR SEX ON 'DOOGIE HOWSER'
Ross Perot, who described the criticism of the "Murphy Brown" television character by Vice President Dan Quayle as "goofy," himself criticized a character on the television show "Doogie Howser, M.D." a few months earlier for having sex.
The Los Angeles Times reported today that in a Sept. 26 meeting at its Washington news bureau, Mr.
Perot cited fictional television shows as setting bad examples and referred to an episode of "Doogie Howser, M.D." in which the title character and his girlfriend, both 18 years old, lost their virginity.
The Times reported that Mr.
Perot said: "Some 15-year-old girl that's been thinking about it hadn't done it yet. 'Hell, Doogie's girl did it. It must be all right.' You and I didn't see that kind of stuff growing up."


Rain Leads to Evacuations and Disrupts Traffic
The heavy rains that swept the region late Friday caused flooding in parts of Connecticut yesterday morning, overflowing streams and rivers, closing streets and forcing the evacuation of more than 250 people from their homes.
About 200 people had to evacuate their homes in two neighborhoods in Waterbury as the Mad River overflowed its banks early yesterday, according to Waterbury officials and the American Red Cross.


Pop/Jazz
June 8
PET SHOP BOYS, Roseland, 239 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 245-3240.
Deadpan, sneakily catchy songs that challenge listeners to gauge just how ironic the group intends to be.
For dancing before and after the concert, a benefit for the AIDS charity Lifebeat, leading British disk jockeys will play their techno and rave records.
Doors open at 8 P.M., with the Pet Shop Boys at 10 P.M.
Tickets are $35 in advance, $50 on the day of the show.
June 9
TRACY CHAPMAN, MAJEK FASHEK AND BLACK 47, Beacon Theater, Broadway and 74th Street, Manhattan, (212) 496-7070.
On Tracy Chapman's latest album, "Matters of the Heart," she lends her deep, somber voice to songs on personal as well as political topics.
But her opening acts -- the Nigerian reggae singer Majek Fashek and the Irish-American rock band Black 47 -- suggest that politics is still on the agenda.
The concert begins at 8 P.M.; tickets are $30.
June 9 to 14
EDDIE PALMIERI AFRO-CARIBBEAN OCTET AND JACK DeJOHNETTE'S SPECIAL EDITION, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Percussive fireworks and daring solos from performers who know all the uses of volatility.
The pianist Eddie Palmieri forges connections between danceable salsa, modal modern jazz, traditional Afro-Cuban rhythms and his own free associations.
Jack DeJohnette's drumming is a string of carefully plotted explosions behind the up-and-coming soloists in Special Edition.
Double bills begin at 9 and 11:30 P.M., with a third show on June 12 and 13 at 1:30 A.M.; admission is $20, with a $5 drink minimum.
June 12
ANN PEEBLES AND OTIS CLAY, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
Two soul singers who have been known to devotees since the 1960's.
Ann Peebles, a major influence on Bonnie Raitt, and Otis Clay, a belter with a gritty voice and dramatic timing, have both made strong new albums.
They will be backed by the Hi Rhythm Section, from Memphis.
Shows at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $15.
HOOTENANNY, Carnegie Hall, (212) 247-7800.
Wrapping up this year's folk festival, with Irish songs from the Clancy Brothers and Robbie O'Connell, Appalachian and country music from Doc Watson, blues and folk songs from Odetta and topical songs from Tom Paxton. 8 P.M.; tickets, $10 to $40.
June 18
KAPELYE AND THE ANDY STATMAN KLEZMER ORCHESTRA, Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, Manhattan, (212) 864-5400.
Two of the best klezmer-revival groups, playing Yiddish music with clarinets and fiddles that laugh and weep. 8 P.M.; tickets $20.
June 19
MY BLOODY VALENTINE, Superchunk and Pavement, the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, Manhattan, (212) 541-8900.
Memorable riffs and ambiguous lyrics war with guitar noise in this triple bill of collegiate rock, one of the dozens of shows that are part of the New Music Seminar's New Music Nights.
Pavement plays offhandedly raucous songs that might bash or drift; Superchunk couples punk hyperactivity with tuneful pop-rock, and My Bloody Valentine melts down its songs into a maelstrom of guitar sound.
Doors open at 9 P.M.; tickets are $13.50 to $20.
June 19 to 27
JVC JAZZ FESTIVAL: NEW YORK, various halls.
The annual jazz festival brings more than two dozen concerts to the city; for full information, call (212) 787-2020.
Some of the highlights:
DIZZY GILLESPIE'S 75TH BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION, with trumpeters (Wynton Marsalis, Freddie Hubbard, Jon Faddis, Red Rodney), saxophonists (Jackie McLean, Paquito D'Rivera) and many others honoring the be-bop trumpeter.
June 19 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall; tickets, $17.50 to $40.
FAREWELL TO BUCK, a tribute to the trumpeter and band leader Buck Clayton, with the Illinois Jacquet Big Band and the Buck Clayton Swing Band.
June 22 at 8 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street; tickets, $25 and $29.50.
THE MODERN JAZZ QUARTET celebrates its 40th anniversary, with the guitarist Laurindo Almeida and the Manhattan Transfer vocal group.
June 24 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall; tickets, $17.50 to $37.50.
A TRIBUTE TO STAN GETZ, with Kenny Barron on piano, Gary Burton on vibraphone, the singers Astrud Gilberto and Abbey Lincoln and the Woody Herman Orchestra, among others.
June 25 at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall; tickets, $17.50 to $35.
June 21
REGGAE SOLSTICE, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
A reggae survey, from bouncy ska by the Skatalites, to lilting reggae by the Wailing Souls, to racy dancehall rapping by Tiger and Cobra.
Also appearing: Mzwakhe Mbuli, from South Africa. 3 P.M.; free.
June 23
SPINAL TAP, the Beacon Theater, Broadway at 74th Street, Manhattan, (212) 496-7070.
The heavy-metal band that all other hard-rockers measure themselves against, if only to see who is the greater self-parody.
The concert begins at 8 P.M.; tickets are $22.50.
June 24
THE COUNT BASIE ORCHESTRA, Lincoln Center's Fountain Plaza, (212) 875-5440.
Part of "Midsummer Night Swing." Ever suave and terse, the big band plays for dancers, inaugurating a four-week Wednesday-through-Saturday series of dance concerts. 8:15 P.M.; tickets, $6.
June 27
ROSANNE CASH AND LUCINDA WILLIAMS, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
The lovesick blues, country-style, by two women who talk back. 3 P.M., free.
June 29
SONIC YOUTH AND SUN RA, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
Sonic Youth, the most influential band in collegiate rock, wraps mammoth guitar sounds around unexpectedly catchy songs.
The keyboardist Sun Ra leads a big band that might play squalling noise or tunes from Walt Disney movies. 3 P.M.; free.
July 11
QUEEN LATIFAH, THE FAMILY STAND AND DREAM WARRIORS, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
Speed-tongued, positive rap from Queen Latifah and the jazz-tinged Dream Warriors; funk, rock and modernized soul from the Family Stand. 3 P.M.; free.
July 12
A TRIBUTE TO WOODY GUTHRIE, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
With Pete Seeger, Arlo Guthrie, Billy Bragg, Suzanne Vega, Nanci Griffith and Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy. 2 P.M.; free.
July 19
THOMAS MAPFUMO AND LES TETES BRULEES, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
The percolating, triple-time rhythms of Thomas Mapfumo's band back up the deep, experienced voice of Zimbabwe's equivalent of Bob Marley.
Wearing face paint and backpacks, kicking around a soccer ball and playing buoyantly danceable "bikutsi rock," Les Tetes Brulees (the Hotheads) from Cameroon offer one of the most unlikely spectacles in African pop. 3 P.M.; free.
July 23
CHANGES AND TRANSFORMATIONS, the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 996-1100.
Part of the Jazz in July series.
Re-creations of music from Louis Armstrong, Charlie Parker, John Kirby and Raymond Scott, along with the New York premiere of Dick Hyman's Sextet for Clarinet, Piano and Strings.
With Mr.
Hyman on piano, Walt Levinsky on clarinet, the Beaux Arts String Quartet and others. 8 P.M.; tickets, $23 and $25.
July 30
KENNY DAVERN'S WINDY CITY STOMPERS AND FRANK TESCHEMACHER CELEBRATION BAND, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 996-1100.
Chicago jazz from the late 1920's, meticulously recreated from recordings. 8 P.M.; tickets, $23 and $25.
July 31
MONK'S MOOD, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 721-6500.
Solo versions of Thelonious Monk compositions performed by Wynton Marsalis, Tommy Flanagan, Randy Weston, Muhal Richard Abrams, Billy Higgins and others. 8 P.M.; tickets, $30.
Aug. 1
KIND OF BLUE, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 721-6500.
Modal jazz in a tribute to Miles Davis, John Coltrane and Cannonball Adderley. 8 P.M.; tickets, $30.
Aug. 6
MUSIC IS MY MISTRESS: THE ROMANTIC ELLINGTON, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 721-6500.
Compositions about women played by the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra. 8 P.M.; tickets, $30.
Aug. 6 and 7
NATALIE COLE, Radio City Music Hall, Avenue of the Americas and 50th Street, Manhattan, (212) 247-4777.
Nat (King) Cole's daughter, singing standards her father made famous along with her own hits.
Tickets are $30 to $50.
Aug. 7
THE MAJESTY OF TAP, Alice Tully Hall, (212) 721-6500.
Jimmy Slyde, Bunny Briggs and Chuck Green tap-dancing with a trio led by Barry Harris on piano. 8 P.M.; tickets, $30.
Aug. 9
TITO PUENTE AND LOS MACONDOS, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-park at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
The timbales virtuoso Tito Puente with his propulsive mambo band, and accordion-driven vallenata music from Colombia by the Macondos. 3 P.M.; free.
Aug. 25 to 30
BETTY CARTER, the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
The sultry-voiced singer and daredevil improviser.
Sets at 9 and 11:30 P.M.; tickets, $25, with a $5 drink minimum.


When the Young Take Over the Outdoors
SUMMER in New York may seem a week too long and 5 degrees too hot, but it needn't be boring for children.
In the city's parks alone, there are free tennis lessons for youngsters, a chess camp, carousels, a formal croquet green, roller skating, bicycling and boating.
And at Jacob Riis Park in Queens, children can watch female lifeguards in an annual test-your-strength competition, or sign up for a sand-castle contest.
For those seeking shade, the Brooklyn Botanic Garden will offer gardening classes, and the Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences will present a "Beetlemania" exhibition.


Warnings About More Than Ecology
Re "Builders Rally to Free Up Pine Barrens Development"  [ May 17 ] , the Nobel Prize-winning author Octavio Paz asked not long ago whether our economic system would be changed by human wisdom or destroyed by its own excesses and contradictions.
In the latter case, he worried that it could drag our democratic institutions with it.
The proposal by Long Island developers and their allies to "modify" laws protecting the pine barrens because it interfered with business interests mirrors the efforts by the Bush Administration to weaken national environmental legislation for the same reasons.
One gets the impression that economic interests establish the rules of the political game to favor themselves, and when citizens manage to achieve some degree of success such as the Long Island Pine Barrens Society, those with economic power simply go outside the rules or change them.


Catherine Triant, George Buxton
Catherine Antonia Triant, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore D. Triant of New York, was married yesterday to George Norman Buxton, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jorge Buxton of New York.
The Rev.
Robert Stefanopoulos performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Mrs.
Buxton is a saleswoman for Clarence House, a fabrics showroom in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is the president of T. D. Triant Inc., an interior design firm in New York.


Better Tennis Without Boors
To the Sports Editor:
What a delightful, refreshing French Open.
An early dismissal of Jimbo and his pumping fists and gyrating butt, and an early dismissal of Superbrat with his scowl and string of obscenities.
Now we can concentrate on tennis and not be embarrassed by vulgar theatrics.


THE PROBLEMS WITH RUSHING HEADLONE TO 'TOTAL QUALITY'
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Ronald Ashkenas and Robert Schaffer, management consultants, wrote, "Like lemmings marching to the sea, many North American corporations are rushing headlong to a destination called 'total quality.' " Many companies' efforts are doomed, they wrote, because of fundamental flaws in the way they manage their quality programs.
The authors went on to suggest that managers often do not demand enough of their subordinates or help them to achieve results quickly.
They cited a survey by the Public Agenda Foundation that 62 percent of high-level white-collar workers believed they were not being asked to work at their full potential.


A Package Deal in Court
When Steven Phillips, a Manhattan attorney with a growing client list of keyboard operators, journalists and others suffering from typing injuries, began to wonder how to gain more attention for their problems, he naturally turned to Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein in Brooklyn.
Over his 25-year career on the Federal bench, Judge Weinstein has shown a willingness for taking dramatic steps to join related cases together and keep them moving.
Judge Weinstein's high-profile moves included consolidation of huge numbers of asbestos complaints and of cases related to diethylstilbestrol, or DES, the pregnancy drug thought to cause cancer in the daughters of women who took it.
He also oversaw a nationwide settlement of lawsuits against chemical companies by Vietnam veterans claiming they were injured by exposure to Agent Orange.


Fisk a Late Scratch
White Sox catcher CARLTON FISK, whose injured right foot has kept him out of action all season, was taken off the disabled list Friday -- and was promptly sidelined with a flareup of the same injury.
The 44-year-old Fisk had been scheduled to start against Oakland Friday night but was scratched two hours before the game.
Team officials said they would wait a few days before deciding whether to put him back on the disabled list. (AP)


After 12-Year Fight, Ohio Incinerator Is Set to Open
For 12 years, citizens of this gritty Ohio River town of 14,000 have battled a consortium of American and European investors who planned and built one of the nation's largest hazardous-waste incinerators in their backyard.
Now the incinerator is about to open.
It is awaiting a ruling from the Federal Environmental Protection Agency on whether its proposed plan for three months of test burning meet with the agency's approval; if it does, and the tests are judged successful, the plant can start operating.


After the Klan, More Unity Than Discord
WHEN the Ku Klux Klan marched on Putnam High School on May 9, townspeople worried that the demonstration would worsen the racial problems that had developed in the small northeast Connecticut mill community.
Instead, the Klan's appearance seemed to have had the opposite effect.
The high school administration has hired a consultant to develop a race relations program for next year, while a new student group is trying to resolve problems internally.


Check Fraud: Hazy Portrait Emerges
To some, he was modest, frugal and deeply religious, a model of prosperity and rectitude in his community who raised funds for charity and worthy causes.
To others, he was a wheeler-dealer who dabbled in stocks, insurance and real estate, who moved millions of dollars around like so much Monopoly money and handled his tangled business affairs with the aggressive, speculative instincts of a high-stakes gambler.
But business associates and acquaintances alike expressed astonishment yesterday that Robert M. Felzenberg, the owner and president of the Payroll Express Corporation of Elizabeth, N.J., had been charged with stealing more than $25 million from 100 companies and government agencies in a huge check-cashing fraud.
The charges were filed in Manhattan on Friday by Federal authorities.


Hilary S. Chard, Geoffrey Moore
Hilary Snyder Chard and Geoffrey Evans Moore were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., by the Rev.
Sydney Anglin Woodd-Cahusac.
Mrs.
Moore, 41 years old, is a real-estate broker at Cleveland, Duble &amp; Arnold in Greenwich.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
She is a daughter of Joan L. Grant of Hanover, N.H., and Horatio J. Snyder of Delray Beach, Fla.
Her father, who is retired, was the senior vice president and a director of the Emery Air Freight Corporation in Wilton, Conn.


Zaire Seizes the Assets of Foreign Oil Companies
The Government has announced that it is seizing the assets of all foreign oil companies in an effort to ease chronic fuel shortages.
Officials say that the measure is temporary, that the companies will be reimbursed for petroleum supplies taken and that the equipment and property will be returned, although no date has been given.


THE PROBLEMS WITH RUSHING HEADLONE TO 'TOTAL QUALITY'
In an article on the Forum page on May 3, Ronald Ashkenas and Robert Schaffer, management consultants, wrote, "Like lemmings marching to the sea, many North American corporations are rushing headlong to a destination called 'total quality.' " Many companies' efforts are doomed, they wrote, because of fundamental flaws in the way they manage their quality programs.
The authors went on to suggest that managers often do not demand enough of their subordinates or help them to achieve results quickly.
They cited a survey by the Public Agenda Foundation that 62 percent of high-level white-collar workers believed they were not being asked to work at their full potential.


Nathalie Comfort, James A. Urry
Nathalie Pierrepont Comfort, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Comfort of Locust Valley, L.I., was married there yesterday to James Alexander Urry, the son of Mrs.
Charles F. Urry of Locust Valley, and the late Mr.
Urry.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown, L.I.
Mrs.
Urry, 27 years old, is a teacher at the Trinity School in New York.
She graduated from Pine Manor College and has a master's degree in early childhood education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is the chairman of Citicorp Venture Capital Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of Citicorp in New York.


Barr Hogen, Morrison Shafroth
Katharin Barr Hogen, the daughter of Timothy L. Hogen and Betsy Gotbaum of New York, was married yesterday to Morrison Shafroth, a son of Diana Shafroth of Littleton, Colo., and the late John Shafroth.
Richard Brown, the District Attorney of Queens, officiated at Gracie Mansion.
Mrs.
Shafroth, who is known as Barr, is 29 years old.
She runs her own catering business in San Francisco.
She is a graduate of Bard College.
Her father is the president of Hogen Associates, a national fund-raising consultancy, in New York.
Her mother is the Commissioner of Parks and Recreation for the City of New York.
Mrs.
Shafroth is also a stepdaughter of Victor Gotbaum of New York, the director of the Center for Labor Studies at the City University Graduate Center in New York.


Three Variations on a Theme Of Summertime Potato Salad
I DON'T think I have ever met anyone who didn't like potato salad.
For me, it is one of the best parts of a summer meal.
For years, I made it the same way: tossing cooked potatoes and chopped scallions in a rich mayonnaise made with egg yolks and olive oil.
Now that raw eggs are regarded, like raw chicken, as too dangerous to eat, I've had to look for other ideas.
Recently, I spent a weekend at a friend's house where she made a dressing using horseradish, yogurt and olive oil.
I am not one of those people who thinks yogurt does the job when you want the rich taste of egg yolks or cream, so I was a bit skeptical, until I tasted it.
It was superb.


Diane Kalnins, William Glover
Diane Marie Kalnins, a daughter of Marie-Therese Kalnins of Southhampton, L.I., and the late Maigonis B. Kalnins, was married yesterday to William Christian Glover, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert B. Glover Jr. of New Bern, N.C.
Msgr.
Edmond J. Trench performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Church in Southampton.
Mrs.
Glover, 31 years old, is a pre-school teacher at the Brick Church School in New York.
She is a graduate of the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father was a partner in M &amp; R Drywall &amp; Construction in Locust Valley, L.I.


A Camping Experience That Is Never a Vacation
Stu Inman stood behind a section of crowded bleachers and watched a spirited scrimmage between two teams filled with college players hoping to make an impression in a gymnasium filled with National Basketball Association scouts, general managers and head coaches.
This was the N.B.A.'s predraft camp, and for the last four days, Inman, the Miami Heat's director of player personnel, and other key N.B.A. executives have packed the gymnasium at the University of Illinois-Circle Campus.
They have talked business, talked deals.
Mainly they have evaluated 69 players who have been invited here to participate in four days of grueling drills and scrimmages.
Most are on the bubble, either between first- and second-round picks, or being drafted or not drafted.


Eclectic Urban Surprise in Long Beach
SOHO in Long Beach labels itself "an American Bistro." But do not expect mid-American favorites.
This is not mashed-potato, chicken-potpie or meat-loaf land.
Rather, the cooking is urban, ethnic and eclectic.
Thai noodles, Chinese pot stickers, Italian pastas, Cajun blackened steaks and Caribbean jerk pork share the menu like neighbors in an ethnic-rich city.
The Caribbean influence will be more pronounced as summer approaches, when jerk chicken, conch fritters and coconut shrimp make the scene.


FRIENDS AT LAST
I have just finished reading John Corry's About Men column "Friends at Last" (May 10), and I'm shocked to find myself sobbing!
I'm not ill, but I've been divorced for 10 years, after a 27-year marriage.
My former husband and I have three children, and we both are remarried.
We don't speak to each other, which has made our children's milestones in life more difficult and tension-ridden than need be.
Yet, the pain and fury have faded for me.
The anger, the legal battles -- whose fault was this, anyway? -- have all receded, and what remains is an abiding knowledge of our years together -- years of hope for the future, joy in our children -- before it went awry.


Q and A
Driving Information Abroad
Q.
We plan to arrive in Amsterdam and drive from there to the Summer Games in Barcelona.
Is there a service that maps routes with information about mileage and points of interest? -- Ruben Carriedo, Chula Vista, Calif.


Driving Down the Cost Curve
Six years ago, two of Silicon Valley's most prominent scientists started a company with the ambitious aim of developing a chip that would mimic the human brain.
Such a chip, employing what is called a neural network, would actually learn by example rather than being preprogrammed to follow established rules.
Last week, the scientists, Federico Faggin and Carver A. Mead, shipped their first product, an electronic wizard assigned to the humble task of reading the magnetic characters printed on checks.
The chip made by their company, Synaptics Inc. of San Jose, Calif., performs in far more flexible ways than conventional products.
Among other things, it can read checks with higher accuracy, at greater speed and with more tolerance for poor printing.


On Deck to Tour Berlin
BERLINERS like to boast that their city has more bridges than Venice.
Comparisons rightfully stop there.
Berlin's winding network of rivers, lakes and canals is often beautiful but remains only a backdrop for the city, not its raison d'etre.
Even if Berlin's waterways remain largely out of sight, hidden under a canopy of trees and behind aging industrial plants -- during much of the cold war some were obscured by the concrete bulk of the wall itself -- they are a particularly good way to explore Germany's recently reunified old capital.
The Spree and Havel Rivers, sometimes constricted in narrow channels, sometimes ballooning out into vast lakes, snake through the city, from the tiny island in the Spree along whose banks Berlin was founded in the early 13th century to the wooded outskirts of today's metropolis.
A complicated network of canals and locks forms a lacy gridwork connecting the natural watercourses, allowing ships to steam out of Berlin direct to Poland and the Baltic Sea in the east and on to Hamburg and the North Sea in the west.
Thirty percent of the city's freight traffic is still delivered by boat.


Shelling of Sarajevo Dashes Slim Hopes of the Besieged
Sarajevo today endured the most sustained bombardment from artillery, mortar and rocket batteries since the siege of the Bosnian capital began two months ago.
The shelling dashed hopes for relief among the city's frightened, hungry people.
A flurry of United Nations activity on Friday spurred the first flickering prospects of a turn for the better since this medieval city, home to 560,000 people before the fighting, began its descent into an endless round of shelling, street-to-street fighting and sniper fire.


BEST SELLERS: June 7, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) From New York schoolgirl to doyenne of a French chateau: the life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
2
2
3
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers secrets from the past and a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
3
1
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
4
3
111
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
5
4
13
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
5
7
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
7
7
8
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
8
8
7
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
9
13
14
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe. (LP)
10
9
6
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $18.95.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
11
6
2
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
12
10
17
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry. (LP)
13
2
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
14 *
11
4
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Four decades in the lives of the motley residents of the 19th-century Washington Territory.
15
1
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
8
2
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
1
CHIEF, by Daryl F. Gates with Diane K. Shah. (Bantam, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who has headed the Los Angeles Police Department since 1978.
3
2
19
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
4
1
7
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
5
10
2
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
6
15
3
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
7 *
3
29
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
8
5
6
TWO NATIONS, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) A political scientist discusses the way racism affects American life.
9 *
1
RACE, by Studs Terkel. (New Press, $24.95.) Conversations with blacks and whites about "the American obsession."
10 *
6
4
THE WAY I SEE IT, by Patti Davis. (Putnam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the daughter of Ronald and Nancy Reagan.
11
4
5
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
12
7
5
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
13
9
12
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the retired commander of a Navy counterterrorist unit.
14
11
4
PLAYING IN THE DARK, by Toni Morrison. (Harvard University, $14.95.) The novelist-critic's call for literary scholarship that will bring the black experience to the attention of all Americans.
15
1
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Dow Jones-Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
16
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
7
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
3
3
27
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4 *
4
27
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
1
THE FRUGAL GOURMET WHOLE FAMILY COOKBOOK, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $22.) A collection of recipes and reflections on food.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE TRUELOVE, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $19.95.) In the 15th installment of their intertwined careers, Jack Aubrey, Royal Navy captain, and Stephen Maturin, ship's surgeon and agent of espionage, must cope with live women on their warship as they strive to smite the upstart Bonaparte and his misguided allies.
THE EASY WAY OUT, by Stephen McCauley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) An engaging novel of bet hedging, loss cutting and white lying in a cast of self-deluding but fundamentally decent characters drawn from the Massachusetts middle class.
HOME FIRES: An Intimate Portrait of One Middle-Class Family in Postwar America, by Donald Katz. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $25.) A wise and respectful story -- names and traumas apparently unretouched -- of one New York family, 1945-90.
INTELLECTUAL MEMOIRS: New York 1936-1938, by Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $15.95.) Written during McCarthy's final illness, this memoir looks back half a century at bohemian New York in the 1930's; everybody is vividly present.
CAETANA'S SWEET SONG, by Nelida Pinon. (Knopf, $24.) The second of this Brazilian novelist's works to appear in English is a long, complex, philosophical-allegorical farce in which matter wars with spirit in an upcountry backwater.
Matter usually wins.
UNDERWORLD, by Peter Conrad. (Poseidon, $21.) This versatile writer's first novel, which starts with a kidnapping and a ghastly murder, is really a carefully layered, and indeed redemptive, meditation on the world we are making for ourselves.
AFTER HENRY, by Joan Didion. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Reports and meditations, affording the pleasures of literature, on phenomena like Patricia Hearst, brush fires, Ronald Reagan.


Play-Doh To Porcelain
THURSDAY. 6:15 P.M.
A black BMW cruised by Gordon Biersch, a brewery and beer hall in San Francisco.
The driver nuzzled a cellular phone and honked his horn at the crowd waiting to get in.
Young and rumpled, older and crisper, men and women, mostly single, all looking.
Gordon Biersch is to San Francisco today what Chicago was to the cattle industry: a major meat market.
Since it opened two months ago, the brewery has sent out a come-back-to-the-fraternity-house signal.
And single San Francisco has swarmed back to the good old days, "600, 800 a night," the doorman said.


Alyson O'Hara, Hugh J. Donlon
Alyson Amy O'Hara, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard S. O'Hara of Andover, Mass., was married yesterday to Hugh James Donlon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hubert J. Donlon of East Orleans, Mass.
The Rev.
Myron F. Bullock officiated in St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Andover.
Mrs.
Donlon, 28 years old, was until recently a registered nurse at Children's Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is a general and vascular surgeon at Andover Surgical Associates.
He is the group's president.


A NEW FACE FOR AMERICAN LABOR
Rivera admits that he has profound troubles on the subject of abortion and has taken a position "that the union should not have a position."
His saying this would trouble me, even if the overwhelming majority of our members endorsed it.
But my money is riding on a pro-choice majority of our union who daily see and care for women and children devastated by the policies of Presidents who care passionately for their lives before birth but not one whit for their lives after.


Saluting a Patron
Metropolitan Museum of Art; June 1, 8 P.M.


A NEW FACE FOR AMERICAN LABOR
Sam Roberts's discussion of Dennis Rivera and the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees Union reminds us that the plight of workers is bound up with that of the country as a whole ("A New Face For American Labor," May 10).
What workers have known for the last decade -- that the quality of their lives wasn't rising with the swelling coffers of the rich -- is now apparent to all.
In the wake of the Los Angeles uprising, it is also evident that the sinking standard of living of American workers is but a part of the shattered notion of social justice for all Americans.
Rivera's strength lies in his ability to connect those two sometimes divergent interests.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Robert M. Ricard; Coming to the Rescue of the City Tree
AS Connecticut's forests break out into full spring glory, Robert M. Ricard is worried that the trees that need the most attention are being ignored.
Mr.
Ricard is an urban and community forester in the University of Connecticut Cooperative Extension Service, charged with helping develop programs to protect city trees.


Speed and A.P. Indy Rule the Day at Belmont
On New York's biggest and best day of racing in 1992, speed prevailed over mud at Belmont Park yesterday as Strike the Gold made a melodramatic return to his home track in a starring role.
But it was A.P.
Indy who won the big one, rocketing down the stretch in a power performance to snatch the 124th running of the Belmont Stakes in the final strides and win for the seventh straight time.
The colt, a 3-year-old son of Seattle Slew and a grandson of Secretariat, won by three-quarters of a length over the British import My Memoirs, who in turn had a neck over Pine Bluff, the winner of the Preakness.
But nobody had a bigger payday than Pine Bluff, who earned $91,776 for finishing third plus $1 million in bonus money for the best overall performances in the three American classics: fifth in the Kentucky Derby, first in the Preakness and third in the Belmont.


Still Time to Sow
All tender plants should be in the garden now, and gardeners should be feasting on peas and strawberries and sniffing the roses.
Plant or bring outside nonhardy ornamentals like fuchsias, cannas, heliotropes and lantanas.
Plant dahlia tubers or young plants raised from cuttings.


Margaret Corse, C. S. Gardner
Margaret Murchison Corse, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Corse of Atlanta, was married yesterday in Alexandria, Va., to Christopher Samuel Gardner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Paul Gardner of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Geoffrey Michael St.
John Hoare performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Gardner, 26 years old, is the recruiting coordinator at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She graduated from Stanford University.
Her father is a senior partner with the Atlanta law firm of Powell, Goldstein, Frazer &amp; Murphy.
Her mother, Margaret M. Corse, is an owner of A. M. Antiques Ltd., a shop in Atlanta.


Karyn Mancuso, Robert C. Gasser
Karyn Ann Mancuso, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore A. Mancuso of New Springville, S.I., and Robert Christian Gasser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Gasser of Toms River, N.J., were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Francis Fajella performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Gasser, 26 years old, graduated from St.
John's University in Grymes Hill, S.I., and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a senior vice president in New York of the Pershing division of the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation.


Another First From California
After earthquakes, floods, fires and riots, Californians are now bracing for upheaval in their politics.
Democratic primary voters last week set the stage for a bruising and colorful campaign, nominating two women for the United States Senate, a nationwide first.
If they both win in November, California, dominated politically by men from vote-rich Southern California in recent years, will be represented in Washington by two northern women.
That would double the number of women in the Senate.
They are Dianne Feinstein, former Mayor of San Francisco, and Barbara Boxer, Congresswoman from Marin County, both of whom easily brushed aside veteran male Democrats who ran well-funded campaigns.
The two are very different politically and personally, and not particularly fond of each other.
But all this was drowned out by the cheers for the political ascendancy of women in a year of swelling public demand for overall change in American political life.


Let's Disperse the Family Values Smokescreen; What the Poor Want
To the Editor:
In "Job Programs and Other Bromides" (Op-Ed, May 19), Lawrence M. Mead politicizes an issue far beyond the power of any one political group to cure.
To say that most Republicans want to enforce on the poor values such as the work ethic, while many Democrats resist, is to condemn more than half the country's population for moral deficiency.


Q-Ratings: The Popularity Contest of the Stars
WHEN TELEVISION'S MOST recent sweeps period ended two weeks ago, NBC was declared the winner, with an average prime-time rating of 12.
Fox achieved a 7.7 with only five nights of programming.
A great deal of fuss was made about this thrice-yearly exercise, which determines how much networks can charge advertisers.
During the same period, a small company on Long Island was tabulating the latest survey of Q-ratings, and very little public fuss was made at all.
That's just fine with Steven Levitt, president of Marketing Evaluations, the 28-year-old company that prepares Q-ratings (Q is for quotient, as in I.Q.), which measure familiarity and popularity.


Subtitles Have the Last Word in Foreign Films
Soldiers open fire on a plaza full of protesters.
In a nearby apartment, a young man bleeds to death from his wounds as an older woman tends to him lovingly.
He raves.
She hovers, putting her hand on his forehead and whispering something in a tear-choked voice.
Unfortunately, this line from the Mexican film "Red Dawn" is in Spanish.
Fortunately, there are subtitles.
According to them, she says, "I'll go get you your bill now."
His
bill?
The audience murmurs. Does she mean
pill?
Or is this some sort of sick doctor joke?
For a moment or two the movie's tension dissipates as people in the audience whisper to one another, trying to figure out what was meant.


Superpower Blues
THE DEMOCRACY TRAP
The Perils of the Post-Cold War World.
By Graham E. Fuller. 285 pp.
New York: Dutton. $20.


Serbs, Shunned by World, Say They Are Victims
A week after the United Nations voted to impose sanctions on Yugoslavia, most of the country's overwhelmingly Serbian population is showing no signs of shame or remorse.
Instead, people who have been internationally shunned as villains are seeing themselves as victims.
The belief that they are being unjustly treated by a world that does not understand or appreciate them extends from a President who insists that his country is not to blame for the violence raging in Bosnia to the President's critics, who charge him with failing to make Serbia's case more persuasively to the world.


Pop Goes the Homeboy
A new hip pop is here.
This week, Robert Crowder, a Brooklyn entrepreneur, is introducing Homeboy sodas from New York to Washington.
The flavors include Cherry Berry Burst and Orange Mango Flip.
In "Fresh Fly Flavor" (Longmeadow Press, 1992, $7.95), a dictionary of hip-hop terms, Fab 5 Freddy defines homeboy as "a male from your place of origin or hometown."


Sarah F. Covert, Patrick O'Connor
Dr.
Sarah Frances Covert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger A. Covert of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Patrick Joseph O'Connor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. O'Connor of White Salmon, Wash.
The Rev.
Philip Zwerling, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Stillwell-Twiggs House in Tucson, Ariz.
Dr.
Covert, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a postdoctoral research fellow in plant pathology at the University of Arizona in Tucson.
She graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a Ph.D. in bacteriology from the University of Wisconsin at Madison, from which her husband received a Ph.D in sport psychology.
Her father is the vice president of marketing for International Nickel Inc., a mining and trading company in Saddle Brook, N.J.


Mary Kearing, Anthony O'Connor
Mary Susan Kearing, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leon R. Kearing of Washington, was married yesterday to Anthony Morris O'Connor, Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony M. O'Connor of New York.
The Rev.
John D. Schule Jr., a Congregational minister, officiated at the Federated Church in Edgartown, Mass.
Mrs.
O'Connor, 26 years old, is an admissions coordinator at Columbia University in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a psychiatrist at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in Washington.


Cruises: Do Travel Agents Steer Clients Straight?
TRAVEL AGENTS love to sell cruise tickets.
The whole business -- lodging, meals, transportation -- is wrapped into one reservation, and the commission on the sale will come in one check.
"I can spend a hour putting together a trip to Orlando," said Lillian Griffith, an agent at Rich World Wide Travel in Pearl River, N.Y.
"But I can be all done with a good cruise package in half an hour."
Like most other travel agents, Ms.
Griffith derives her whole income from commissions.
She may never receive the 8 percent commission for the Orlando hotel reservations because hotels are known to pay agents' commissions sporadically, and she will get no commission at all on the meals her clients eat out or on other things they buy, like taxi rides.
She will get 10 percent on the Orlando airline ticket although she may have to rewrite it a couple of times if her clients change their plans.
But cruises are the gravy, she concurs: On her clients' cruise, everything is commissionable, and the minimum commission is 10 percent.


Czechoslovak Exit Polls Suggest a Nation to Be Governed on Tenterhooks
Voters in the two halves of Czechoslovakia sent sharply conflicting messages in balloting for national and republican parliaments, according to early returns and Government forecasts of voting trends made public today.
The returns and forecasts, based on interviews with voters leaving the polls, suggest Czechoslovakia is headed for a period of political uncertainty.
In Slovakia, in the east of the nation, one in three voters in selected districts were backing candidates loyal to Vladimir Meciar, who has warned that he might break up the 74-year-old Czechoslovak federation because of Slovakia's unhappiness over growing economic disparities with its wealthier Czech neighbor.


Crowd and Score Are on Sindelar's Side
Joey Sindelar hopes a three-shot lead and a partisan gallery will be enough to overcome the uncertainty of a long slump as he attempts to win the Memorial Tournament on Sunday.
The 34-year-old Sindelar birdied four of the last five holes today for a 67 that gave him a 54-hole total of 15-under-par 201, three better than Jeff Maggert and Mark Brooks.


Repairing and Replacing the Many Types of Siding
SEVERAL styles of wood siding are popular.
They include shingles, shakes, clapboards, lap siding, plywood panels and boards and battens.
Properly applied and either sealed or painted about every five years, each kind should last at least 30 years.
But damage to wood siding has to be repaired promptly to prevent worsening, especially in new houses that lack wood sheathing behind the siding.


Family Values: Hard To Define, Harder to Afford
Despite all the official hand-wringing about family values, over the last three years President Bush and Congress have been unable to agree over much legislation to aid families.
Liberals and conservatives clash over whether support for Federal spending on social welfare programs is an accurate measure of a politician's commitment to families.
And they disagree about the definition of "family values" at a time when one-fourth of all American births occur out of wedlock.
But they concur that the Government could do much more than it has to bolster families.


Women in Science
To the Editor:
This year, like last, only 5 of the roughly 60 new members elected to the National Academy of Sciences were women (news article, May 10).
An accompanying article asks your yearly question, "Why aren't women finding more success in science?"


Josefa Mulaire and William Tester
"BRING your umbrella," Josefa Mulaire said a few days before her wedding.
It was good advice.
Last Sunday afternoon during a downpour, she married William Tester in the backyard of her childhood home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
During the ceremony, they stood on the bride's favorite spot in the yard, holding umbrellas that buckled in the wind while some 90 guests watched from inside a nearby tent.
The rain soaked the bride's dress, splattered the groom's eyeglasses, leaked through the roof of the tent, ruined hairdos and turned the ground to mud.
But in the end, the monsoonlike weather only added to the merriment.


Currency; Canada's Dollar Holds Its Own
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
126.85
127.60
140.35
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5915
1.6080
1.7715
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1920
1.2032
1.1481
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8320
1.8285
1.6710
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$338.40
$336.25
$366.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


All Eyes (or None?) Are on St. Petersburg
Maybe if they scheduled enough doubleheaders, all of the teams that are mentioned as prime candidates for moves to St.
Petersburg's forlorn domed stadium could play there.
The long-deprived fans of Florida's west coast could root for the St.
Petersburg Giants on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, the St.
Petersburg Mariners on Mondays and Tuesdays and -- why not? -- the St.
Petersburg Astros on Wednesdays and Thursdays.
"We'll take them all," said Rick Dodge, St.
Petersburg's assistant city manager, who has worked feverishly for years to lure just one team to the city.


Tickets. Decor. Action: Let the Benefit Begin.
NAME: Beth Rudin DeWoody.
IDENTITY: Coordinator for the Rudin Foundation, a family charitable organization; board member of Phoenix House, the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


Candlewood Playhouse Stages Its Version of 'Peter Pan'
THE Children's Theater Series of the Candlewood Playhouse isn't scheduled to begin performances before another week or so, but that's only a technicality.
Even though "Peter Pan," which opened the professional summer season on May 26 and bears the imprimatur of Broadway, the production in New Fairfield is so minor it may as well be "Peter Rabbit."
Forget that, in any version, J. M. Barrie's 1904 play is a rueful -- some say, bitter -- contemplation on vanished youth.
A New York Times review in 1916 put it this way: "Peter Pan is not children at play, but an old man smiling -- and smiling a little sadly -- as he watches children at play." Peter Pan ran, or flew, away when he heard his father and mother discussing what he was to be as a grownup.
He grasps adventure in everything, even the prospect of death.


Annette Woolard, William Provine
Annette Woolard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar S. Woolard Jr. of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday in Greenville, Del., to William Douglas Provine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald W. Provine of Victorville, Calif.
The Rev.
Adam M. Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred.
Ms.
Woolard-Provine, 33 years old, is the assistant director of the Historical Society of Delaware in Wilmington.
She graduated from Wake Forest University and received a master's in history from the University of Delaware, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in American History.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Du Pont Company in Wilmington.


The Power Behind Richard's Throne
It is England in the 1480'S, and it is England in the 1930's.
The would-be dictator speaks Shakespearean verse, but wears a black shirt and a fascist-style armband, the red cross of his country's patron saint, St.
George.
When he assumes power, he stands on a 15-foot podium and speaks in the same singsong tones Edward VIII used when he publicly announced that he was giving up his throne for the love of Wallace Simpson.
Indeed, recognizably modern upper-class English voices and upper-class English faces are all around, creating the impression of a Nazi regime on the banks of the Thames.
No wonder the revival of "Richard III" that arrives at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Tuesday caused a stir when it first opened at Britain's National Theater in 1990.
Ian McKellen, who plays Richard, is well known in New York, notably as the villainous Salieri in Peter Shaffer's "Amadeus," for which he won a Tony Award in 1979.
But Richard Eyre, who is responsible for the production, is surprisingly unfamiliar to Americans.
He may be director of the National Theater and a major name in Britain, but the two-week stopover of "Richard III" in Brooklyn marks his theatrical debut in the United States.


Losers in Home Sales Deserve Tax Break
To the Editor:
One of the Presidential candidates should propose a tax deduction for taking a loss on the sale of a personal residence.
The gain on such sales is generally taxable, subject to certain exclusions.
On the sale of all other real property, the gain is also taxable and the loss tax-deductible, again subject to exclusions.


Topics of The Times; America's Not the Only Cop
America the Supercop, pounding its global beat alone, menaced by threats and nervously eyeing its partners as potential challengers -- that was the needlessly provocative vision contained in an early draft of the Pentagon's post-cold war strategy paper.
Now the Pentagon planners have produced a less alarmist, more modest version.
In place of chest-thumping unilateralism, they acknowledge the importance of acting in concert with allies and obtaining the blessing of international institutions.


A Bouquet To the Designers
To the Editor:
In his essay "Bryant Park, an Out-of-Town Experience"  [ May 3 ] , Paul Goldberger tossed bouquets to all involved in its restoration but made no mention of the park's designers.


Liane C. Manshel and Richard E. Weintraub
Liane Catherine Manshel, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Warren D. Manshel of New York, was married last night to Richard Edward Weintraub, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis Weintraub of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Newport, R.I.; Victorian Style Beach Pavilion
AFTER the destruction last summer of this city's most popular beach by a hurricane, the city has embarked on a reconstruction plan that calls for building a new beach pavilion on stilts in a Victorian style.
The goal is to bring Easton's Beach, the city's largest and most used public beach, back to its days of glory in the late 1800's, when summer visitors came, many by steamer and trolley, to stroll the beach's wooden boardwalk, city officials said.


Topics of The Times; Wet Weekends
To be living in the New York area this month is to know that Friday means the beginning of bad weather that with luck might end before Sunday night.
Still, there are consolations.
The trees are green, the grass is glossy and the drop-drop-drop of the evening rain is a surer soporific than a TV rerun.
The reservoirs are rising to healthy levels and those who linger longer in the shower than cleanliness demands can forgo the guilt.
Sunburn, and the attendant itch and peel, is impossible.


Courtney Lee, Andrew Jones
Courtney Allison Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Lee 3d of Harding Township, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Llewellyn Jones, a son of Carlisle Jones of New York and Mary Philbrick Jones of Summit, N.J.
Msgr.
John Corr performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Jones, 25 years old, is the assistant financial officer at Campaign for Oxford, a fund-raising arm in New York of Oxford University.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is a director of Salomon Brothers Asset Management in New York.


SPorts
Here is a sampling of spectator sports in the New York metropolitan region and participatory sports in New York City this summer.
Dates and times are subject to change.
FOR SPECTATORS Baseball Home Games
SHEA STADIUM, Flushing, Queens.
New York Mets.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:40 P.M.
Tickets range from $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
Pittsburgh Pirates (June 12 and 13, 7:10 P.M.; June 14, 1:40 P.M.); Montreal Expos (June 15 to 17); St.


The Image Endures
"AN Egyptian tomb painter," the photographer Richard Avedon called him.
George Hurrell, who died on May 17 at the age of 87, may have been the master of artifice.
In his seven decades as a portrait photographer in Hollywood, Mr.
Hurrell photographed all the great stars -- some would say
created
all the great stars.
His portraits were like movies in a single frame: he created plot and character with light and hair and makeup, and he planted the seeds of the style seen in today's music videos and perfume ads.
Following are some appreciations of him, past and present.
FRANCESCO SCAVULLO, photographer
When I was a kid living in Staten Island, I used to take pictures of my sisters in his style.
I would throw them over the sofa and comb their hair back and put lipstick on them and a use a bridge lamp as a floodlight and take their picture.
My parents wanted to know what kind of kid they raised who was 8 and draping his sisters in fur and silver fox and photographing them on the sofa.
Now that Hurrell's dead, Matthew Rolston can get on with his life, sampling Hurrell.
All photographers are sampling today.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Enfield, Conn. 134,000
357 George Washington Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old ranch; pool, patio, 0.25 acre; taxes $2,397.
Madison, Conn. 310,000
5 Chapman Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 140-year-old, newly converted antique barn; open-floor plan, 2-car garage, 0.25 acre; taxes unavailable.
North Branford, Conn. 147,500
12 Edward Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; new kitchen and baths, 2-car attached garage, formal dining room; taxes $1,171.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 417,500
11 Flag Hill Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old contemporary; 2 fireplaces, den, cathedral ceilings, deck, family room, pool, 1 acre; taxes $9,941.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 225,000
213 Hack Green Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; stone fireplace, oak floors, skylight, sunroom, decks, 2 acres; taxes $4,354.
South Salem, N.Y. 215,500
Lake Kitchawam Drive (cq)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; fireplace, screened porch, eat-in kitchen, family room, new deck; taxes $4,748.
OTHER AREAS Flemington, N.J. 185,000
29 Maple Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 100-year-old Victorian colonial; 1-car garage, wrap-around-porch, full basement; taxes $3,044.
Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J. 262,000
163 Blauvelt Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; fireplace, screened porch; taxes $3,547.
East Northport, L.I. 143,000
87A Daly Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, family room; taxes $2,400.


SAUDIS USING OIL IN YEMENI DISPUTE
Saudi Arabia has warned oil companies from the United States, France, Britain and Canada to stop looking for oil in several thousand square miles along a disputed section of its border with Yemen, or face the possibility of retaliatory measures, including military action.
The Saudi warning, in letters to the companies, implied that they were operating without permission in Saudi territory.
But industry executives said many of the operations are on land and in Red Sea offshore waters that have been under Yemeni control for years.


Fearing Felons on the Loose, New Jersey Reviews Monitoring
For more than two years, the New Jersey Department of Corrections has been sending some inmates home ahead of their parole date, tethering them to electronic monitors worn as ankle bracelets and hoping to keep them from returning to overcrowded prisons.
But in April, authorities say, one prisoner apparently found a way to remove his bracelet and fatally shot a friend as they "horsed around" with a gun.
Late last month, another failed to show up for an evening drug counseling session, went to a barbecue and, before authorities detected his absence, was charged with beating and stabbing a man.


Good News, Then Bad News, but Good Spin
A wave of upbeat numbers early last week depicting a broad, if hardly booming, recovery ended on a decidedly downbeat note with Friday's report that unemployment had risen in May.
Early in the week, the Dow Jones industrial average broke 3,400 for the first time, corporate purchasing reached a level not seen since 1988, consumer spending rose and the Federal Reserve Board's chairman said inflation was not likely to threaten the economy in the next couple of years.
But on Friday, the Labor Department said the unemployment rate had jumped to 7.5 percent, its highest in almost eight years.
While the jobless report was widely taken as rotten news -- both for the economy and, at the White House, for George Bush's re-election prospects -- it actually contained more than a little evidence that the modest recovery remains alive and well.


Amy A. Peet, Richard Pace Jr.
Amy Augusta Peet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Chester Peet Jr. of Shelter Island, L.I., was married there yesterday to Richard Joseph Pace Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Pace of Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
William Barron officiated at the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Isle Church.
Mrs.
Pace, 25, is a regional sales manager at Institutional Investor Magazine in New York.
She graduated from Providence College.
Her father retired as president of McMichael Yacht Yard in Cos Cob, Conn.
Her mother, Mary G. Peet, retired as events-management director for Wullschleger Enterprises Inc., a yacht-racing management company on Shelter Island.


Lisa Arons, Geoffrey Aldridge
Lisa Arons and Geoffrey Watson Aldridge were married yesterday in Bloomfield, Conn.
Jerome H. Lowengard, a Justice of the Peace, officiated at the ceremony at Tumble Brook Country Club.
Mrs.
Aldridge, 33 years old, is the president of Aldridge, Chase &amp; Hunt, an executive search firm in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated from Vassar College.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Flora G. Arons of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Hubert M. Arons.
Her father was the president of Connecticut Cold Storage Corporation, an East Hartford warehouse operator and food processor.


Repairing and Replacing the Many Types of Siding
SEVERAL styles of wood siding are popular.
They include shingles, shakes, clapboards, lap siding, plywood panels and boards and battens.
Properly applied and either sealed or painted about every five years, each kind should last at least 30 years.
But damage to wood siding has to be repaired promptly to prevent worsening, especially in new houses that lack wood sheathing behind the siding.


Ham and Wit, And at Times It's Wry
A good master of ceremonies can make or break a charity event.
Though most put audiences to sleep, there are a select number of writers and entertainers who have that special talent for enlivening those $500-a-plate black-tie benefit dinners.
In New York, Fran Lebowitz (far right), Sandra Bernhard (center) and Dick Cavett are the toastmasters of the moment.
EMCEE NO. 1: Dick Cavett.


Vive la Difference (If There Were One)
Why an all-female political talk show?
A perfectly good answer is, why not?
Yet one presumes that the originators of "To the Contrary," the weekly half-hour public broadcasting series that began in April, had something grander in mind, something like bringing female perspective, insight and sensibility to a line of work dominated by men.
A recent sampling leaves some doubt that such a perspective exists.
Anyone reading a transcript of the discussions would be hard put to say wherein they differ from all-male or mixed offerings like NBC's "McLaughlin Group," on which "To the Contrary" seems to have been modeled.


Mom Was in a League of Her Own
"Why didn't I get her swing?" This is a question I ask myself whenever I look at that old black and white picture of my mother at the plate in 1945.
If I had had a choice of any physical attribute my parents were able to pass on to me, I would definitely have taken her swing.
It's the kind of swing you associate with Ted Williams or Will Clark; smooth and sweeping, arms extended, weight shifting from back foot to front at just the right moment, supple wrists that snap the head of the bat through the ball.
I imagine the line drives she sent screaming through the middle or deep into the alleys in left or right center.


They Ain't So Tough
CITY BOYS
Cagney, Bogart, Garfield.
By Robert Sklar.
Illustrated. 311 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $27.50.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; In Rent Dispute, Paper Says, Perot Got Court to Allow Daily Searches
Two years ago during a dispute with a tenant renting a home from Ross Perot, lawyers for Mr.
Perot persuaded a judge here to permit searches of property without warrants, The Dallas Morning News reported today.
The newspaper said Mr.
Perot hired off-duty police officers to conduct searches of the house three times a day after the tenant, H. Waynes Hayes Jr., fell nine days behind in his monthly rent of $7,500.
The searches continued for 10 days until lawyers for Mr.
Hayes and Mr.
Perot worked out a settlement, the newspaper said.


With Gallic Flair
Cooper-Hewitt Museum; June 2, 7:30 P.M.


Environmental Policy: It's a Jungle in There
Is President Bush a brave and lonely voice of reason against a tide of environmental protection that could be disastrous to the economy?
Or is he managing environmental policy to gain support from conservative interests who use warnings of economic harm and loss of liberty to weaken environmental regulation?
Those questions were at the center of a week of conflict over environmental policy that engulfed the White House and then tumbled out before the world in the opening days of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Brazil.


Hang on! The Fun Is Sometimes Cra-a-a-a-zy
IN the normal cycle of daily life, fun is a commodity usually left to chance.
Dinner parties, expeditions to the movies, even a night sitting around the house can potentially be fun, but no guarantees exist; fun can occur when it's least expected, or elude when it's most needed.
Amusement parks break the cycle.
They are fortresses of fun, places cordoned off for that exclusive purpose.
They supply everything necessary for the formula of happiness -- tasty food, laughing children, rides that jiggle the brain, games for 50 cents or a dollar, perhaps even a beach -- and all to the point of excess.
Work, stress, unbalanced checkbooks and diets have no quarter within the perimeters of amusement parks.
Fun is the tyrant, reigning supreme.
Even the garbage cans are dressed up like clowns.


Tech Notes; The Buses Run On Canola Oil
Several transportaion systems in Europe and the public bus system in Sioux Falls, S.D., are testing a new fuel made from either canola, sunflower or soy oil for use in diesel engines.
Just pour the fuel into the tank, says the developer, Novamont, part of the Ferruzzi-Montedison Group of Italy.
There is no need for any modification of the engine (or boiler if it is used for heating).


A Speech, Then Action
When Donald L. Paul was asked to give a talk last year to a group of oil exploration scientists, he cobbled together some thoughts he had saved through the years in a speech on the future of oil industry research.
His speech turned out to be a rough blueprint for a new subsidiary of the Chevron Corporation that he was tapped last week to lead.


The Trouble With Skills-Based Pay Systems
To the Editor:
The article on skills-based pay ("After the Pay Revolution, Job Titles Won't Matter," May 17) does not present the downside risk of these plans as completely as it should.


Hanoi Jails Lawyer for Links With American
At a time when the United States is moving steadily but slowly toward lifting an embargo and establishing diplomatic relations with Vietnam, Hanoi has chosen to send a strong if perplexing message to its people against fraternizing with Americans.
In mid-May, a southern Vietnamese lawyer who had aided homeless orphans with the backing of leaders of the American antiwar movement was sent to prison for 12 years for maintaining ties with United States citizens.
His crime -- an "anti-socialist act" -- was trying to go into business with an American who advocates ending the embargo against the Vietnamese.
He was arrested with another Vietnamese and Michael Morrow, a former American journalist who uncovered the story of the My Lai massacre.


Fine Color Prints Made in Minutes
WHEN Jody Dole, one of advertising's most innovative photographers, makes color prints, he doesn't mess with trays of developing and fixing solutions or with a traditional enlarger.
Instead, he uses a revolutionary computer program that makes top-quality digital prints without a darkroom in minutes, not the usual hours (or sometimes days) that standard color processing requires.
For the last six months, Mr.
Dole, 36 years old, has been traveling as often as three times a week from his studio in Manhattan to the Cactus Corporation in Fairfield, N.J., where he works on the latest electronic photography equipment: a Macintosh computer with specially developed components -- electronic imaging programs and computer-managed color toner control systems.


Walker-Trade Fallout Still a Topic in N.F.L.
The Minnesota Vikings' release of running back Herschel Walker last week slammed shut the book on arguably the most one-sided trade in modern National Football League history.
The trade with the Dallas Cowboys left the Vikings looking like dupes of the decade and left their fans to ponder what the team could have been thinking when it made the deal.
The Cowboys received five players, seven conditional draft picks tied to the status of those players, and a 1992 first-round pick in exchange for Walker and two third-round picks.
Now that the effect of the conditional picks can be seen, the net result of the trade reads like the fine print in a bad lease agreement.


Boys of Winter In Hawaii
Baseball fans who suffer a letdown after the World Series will have a remedy available this year: the Upper Deck Hawaiian Winter League, which begins its first season of play Oct. 29.
The Double-A league made up of professional players from the United States and Japan will have four teams: one in Honolulu, on Oahu; one each in Wailuku and Lahaina, on Maui, and one in Hilo, on the Big Island.
The 54-game season will end with a championship game on Dec. 29.


On the Front of Newsweek, a Conflict of Values
Barbara Kruger has learned that her new medium isn't always kind to her message.
Ms.
Kruger, a Conceptual artist who combines provocative text with photographs, has designed covers this year for Ms. and Esquire magazines, and her style was copied for a recent issue of The New Republic.
Last week, Newsweek became the most widely read magazine yet to feature her work on its cover, but Ms.
Kruger isn't altogether pleased.
Her artwork was used to illustrate a story by a writer whose politics she disagrees with.
The article -- "Whose Values?" -- was written by Joe Klein, the former political columnist for New York magazine who recently joined Newsweek as a senior editor.


Kajal Rejaie and Stephen Vicinelli
August wedding plans have been announced for Kajal Rejaie and Stephen Gaetano Vicinelli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gaetano Vicinelli of Summit, N.J., by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Iraj Rejaie of Houston.
Miss Rejaie, 25 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her fiance, who graduated cum laude.
She has a law degree from the University of Texas at Austin .
Her father is a plastic surgeon in Houston.


Crazy for More
To the Editor:
Frank Rich and Ethan Mordden may agree that "Crazy for You" is the long-awaited second coming of the brainless 1920's musical -- a busy affair with a mandate of Gershwin goodies and visual bedazzlement to last a lifetime.


Christie Sporer, Aris Chaconas
Dr.
Christina Marie Sporer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Sporer of Greenwich, Conn. was married yesterday to Dr.
Aristides Evan Chaconas, the son of Marina Chaconas of Ocean City, Md.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry officiated at the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Chaconas, known as Christie, is 29 years old.
She is a radiology resident at Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas, where her husband is to start a neurology fellowship next month.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received her M.D. from Georgetown University.
Her father is a retired senior partner in the accounting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche in Stamford, Conn.


Giverny Honors Americans
A new museum opened last week next door to the Fondation Claude Monet home and gardens in Giverny, 50 miles northwest of Paris.
It commemorates the work of the many American painters who settled in Giverny around the turn of the century, drawn by Monet's influence and fame.
The Musee Americain Giverny has been both founded and financed by the Chicago art patrons Daniel and Judith Terra as a sister institution to the Chicago Terra Museum of American Art.
It will hold temporary exhibits showing much of the Terra collection as well as American works borrowed from other museums in Europe.


INSIDE
After the Riots
A month later, life is back to what passes for normal in make-believe land.
And yet everything is very different.
Los Angeles Journal, page 22.
Florida Weighs Vote Change
As both parties watch nervously, Florida is considering a proposal to abolish the winner-take-all method of distributing electoral votes.
Page 25.
U.S.
Champions the Forests
In a bid to salvage its image at the Earth Summit, the United States is leading a drive to save the world's forests.
Foes are suspicious.
Page 20.
Talk Around the Clock
An entire day of listening to talk radio in New York reveals a seething world of paranoia, pettiness and the occasional bit of wisdom.
Page 31.
A.P.
Indy Wins Belmont
A.P.
Indy won the Belmont Stakes in 2:26, 2 seconds off the mark set by his grandfather, Secretariat.
Section 8.


Azerbaijanis Prepare for Presidential Elections


POSTINGS: Mount Olive Child Care; Kids in the Corporate Scene
As many as 16 infants, 40 toddlers (16 months to 3 years old) and 60 preschoolers (up to 6 years old) could liven up the corporate landscape of the 670-acre International Trade Center (ITC) in Mount Olive, N.J., next spring.
Bright Horizons, a five-year-old Cambridge, Mass., child-care company, will open its 46th center there in a 6,200-square-foot, one-story building at 450 International Drive.


Sue Levy, Camm Sublette
Frank Levy of Scarsdale, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter Sue Levy to Camm Sublette, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Sublette of Bradenton, Fla.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levy, 31 years old, is a graduate of Pennsylvania State University.
She is a self-employed computer designer.
She is also daughter of the late Myra Collins Levy.
Her father is the principal of the J.S.&amp; M. Company, a textile brokerage company in New York.


In Jersey City, a Determined Woman
WHEN Marilyn Roman became the first woman to serve as mayor of New Jersey's second largest city last March, she was expected to be little more than a caretaker, someone to handle day-to-day operations until a permanent mayor could be chosen at a special election in November.
Some caretaker.
In just three months, the 56-year-old Mayor Roman, a Democrat, has moved to replace members of the city's Urban Employment and Training Corporation board who, she said, had failed to attend meetings.
She has set up a new computer system for handling citizen complaints.


A STITCH IN TIME
I read with surprise the many positive responses to Perri Klass's Hers column "A Stitch in Time" (Letters, May 10, May 17).
With so many serious problems still facing women in the work place today (and especially in academia), I find it puzzling that women would rally around the right to knit in lectures.
That my female students
do not
knit in my classoom has been symbolic for me of how far they've come from the days when they were relegated to the porch to do things like that, while men traveled the universe of space and time, engaging in rich intellectual discourse in the drawing room.
LAURA ANN PETITTO Center Fellow Center for Advanced Study
Stanford, Calif.


Three Variations on a Theme Of Summertime Potato Salad
I DON'T think I have ever met anyone who didn't like potato salad.
For me, it is one of the best parts of a summer meal.
For years, I made it the same way: tossing cooked potatoes and chopped scallions in a rich mayonnaise made with egg yolks and olive oil.
Now that raw eggs are regarded, like raw chicken, as too dangerous to eat, I've had to look for other ideas.
Recently, I spent a weekend at a friend's house where she made a dressing using horseradish, yogurt and olive oil.
I am not one of those people who thinks yogurt does the job when you want the rich taste of egg yolks or cream, so I was a bit skeptical, until I tasted it.
It was superb.


Is Pornography to Blame?
To the Editor:
I admire Andrea Dworkin's skills as an essayist and her fiery devotion as an activist.
But as the author of sexually explicit works such as "Intercourse," Ms.
Dworkin should ponder the likelihood that her own books would go unpublished if they were not protected by constitutional ideologues.
JOHN R. GONZALEZ Grand Rapids, Mich.


MADE TO MEASURE
If a woman believes her breasts are inadequate, that attitude will communicate to her lover.
But if she enjoys her own breasts, whatever their size, so will he.


All Aboard the Raging Hormone Express
THE SILENT PASSAGE
Menopause. By Gail Sheehy. 161 pp. New York: Random House. $16.
IN FULL FLOWER
Aging Women, Power, and Sexuality.
A History.
By Lois W. Banner.
Illustrated. 422 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Lake Michigan Car Ferry Back
The 100-year-old ferry across Lake Michigan is back after a break of a year and a half, with a new focus: passengers.
The newly renovated Badger, which had been used primarily to transport railroad freight cars as well as a few automobiles and passengers across the lake, began daily round trips last month, carrying passengers and their cars between Ludington, Mich., and Manitowoc, Wis.
The 60-mile crossing takes four hours.
The Lake Michigan Carferry Service, the only cross-lake ferry operating on the Great Lakes, provides access to beaches and resorts.
The Badger's new owner, Charles Conrad, a local entrepreneur, says that more than $500,000 was spent on improving the vessel and adding two restaurants and lounge and enclosing a deck.


Mutual Funds; The Street's Share of Sales
Wall Street firms hold about a quarter of mutual fund assets.
Fund sales, of course, provide only a small part of the firms' total revenue, but it is a growing share, according to the New York Stock Exchange Broker-Dealer Income Statement.
Revenues generated by brokerages' mutual fund sales charges have risen steadily in the past four years and jumped 27.3 percent in 1991.
Last year's rate of gain trailed only an 87.2 percent increase in underwriting revenue and a 30.4 percent gain in research-related revenues.
Both of those categories had declined sharply in 1990.


Jones Beach, at 40, Rocks to a Young Sound
NOTHING special is planned for the 40th anniversary of the Jones Beach Marine Theater this summer.
Just a banner saying "40th Anniversary: Jones Beach Theater," which will hang between Sections 8 and 10, and a visit planned for tomorrow by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Otherwise, it will be business as usual at the amphitheater, which will continue its nine-year tradition of presenting concerts, a far cry from the lavish revivals of Broadway musicals for which the theater became widely known and that eventually became financial failures.


Miss Felstehausen, Thomas McClellan
Deborah Felstehausen, the daughter of Herman Felstehausen of Madison, Wis., and Virginia Pagel of Lubbock, Tex., was married yesterday in Montclair, N.J., to Thomas McClellan, a son of the late Grant S. and Grace C. McClellan.
Judge Robert D. Martin of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Milwaukee officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
John Cali, the bridegroom's uncle and aunt.
Mrs.
McClellan, 30 years old, is the managing editor of Drawing, the Drawing Society's journal, in New York.
Her father is a professor of natural resources at the University of Wisconsin.
Her mother is a professor of home economics at Texas Tech University.


BENEFITS
Evening of Song and Comedy
JUNE 7 -- The New York Society for Ethical Culture and the National Musical Theater Network, which provides a showcase for new musical talent, will hold a joint benefit at the society's headquarters, 64th Street at Central Park West.
Starting at 7 P.M. more than a dozen performers -- some established, others aspiring -- will entertain.
A champagne reception follows.
Tickets at the door, $100, or for the show alone, $35.


Cynthia L. Austrian, John D. Weber
Cynthia Lynn Austrian, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Austrian of New York, was married yesterday to John David Weber, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Weber of Quechee, Vt.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Weber, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University, where she is a candidate for an M.B.A.
Her father is a principal in Austrian Roth &amp; Partners, real-estate consultants in New York.
Her mother, Linda Austrian, is a vice president of LaPook-Lear Systems Inc., a medical software company in New York.


A Loud, Angry World on the Dial
"Am I right?"
The caller's name was Barbara, and she was venting spleen about many things, but in particular about Ross Perot, the putative candidate.


Where the Wine List Alone Is Worth a Trip
ROSELAND COTTAGE, the Henry Bowen house in Woodstock (in the northeast corner of the state), makes a delightful attraction for anyone interested in architecture and history.
And for day-trippers, the discovery of a good restaurant nearby adds considerably to an outing.
Though the Harvest at Bald Hill in South Woodstock is in a sprawling red barn-like building at the junction of Routes 169 and 171, the restaurant inside is not barnlike at all.
Its dark brown wood-panel walls and dark ceiling would be gloomy if not enhanced by ample windows, clever lighting from lampshade-shape wall sconces and table lights.
A tiny string of lights looped along the draperies at the end of a succession of cozy dining areas adds a festive look.
In warm weather a screened porch makes a pleasant place for dining, especially at lunch.
Overflow dining is also possible in the separate bar.


Reunion of Spirit For Radcliffe '92
The exchanges were personal, emotional and intense at the 30th, reunion of the 1962 class of radcliffe College in Cambridge, Mass.


Japan's Slowed Economy Offers A New Chance for Wishful Thinking
With the Tokyo stock market at half its 1990 value, Japan's once-invincible banks reeling from billions of dollars in bad loans, and signs that the American economy is slowly rebounding, the new common wisdom in the United States seems to be that maybe the Japanese are not so tough, after all.
"Americans who want to see America outperform Japan ought now to be humming the 'Hallelujah' Chorus -- not in glee at Japan's difficulties, but in confidence that America need not fear Japan," wrote Karen Elliott House on the opinion page of The Wall Street Journal, in one of many such recent articles that struck similar themes.
The Japanese, she concluded, "were never the economic terminators of America's imaginings."


The Landmarks Agency Honors Places and People
TWO churches, a granite street, a carousel and a tiny 18th-century cemetery were among the dozen places and people honored on Wednesday by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
It was the second annual ceremony at City Hall in which the commission gave awards for excellence to the owners, architects and officials responsible for restoring or remodeling individually designated landmarks and properties in historic districts.


Update; Eastern Parkway Repairs Are Close to Completion
Prodded, poked and "spoon-fed" by the Department of Transportation, the contractor restoring Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn to its past grandeur is finally nearing completion of the project.
"They've laid down the binder on the main southern roadway and we expect to have the resurfacing done by mid-July, which means we then can go back to normal traffic patterns," said Joseph DePlasco, a Transportation Department spokesman.
The binder, Mr.
DePlasco explained, is an adhesive under the asphalt.


Joely P. Sabin, Steven R. Halper
Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Sabin of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of a daughter, Joely Pamela Sabin, to Steven Ross Halper, a son of Barry Halper of Livingston, N.J., and Carole Klein of Watchung, N.J.
A December wedding in planned.
Ms.
Sabin, 23 years old, is a media planner at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is a dentist in Milburn, N.J.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 7, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
MAN OF MY DREAMS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A Victorian beauty inadvertently wins the nobleman she had aspired to marry.
2
2
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman who, upon regaining consciousness in a hospital, recalls the horrors that brought her there.
3
19
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
3
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
5
2
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $5.99.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
6
19
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
7
7
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
8
1
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
9
29
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists in England, Ireland and America.
10
2
IMBALANCE, by V. E. Mitchell. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" adventure.
11
2
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $5.99.) A war in Africa sometime in the future involves Cuba and the United States.
12
8
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
13 *
57
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
14 *
6
ASPEN GOLD, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A woman from Colorado faces a choice: fame in Hollywood or love with an old flame.
15
2
WOMAN WITHOUT A PAST, by Phyllis A. Whitney. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A Long Island woman journeys to South Carolina to solve the mystery of her birth and heritage.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
7
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
3
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series.
4
55
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
3
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
6
448
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7 *
47
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8 *
18
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
9
8
JFK: CONSPIRACY OF SILENCE, by Charles A. Crenshaw with Jens Hansen and J. Gary Shaw. (Signet, $4.99.) A surgeon tells what he observed while treating the dying John F. Kennedy.
10 *
3
DARKNESS VISIBLE, by William Styron. (Vintage, $8.) The novelist's memoir of a period of severe depression.
11 *
13
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
43
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
7
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
1
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1992 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
4
72
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
91
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Frances Moyles, Matthew Fisher
Frances Carroll Moyles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Moyles of Sewickley, Pa., was married there yesterday to Matthew Paul Fisher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Fisher of Rumford, R.I.
The Rev.
Gerald Murray, a cousin of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
James Church.
Mrs.
Fisher, 28 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is the president of the MMC Group, a leveraged-buyout firm in Pittsburgh.


Silvermine Takes Seriously The Business of the Arts
THERE'S nothing spooky about a bust of van Gogh -- until the Silvermine Guild's new artistic executive director, Brian Gormley, poses next to it.
Is it a mere coincidence that the bust, with ear intact -- an entry in a current exhibition -- appeared at Silvermine around the same time as Mr.
Gormley?


IN TROUBLED TIME, COLUMBIA'S CHIEF IS STEPPING DOWN
Michael I. Sovern, who helped heal the wounds of Columbia University's past but has been criticized recently for his handling of the university's financial problems, announced unexpectedly yesterday that he would step down as president next June.
Mr.
Sovern, who made the announcement to the Board of Trustees at its regular meeting, said he was giving up the post to spend more time with his wife, who is fighting cancer.


U.S., Trying to Buff Its Image, Defends the Forests
The United States, under fire at the Earth Summit for perceived foot-dragging on treaties intended to protect the planet's climate and its biological diversity, is trying to restore its standing, at least partly, by leading a drive to save the world's forests.
But opponents of the forests initiative are suspicious of the Bush Administration's motives, and the prospects that the initiative will advance at the summit, or that it will do much to repair Washington's environmental reputation, are in doubt.


Corrections
An article on May 17 about a proposal in Alabama to increase spending on education misattributed a quotation.
It was Frank Newman, president of the Education Commission of the States (not Mark Musick of the Southern Regional Education Board), who said, "While it is not uniform across the country and the reasons are different, most governors and legislators who are now more wary of tax increases believe that if they have to have an increase, the place where that is possible is for education."


World League: A New View
To the Sports Editor:
We appreciate the coverage that the World League has received in The Times in recent weeks.
But Richard Sandomir paints a distorted picture of the World League in "The World League's Humpty Dumpty Act," (May 29).


Got a Perot Headache? 8-Way Relief: REPUBLICANS; Overcoming Fear
The cliche of the 1992 election is that this campaign is about "the future" and will be won by the candidate who is "for change." The driving force is not the desire for change but the fear of it.
The old world order is gone.
The restructuring of our economy threatens even the most secure worker.
Government appears gridlocked by indecision, and voters wonder whom to hold accountable.
While some seek to make this an indictment of George Bush, the problem is a crisis of confidence in our entire political system.
Thus, the popularity of "outsider" Ross Perot.
Whatever his personal attributes, he, and his style of buccaneer politics, is not the cure for what ails America.


Need a Zebra? Or Perhaps a Camel Will Do?
MOTORISTS driving on Route 4, the main road in the town of Goshen in western Connecticut, are inclined to do a double take or two while passing the farm of the Commerford family.
Was
that
a camel staring back from a field? Are those
really
zebras in the middle of a herd of horses? You think you saw an
elephant
?


Miss Sullivan, John M. McHugh
The engagement of Katharine Taylor Sullivan and Senator John M. McHugh, a son of Jane O. McHugh of Watertown, N.Y., and the late Donald J. McHugh, has been announced by her mother, Assemblywoman Frances T. Sullivan of Fulton, N.Y.
Miss Sullivan is also the daughter of the late Eugene F. Sullivan Jr., who was a New York State Supreme Court Justice.
She is a graduate of Syracuse University and a student at the Albany Law School of Union University.
Her mother, a Republican, represents New York's 117th district.


A la Carte; The Sombreros Say, Ole!
EVERYTHING at Los Compadres is plastic, except the food.
That means that the clean modest Mexican luncheonette-style restaurant in Huntington Station is quite different from most of its suburban counterparts.
They often stress south-of-the-border atmospherics and serve bland Americanized food.
The stage is set at this hole-in-the-wall ethnic eatery by the plastic plates, trays and seats, as well as cartons of onions and avocados under a television set, a Good Humor freezer chest, a beverage cooler, a pay telephone and spirited mariachi music.


The Sweet Smile of Success
STAR quality.
A lot of people seem to think Byron Lars has it: a million-dollar smile, an athlete's body, natural charm and real talent.
It's what makes him a standout among the promising young fashion designers who have emerged in the last year or so, one who seems destined to go far.
If you told him that, he'd say: "Wow! That's cool."
It's what he always says, even when he heard about the big show Bloomingdale's was planning for him in September and the ads that Macy's is running this summer in Mirabella and New York magazine.


In the Court of the King of Tonga
WHAT YOU ARE DOING IN TONGA?" asked a big square-headed official in a blue skirt with a hem below his chunky knees. We were standing in a wooden shed at the Fua'amotu Airport on the island of Tongatapu.
"Just looking around," I said. "A little paddling."
I want to see the King, I almost said.
I intended to go to the northern archipelago, called Vava'u, and camp on a desert island.
But what I wanted to do on this island was meet His Majesty, King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV, the King of Tonga.


Landscapes Have the Look of Au Nature
NATIVE plants are definitely in these days.
These are the plants that belong, that have been growing around the area for centuries and are a part of the natural landscape.
Many of these indigenous plants are truly beautiful to see.
Witness the glorious blooms on the lovely pinkshell azalea (Rhododendron vaseyi).
Its magnificent pink flowers cover the shrubs and decorate sunny hillsides.
Although this particular azalea is essentially a Southern native species of the Blue Ridge Mountains, it is available outside its natural range at nurseries.
This is one woody plant that could be grown more often, but too few gardeners know about it.


Dress Codes
To the Editor: Last summer my husband and I eagerly entered Florence's famous restaurant Enoteca Pinchiorri, having made reservations weeks earlier.
We were dressed, as several guidebooks instructed, in the required dress/jacket and tie (brought along for the occasion) despite the 90-degree temperature.
It was therefore quite surprising to be seated next to a tourist couple, he in golf shirt and shorts, she in a Bullwinkle moose T-shirt and shorts.
Some other diners were also dressed casually, though not that inappropriately.
The restaurant is elegant, the food interesting, the service excellent and the prices astronomical -- about $100 for the fixed price menu, over $70 for the least expensive wine.
In these circumstances the lack of enforcement of a dress code was irritating -- Bullwinkle did detract from our enjoyment, especially as we had borne the discomfort of a non-air-conditioned restaurant on such a hot evening.


Promenade Purse
WHAT IT IS -- It looks like the satchel Dr.
Doolittle might carry to the reptile house.
Or perhaps what Hieronymous Bosch would have come up with if he'd been commissioned to paint hell in a hand basket.
"It's designed as an art object," said its creator, the jewelry designer Barry Kieselstein-Cord.
He predicted, in all modesty, that it will be "a classic for all time, the bag of the century."


Corrections
Because of a producer's schedule change, an opera listing and a caption on page 37 of the Arts and Leisure section today misstate the opening date for "Casino Paradise" at the Ballroom.
It is next Sunday.


Zimbabwe's Safari Hotel
Visitors to the Elephant Hills Resort at Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe, may not see any elephants, but sometimes spot a lion, hippo, gazelle, warthog or crane on the resort's 18-hole golf course or in the nearby Victoria Falls National Park.
The deluxe resort, which was destroyed by fire in 1977, reopened in February after a $50 million reconstruction program.
Less than two miles away are the thundering Victoria Falls, the country's most popular destination for foreign visitors -- audible from the golf course.


A New Spring Refrain: Take Me Out to the Sports Bar
SPRING heralds its arrival in the suburbs with reassuring rituals that vary little from year to year.
For some, it is the scent of burning charcoals wafting through the air as neighbors attempt the first barbecue of the season.
For others, it is the appearance of dazzling azalea hedges that dot the landscape or islands of colorful tulips punctuating roadway meridians.
And then there are those who measure their lives by the comforting procession of the sports calendar, as precise and preordained in its stately unfolding as any liturgy.
Baseball defines spring, just as football does autumn or hockey the winter.
Yet these fans spurn the trip to Yankee Stadium or Shea Stadium to watch a few innings of baseball when spring arrives.
They have little interest in sitting in traffic to get to a game or putting up with rowdy fans and mediocre hot dogs at the ball park once they get there.


Trial of a Swiss Au Pair Could Use Translators
Lawyers have their own styles.
Intense is the style of George L. Bolen, the prosecutor of Olivia Riner, the Swiss au pair charged with the arson murder of the baby in her care.
Mr.
Bolen is sometimes so focused on details that he seems to lose track of the ordinary way people talk to one other.
In Bolenspeak, the time 4:42 came out "four-point-four-two." Sometimes, the prosecutor will stop midsentence, look up at the ceiling and, after a pause, explain, "I'm looking for the word."


Amy Gittings, Karl Williams
Amy Lee Gittings, a daughter of Kenneth L. Gittings of Bergenfield, N.J., and Janice Gittings of Closter, N.J., was married yesterday to Karl Ethan Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Williams of Alpine, N.J.
The Rev.
Ernest Blougouras performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Theologian in Tenafly, N.J.
Mrs.
Williams, 28, is a saleswoman with Michael Sullivan Associates, a Washington real-estate company.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is the chief financial officer of the North American Reassurance Company in New York.


Welfare Mothers Earn Help in the Job Market
MAUREEN STEVENS of Eastchester is a single mother of two young children who has been receiving public assistance for three years.
But now, 20 years after graduating from high school, Miss Stevens is looking forward to a career in computers after completing her first year of college at Pace University in White Plains.
Miss Stevens, who concedes that she "didn't like school to begin with 20 years ago," earned a perfect 4.0 grade point average and first honors after last fall's semester.


Classical Music
June 10
SONDHEIM CELEBRATION.
Carnegie Hall pays tribute to Stephen Sondheim in a benefit concert of his music, performed by Liza Minnelli, Glenn Close, Bernadette Peters, Regina Resnik, Jerry Hadley and others. 8:30 P.M.
Remaining tickets: $750.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
June 16
METROPOLITAN OPERA.
The Met opens its summer season of concerts in parks in and around New York City with Puccini's "Boheme" on the Great Lawn of Central Park.
Maria Spacagna and Franco Farina sing the leads, with Christian Badea conducting.
Rossini's "Barbiere di Siviglia" will be the other work in an alternating schedule that runs through June 27. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
June 21
"OF RAGE AND REMEMBRANCE." John Corigliano's Symphony No. 1, inspired by the AIDS Memorial Quilt, stirred strong feelings pro and con when the New York Philharmonic and the Chicago Symphony each performed it here this year.
The New York City Gay Men's Chorus will offer the premiere of Mr.
Corigliano's "Of Rage and Remembrance," a vocal arrangement of the symphony's third movement, with text by William M. Hoffman, the composer's collaborator in the opera "The Ghosts of Versailles," in a concert at Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
July 3
SUMMERGARDEN.
Every summer, Paul Zukofsky leads a hardy band of Juilliard students in a valiant attempt to surmount street noises in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art, 14 West 54th Street.
This year, the festival presents music of the renegade composer John Cage in celebration of his 80th birthday.
One thing for sure: there will be ambient noise aplenty to fill the silence of Mr.
Cage's "4 Minutes and 33 Seconds." Concerts continue through Aug. 30 at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 708-9750.
July 6
KIROV OPERA.
The premier opera company of St.
Petersburg, Russia, opens a two-week run at the Metropolitan Opera House with Prokofiev's "Fiery Angel." The company is also presenting Tchaikovsky's "Queen of Spades," and Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov," which will end the season on July 18. 7 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $135.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
July 7
MOSTLY MOZART.
Lincoln Center's annual Mozart festival opens with a program conducted by Gerard Schwarz and featuring Anne-Sophie Mutter and Barbara Hendricks, in Avery Fisher Hall.
The program is repeated on July 8, and the festival runs through Aug. 22. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $11 to $35.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
July 8
TCHAIKOVSKY CELEBRATION.
A recent performance of Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony by Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic held great promise for their series of four concerts in Carnegie Hall devoted to the composer, through July 16.
In this first program, to be repeated on July 9, Mr.
Masur conducts the Fourth Symphony and the Violin Concerto, with Midori as soloist. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
July 18
NEW YORK CITY OPERA.
The New York City Opera will present the first new production of its season at the New York State Theater, "110 in the Shade," with music by Harvey Schmidt and lyrics by Tom Jones, directed by Scott Ellis.
The company's other new productions this summer are Bizet's "Carmen," directed by Jonathan Eaton, beginning on Aug. 1, and Busoni's "Doktor Faust," directed by Frank Corsaro, beginning on Sept. 11. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $68.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
Aug. 3
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC.
In the first of two programs to be offered by the New York Philharmonic in parks in and around the city, Kurt Masur conducts Beethoven's Seventh Symphony and other works on the Great Lawn of Central Park.
Samuel Wong is to lead the second program in the series, featuring Dvorak's Symphony No. 6 and other works on Aug. 10. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information and calendar of other concerts in the series: (212) 875-5709.
Aug. 10
MOZART OPERAS IN CONCERT.
The Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center inaugurates its final series, concert versions of the composer's early operas in Alice Tully Hall, with "Mitridate." The series continues through Aug. 22. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
Aug. 21
MOZART REQUIEM.
Admirers and critics alike may rejoice in the culmination of the 19-month Mozart Bicentennial at Lincoln Center.
Richard Stoltzman plays the composer's Clarinet Concerto, and Gerard Schwarz conducts the Requiem in the final Mostly Mozart program at Avery Fisher Hall, to be repeated on Aug. 22. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $11 to $35.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


A Spirit Without Match in Any Game
WHEN Jonathan Slifka went out for the boys' tennis team at William Hall High School this spring, it presented a potential predicament for the coach, Jim Solomon.
Mr.
Solomon, in his 18th year as the boys' tennis coach at the West Hartford school, was convinced that Jonathan had the right to try out for the strong Hall High School squad.
But if the 14-year-old freshman was good enough to make the team -- which had not lost a match to a high school team since 1987 -- Mr.
Solomon would have to persuade the Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference that a player in a wheelchair could compete in high school tennis matches.


It's Ephemeral, But Sidewalk Artists Have a Field Day
BY adult standards, it was a short burst of creativity, lasting about an hour.
One minute the sidewalks in front of the Ridgeway Elementary School here were just sidewalks, and the next minute they were rain forests teeming with animal life, or underwater scenes replete with octopuses, whales and porpoises.
All 500 students in the school took part in Sidewalk Art Day, which was orchestrated by Ridgeway's art teacher, Bunny Steinman.
The event was a spring fling, a paean to youthful energy, an exuberant art happening.
Passers-by might see a swarm of children, chalk in hand and noses to the walkway, but if this was graffiti, it was organized graffiti.
A Piece of Sidewalk
Each class was given a piece of sidewalk on which children could draw together or by themselves.
The idea was to illustrate this year's school theme of global understanding, said Betty Robinson, Ridgeway's principal.
In their curriculums, the lower grades had focused on multiculturalism, while the upper grades had explored ecology, she said.


Galleon's Gold Sets Uruguay To Dreaming
Gold fever has broken out here as an Argentine treasure hunter brings up Spanish riches that have lain beneath the Rio de la Plata for 200 years.
Other adventurers have rushed to launch similar expeditions.
And with the Government entitled to half of the booty, the heady sensation has spread to Uruguayan politicians and Government officials, who anticipate a windfall that could be used to finance education, housing and welfare programs.
Among the most euphoric, there is even talk of paying off a large part of the country's foreign debt.


Public &amp; Private; Love Me, Sender
I have to say that I think the post office people made a big mistake.
And it's not even the kind of Ripley's Believe It or Not mistake you're probably thinking of, the marriage proposal delivered 37 years late, 37 years in which a sweet young thing with a light heart turned into a bitter misanthropic old coot who keeps too many cats.
It's the Elvis mistake.


Was the Prado Right to Flout Picasso's Wishes?
In newspapers all over Spain, and on the nightly television news in Madrid, there had been continual talk about the future of Picasso's huge painting "Guernica." Should it stay in the Prado, as was Picasso's expressed wish, supported unanimously by his heirs after his death?
When "Guernica" was relinquished in 1981 by the Museum of Modern Art in New York, where it had been on view since 1939, it was specifically on behalf of the Prado, with which Picasso had identified so strongly.
Or would it make more sense to ignore any possible moral obligation and ship the painting downhill to the Queen Sophia Center of Art -- universally known as the Reina Sofia -- which is shaping up to be Madrid's first comprehensive museum of modern art.
"Guernica" is, after all, one of the monuments of 20th-century art, and the Reina Sofia, which did not exist when Picasso made his wish known, could be said to be the best and most natural place for it.


'Heart Strings'
The Atrium at Remi; June 3, 6:30 P.M.


Is Pornography to Blame?
To the Editor:
I am the president of Penthouse International, and would like to reply to Andrea Dworkin's letter.
By her own account Ms.
Dworkin was sexually assaulted three times between the ages of 9 and 18; she became mute as a result; she learned to trade sex for money, spending years out on the streets; she was a battered wife; she became mute again.
Her absolute antagonism to any male-oriented erotica is an understandable reaction.
However, her history does not make her conclusions concerning cause-and-effect relationships between sexual materials and abusive behavior reliable.


New Subpoenas Issued in Inquiry Into '89 Dinkins Campaign Gifts
With the central figure in the case soon to be sentenced, the Manhattan District Attorney's office has issued new subpoenas as it continues to investigate possible irregularities involving contributions to Mayor David N. Dinkins's 1989 campaign.
One new recipient, the former executive director and treasurer of the Committee for David Dinkins, Suzanne Dubose, said yesterday that she had been subpoenaed to testify soon.
And a lawyer close to the case, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said he was aware that new subpoenas had been issued.
District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau declined to discuss any aspect of the case yesterday.


Ann C. Ruhr, Nicholas Pifer
Ann Cecilia Ruhr, the daughter of Charles F. Ruhr and Dr.
Cora J. Ruhr of Forest Lake, Minn., was married yesterday in Northampton, Mass., to Nicholas Stuart Pifer, a son of Alan and Erica Pifer of Greens Farms, Conn.
The Rev.
Hubert Flesher performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Helen Hills Hills Chapel at Smith College.
Mrs.
Pifer, 26 years old, is an assistant treasurer at the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Smith and received a master's degree in international studies from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is chairman of Ruhr/Paragon Inc., an advertising company in Minneapolis.
Her mother is an optometrist in White Bear Lake, Minn.


Repairing and Replacing the Many Types of Siding
SEVERAL styles of wood siding are popular.
They include shingles, shakes, clapboards, lap siding, plywood panels and boards and battens.
Properly applied and either sealed or painted about every five years, each kind should last at least 30 years.
But damage to wood siding has to be repaired promptly to prevent worsening, especially in new houses that lack wood sheathing behind the siding.


Jessica Marshall, Peter Belhumeur
Jessica Marshall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Marshall of Wellesley, Mass., was married yesterday to Peter Neil Belhumeur, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland J. Belhumeur of Providence, R.I.
The Rev.
Corelyn F. Senn officiated at the First Unitarian Church of Providence.
Mrs.
Belhumeur, 28 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she is a Ph.D. candidate in the history of American civilization.
Her father is a consulting engineer and economist at the Cabot Corporation, a chemical company in Boston, and at the National Petroleum Council in Washington.
Her mother, Dale R. Marshall, is the academic dean at Wellesley College.
The bride's grandfather William P. Rogers of Bethesda, Md., and New York was Attorney General in the Eisenhower Administration and Secretary of State in the Nixon Administration.
He is the senior partner in the


More and More, the Way to Go
North America is in the throes of a "two-wheeled tizzy," as one bicycle industry publication calls it.
On swift, sleek road bikes with skinny tires and on rugged yet lightweight mountain bikes with thick ones, in pairs on tandem bicycles and in low-slung seats on recumbents, adults are pedaling across the United States and Canada in record numbers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Staff; A Veteran Insider in Clinton's Camp
Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign chairman is a prominent lawyer-lobbyist here who is best known for his first-hand and repeated experience at running failed Democratic races for the White House.
The losing streak of the chairman, Mickey Kantor, began in 1976, when he headed the Presidential campaign of Edmund G. Brown Jr., then Governor of California.
Four years later, as state chairman for President Jimmy Carter's re-election effort, he watched the White House slip from Democratic control.
After serving as the California chairman of Walter F. Mondale's losing Presidential campaign in 1984, he decided he had had enough.


Bleary-Eyed in Barcelona
YOU'LL have to excuse me if I start to nod off.
Every time I think about Barcelona, exhaustion slides over me.
No matter how loving my images of the city -- Gaudi mosaics undulating across midtown buildings, lush jungle-balconies of bird cages and snaky green ferns -- my spoilsport memory always kicks in and tells the truth: Barcelona is an outlandish endurance contest I was born to lose.
In my frequent business trips to Barcelona over the past two years, I've seen a city where people think nothing of scheduling a meeting with you at 8:30 at night in their offices and it looks like morning bell at the Stock Exchange; a city where dinner before 10 can be considered indecent; a city whose discos are graciously categorized as early and late.
Early means that things heat up around 2 A.M., late around 4 -- and this is on weeknights.


Preen Prep
NEXT time you see Linda Evangelista or Naomi Campbell, ask them.
Runway modeling isn't easy.
The point is that it's supposed to
look
easy.
As opposed to, say, running a public school, which isn't easy and doesn't look as if it is.
A few days after Benno C. Schmidt Jr. said he was leaving Yale for Christopher Whittle's national private-school system, students at the High School of Fashion Industries, a public school with one of the lowest dropout rates in New York City, were preening, getting ready for their year-end fashion shows.


Prompted by Recession, More Couples Are Choosing City Hall Weddings
IN his 16 years as Mayor of Hamilton Township in Mercer County, John Rafferty has performed more than 3,000 weddings, by all accounts the most of any mayor in New Jersey.
But his counterparts around the state are catching up.
Interviews with more than two dozen mayors indicate that they have been presiding over increasing numbers of marriages in recent years.
In part, they say, that is a tribute to the recession: a simple ceremony at the town hall costs far less than the traditional church wedding.


Commercial Property: Japanese Investors in Manhattan; When the Market Is Tough, the Tough Try Marketing
SITTING in the sparsely furnished leasing office on the 22d floor of the 42-story office tower at 650 Madison Avenue, Noriko Knox, president of the International Marketing Group, co-agent for the building, tried to explain one recent morning why the owners, the Hiro Real Estate Company of Japan, had found it so hard to lease.
The company bought the building, between 60th and 59th Streets, in 1987, then renovated and expanded it.
The total cost was not disclosed, but brokers calculated it would push the leasing rates above prevailing market levels.
The building remained virtually empty for two years and today half of its 520,000 square feet of space still is vacant.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BREAKING BLUE By Timothy Egan. Knopf, $22.


Lisa Ann Byrns and Leo Joseph D'Acierno
Lisa Ann Byrns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Byrns of Sewell, N.J., was married yesterday in Bryn Mawr, Pa., to Leo Joseph D'Acierno, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo D'Acierno of Fair Lawn, N.J.
The Rev.
Timothy D. Dobbins performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer.
Mrs.
D'Acierno, 31 years old, is an associate in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a J.D. from Cornell University.
Mr.
D'Acierno, also 31, is a principal in the New York office of the management consulting firm of Booz Allen &amp; Hamilton.
He graduated from Harvard University.


The Executive Computer; Three Different Ways to Dress Up Windows
Microsoft Windows 3.1 is often referred to as an operating system, and in some ways it is.
It has its own command conventions, and it puts its own special demands on both the hardware and the software used with it, just as other operating systems do.
Technically, though, Windows is just a facade, albeit a fancy one, for DOS, which remains the true, underlying operating system.
Just as Windows changes the face of DOS, making the computer easier to use, several programs are available that change the face of Windows and make it easier to use: Norton Desktop for Windows 2.0, New Wave 4.0 and Rooms for Windows.
Each has its own strengths to match the different personal working styles of executives.


Scene: A Leafy Bower. Cast: Urban Diners
WITH the mercury comfortably residing above 70 degrees, New Yorkers are flocking to the city's outdoor cafes and gardens.
New York City was not designed with leg-stretching cafe patrons in mind; too often, you find yourself cramped in a near-fetal position as sidewalk strollers jostle your table.
All of the outdoor-dining settings below are safely away from the sidewalk, the street, car fumes and curious canines.
Some are more spacious than others.
Yet all offer confined New Yorkers a little taste of the great outdoors.
Cafe
210 Spring Street, SoHo
, (212) 274-0505. Dinner:
About $40 a person with a glass of wine. (All prices include tax and exclude tip).


Creating a Veil of Illusion, $142
The best-selling women's bathing suit at Bloomingdale's in Manhattan is by Karla Colletto: a lingerie-look bra and a daring bikini bottom joined by a concealing expanse of tightly woven semisheer mesh.
At $142, it's the most expensive suit in the department.
No matter.
It's magically flattering, the saleswomen say.


Under Sail Along Ontario's Rideau
ON the map it looks as though the lakes and rivers of eastern Ontario have been splattered there by a celestial Jackson Pollock.
Some of the 60-odd lakes appear to have trickled together to form meandering ribbons.
Others are blobs connected by fine threads.
As I looked at the map, contemplating a one-week sailing trip in Canada, I could imagine poking around in this watery wilderness with my two teen-age sons and our dog, Birdie -- fishing for whoppers, camping under a full moon and generally washing away the cares of modern life.
We would put our 17-foot boat on a trailer and drive to Kingston, Ontario.
The area is nearby -- only 150 miles north of Albany -- but what especially intrigued me was that many of these lakes are connected by a navigable waterway called the Rideau Canal.
This 123-mile passage, which includes 47 locks made of huge, hand-hewn limestone blocks that march up and down the hills between Kingston and Ottawa, was constructed in the 1820's when Britain feared war with the United States and sought an alternative east-west artery in case it was denied the use of the St.
Lawrence River.


Where Harpsichords Get Star Treatment
SALIERI on a steamship and chamber music in an old meetinghouse are just two facets of the 10th season of the Connecticut Early Music Festival, which offers 12 programs at 9 sites in southeastern Connecticut beginning Friday and running through June 28.
Founded by longtime colleagues who are internationally renowned in the early music area -- the harpsichordist Igor Kipnis of Redding and the flutist John Solum of Westport -- the summer music festival is highly regarded for its historically accurate performances on both authentic and reproduction instruments.
Will Crutchfield, who conducted Handel's rarely heard opera "Amadigi" in last year's festival, returns on June 28 to conduct "Atalanta," which Handel composed in 1736.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Rule: Don't Speak To the Mike
JESS KERSEY keeps trying to raise everybody to the highest professional level in this long march to the National Basketball Association championship.
The referee gave Pat Riley some friendly advice on coaching during the recent tag-team series between the Knicks and the Bulls, and on Friday night he gave Michael Jordan an object lesson in court savoir-faire: In basketball, one must always seek the open man but avoid the open microphone.


String of 'Upsets' Puts Toney in the Limelight
The left hook JAMES TONEY used last year to dethrone MICHAEL NUNN as the International Boxing Federation middleweight champion shocked more than the previously undefeated Nunn and his hometown fans in Davenport, Iowa.
It also stunned the nation's boxing writers, who had somehow missed the promise Toney had shown in knocking out JOSE LUIS ESTEVEN a year earlier and his continued development under his manager, JACKIE KALLEN.
Caught unaware, the writers covering the fight had to ask Toney to hold a special interview session so they could catch up on biographical details of the fighter from Ann Arbor, Mich.


Protestant Baby Boomers Not Returning to Church
The "lost generation" of baby boomers who left mainline Protestantism in the 1970's and 80's is not coming back, and their churches will exert even less of a hold on their children, according to researchers who have completed a major new study of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.).
The researchers, whose findings were reported by The Associated Press last week, say that many in that generation are not turned off by religion, just unpersuaded that the churches they know are essential to their faith.


Freer Politics Free Up Big Kenya Newspaper
When Western nations halted aid to Kenya six months ago, forcing the Government to start opening the political system, it was not clear what would happen to the press.
Would newspapers and magazines, stifled by years of attempted and often successful suppression, take up the challenge?
The answer may be here in the city room of the The Nation, Kenya's largest paper, where cigarette smoke is thick and editors bark orders into phones.


Michaela Dodyk, Eric P. Schulz
Michaela Alcott Dodyk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul M. Dodyk of Ridgewood, N.J., was married in Gold Hill, Colo., yesterday to Eric Paul Schulz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin C. Schulz of West Springfield, Pa.
The Rev.
William Fredericks performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Gold Hill Inn.
Ms.
Dodyk, 26 years old, is keeping her own name.
She is a caseworker in the Boulder (Colo.), Emergency Family Assistance Association.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
Her mother, Delight W. Dodyk, is an instructor in women's history at Drew University.


Can Frazier Walk the Walk?
To the Sports Editor:
Regarding William C. Rhoden's essay describing Walt Frazier's frustration with today's players' lack of intensity ("Striking a Hotter Kind of Cool," The Times, May 9):


From the Mekong to the Bayous
A GOOD SCENT FROM A STRANGE MOUNTAIN
By Robert Olen Butler.  249 pp. New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $19.95.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MAKING KOCHINA DOLLS
Marlon Huma, a member of the Hopi tribe, will demonstrate the making of Kochina dolls in Yonkers Thursday through Saturday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Kochina is the religion of the Hopi Indians.
The dolls and dances represent various elements of the cycle of life and their interconnection.
The demonstrations will take place at Steve's Trading Post, 471 Tuckahoe Road, where Steve Katz, the owner, sells jewelry, pottery, basketry, rugs, sculpture, headdresses, drums and other crafts from more than 30 tribes he visits nationwide.
The dolls are carved from cottonwood roots and can be 1 to 18 inches tall.
They can be male or female, shaped and painted to depict clowns, spirits, the seasons, maidens and braves.
They sometimes have eagle feather headdresses, leather boots and jewelry that has been handed down from previous generations.
They are a common sight hanging on the walls in Hopi households.
Mr.
Huma is from the village of First Mesa on the 40,000-acre Navajo Reservation near Flagstaff, Ariz.
"Marlon has become a special friend," Mr.
Katz said, "and I am returning his hospitality to me by inviting him here for awhile to see how I live." Mr.
Huma, 30 years old, is married and has three children.
He has traveled outside Arizona only once, to a powwow in Oklahoma.
"There are only 9,000 Hopis left," Mr.
Katz said, "and they survive by making and selling their handiwork." The dolls take about two weeks to complete, not because the work is so time consuming but because Hopis have a different perception of time.
The dolls sell for $250 to $1,400.
A few will be for sale, and others can be ordered from Mr.
Huma.
The number to call for more information is 779-9613.
BOOK AND AUTHOR LUNCH
Four noted authors will speak at the Westchester Library Association's Book and Author Luncheon tomorrow at noon at the Tarrytown Hilton.
This is to be the first of a series of yearly luncheons featuring speakers and giving the libraries an opportunity to promote themselves in a time of economic constraint.
George J. Delaney, vice president of Consolidated Edison, which helped underwrite the event, will serve as chairman.
The authors will talk about their most recent books, all published within the last year.
They are Robert Stone, author of "Outerbridge Reach," published by Ticknor &amp; Fields; Belva Plain, whose "Treasures" was published by Delacorte; Gary Sick, author of "October Surprise," published by Times Books, and Robert Kotlowitz, whose "His Master's Voice" is from Knopf.
Packages containing information and souvenirs from the county's 38 libraries will be placed on each chair, and tickets at $30 may be purchased at the hotel or at the Getty Square, Grinton I. Will and Crestwood library branches in Yonkers.
RUSSIAN ART SHOW
The Russians are coming to the Somerstown Gallery today, depicted in paintings and photographs, which will remain on exhibition through July 5.
Oils by Sergei Polyakov, now living in Moscow but originally from Belarus (formerly Byelorussia), are exuberant, bold and colorful, evoking the myths and fairy tales of Old Russia with humor and style.
Marjorie Michael has produced a series of paintings of Russia's massive and elaborate medieval churches, restored during the last few decades by the Soviet Government.
She followed the route of the so- called Golden Ring of churches from Moscow through the Yaroslavi, Kostroma and Vladimir regions of northeastern Russia.
Two Russians, Anatoly Loshmanov and Sergei Kuzmin, and one American, Lisa Toto, contributed the photographic images in the show, capitalizing on the increased freedom of photojournalists to record what they wish on film.
Mr.
Kuzmin has been a photographer for Pravda and the Free Trade Union Journal, while Mr.
Loshmanov was director of photography for the Kiev Movie Studio before branching out on his own to maintain a freelance photography studio.
Ms.
Toto left her job at the Bridgeport Post to make three trips to Russia, where she photographed the wasteland created by the Chernobyl nuclear accident and former President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, among other subjects.
During the opening reception today from 2 to 5 P.M. a slide presentation of Russian landmarks, sculpture and art will be given by Leonid Hushmatov.
The gallery, on Route 100 in Somers, is open Tuesdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 P.M.
More information is available by calling 277-3461.
VASSAR BOOK SALE
More than 300 Westchester students have obtained scholarships to Vassar through a book sale that the college has held each year since 1959.
In the process, more than 1.25 million books and related items have been sold.
The 1992 sale will be held at the County Center in White Plains Friday through Sunday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
A collector's corner will feature first editions, unusual illustrated books, autographed and rare books and books noted mainly for their tiny size and great age.
In addition there will be a collection of books on the archeology of the South Pacific and pre-Columbian regions, books on antiques, Japanese dolls and fine art, cookbooks, children's books, records, mysteries and languages, including Spanish, French, German, Swedish, Russian, Hungarian and Japanese.
Paperbacks will cost 50 cents, and 40,000 hardcovers, $1 and more.
At unscheduled times, instant bargain sales, a Vassar tradition, will occur, giving patrons a half-hour to buy all they can carry for half price or purchase any book with a red cover for 25 cents for 10 minutes or take advantage of other quick-sale incentives.
The phone number for more information is 948-4115 or 761-8376.
NEW SUNNYSIDE WALK
A walk in the woods that Washington Irving himself used to stroll has been reopened at Sunnyside, his home in Tarrytown.
Historic Hudson Valley, with a grant of $50,000, expanded the half-mile trail and installed a wooden bridge and benches at scenic overlooks along the Hudson River.
Using as reference material drawings from 1856 that show a path and benches near the stream, the project, which took more than a year, afforded an opportunity to open up eight acres of formerly inaccessible property and create a picnic area.
Guided walks and discussions of the Romantic Landscape tradition will be held every Saturday from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. on the hour through the end of August.
The trail is open to visitors on their own daily except Tuesdays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
From July 4 through Labor Day, the trail will be open until 8 P.M.
Saturdays and Sundays, offering views of sunsets across the river.
Sunnyside is just off Route 9, one mile south of the Tappan Zee Bridge.
Admission to the grounds is $3 and includes the guided and unguided walks.
Those who wish to take guided tours of Irving's house will be charged $3 in addition to the grounds admission.
The number to call for more information is 631-8200.


Hobart's Temple
To the Editor: To Mary Cantwell's article "Tasmania: Two Faces" (April 26), I would like to add the following.
In the early 1840's, the Jewish community of Hobart decided to erect a place of worship on part of a garden belonging to a Jewish merchant, Judah Solomon, the Government having refused a land grant for that purpose.


The Hills Are Alive . . .
To the Editor:
Jon Pareles seeks radio stations like KBHR of "Northern Exposure"  [ "Radio Days in Cicely, Alaska: Anything Goes," May 3 ] .
Yet stations like K-Bear are alive and well around the country.
Here in Colorado, for example, KOTO in Telluride, KVNF in Paonia and KDNK in the Carbondale/ Aspen area do everything from offering advice about crossing icy streets to broadcasting town council meetings and running notices announcing lost dogs, new babies and church bake sales.


For Public Service
Waldorf-Astoria; June 4, 7:15 P.M.


Let's Disperse the Family Values Smokescreen
To the Editor:
I am writing as a psychiatrist who has dedicated his life to working with inner city populations, in response to the President's misguided blaming of poor family values for the uprisings in the inner cities.


When Social Services Have a Bottom Line
Corporate America has increasingly found itself in recent years plugging some holes in the nation's social welfare system.
As various levels of government have scaled back or declined to increase their roles in meeting both old and emerging social needs, corporations have stepped forward into areas they didn't anticipate entering even a decade ago.
And as they supply services ranging from prenatal care to job training, the lines between the traditional roles of business and government sometimes blur, raising questions of accountability and responsiveness.
Employers like A.T.&amp; T., I.B.M., Kraft, Corning, Texas Instruments, Primerica, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Honeywell and Stride Rite have steadily moved into providing social services, primarily for employees but also, on occasion, the wider community.
For example, the Prudential Insurance Company finances a program to pay doctors and nurses for the Head Start program at community health clinics in Newark and Patterson, N.J., and Cessna Aircraft built a training factory in a depressed area of Wichita, Kan.


Playing Stars Upset Star Players
IN mid-March a celebrity team in Hollywood competed in a charity event with two teams from the business world.
The captain was Les Brown, the bandleader, and one of his teammates was Leonard Pennario, the concert pianist.
Also in support were Don Adams of "Get Smart" fame and Joan Benny, daughter of Jack Benny.
Three others were from the world of sports.
Gene Mako won a Wimbledon and many other doubles titles in the 30's, and Bob Falkenburg won the Wimbledon singles title in 1948.
Last was Wes Parker, first baseman for the Los Angeles Dodgers from 1964 to 1972.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  RUSSIAN BACKLASH STALLS AID


MAY 31-JUNE 6: Morality Play; A Playwright Decides The Shows Must Go On
Jon Robin Baitz, author of "The Substance of Fire" and "The Film Society," among other plays, last week dramatized what he thought of the National Endowment of the Arts.
Accepting a $15,000 grant from the N.E.A., he promptly announced two gifts of his own -- of $7,500 each to two institutions recently turned down for N.E.A. support by Dr.
Anne-Imelda Radice, the agency's acting director, because of what she deemed sexually explicit material.


President Is Urged to Renew His Ties to Core G.O.P.
The first broad outline of the Bush Strategy, Post-Perot, is emerging, and its hallmark is caution:
Let the President be President, and let surrogates take the shots at Ross Perot. (Gov. Bill Clinton is struggling quite nicely on his own, and requires no attacks at the moment.)


Jane Licciardello, James McIntyre
Jane Billings Licciardello, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
A.
Thomas Licciardello of Trumbull, Conn., was married yesterday to James Andrew McIntyre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angus P. McIntyre of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Donald Remick performed the ceremony at the Second Congregational Church in North Beverly, Mass.
Mrs.
McIntyre, 28 years old, is the business manager for the case-study publishing program at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.
She is a cum laude graduate of Harvard College and earned a master's degree in educational administration, planning and social policy from Harvard.
Her father is chairman of Physicians Health Services, a health maintenance organization in Trumbull.


SURFACING
PARTY GIRL
Tatiana Von Furstenberg:
Diane's daughter, just graduated from Brown.
Ubiquitous on the Manhattan social scene.
ORGANIZATION
Feminists for Animal Rights (F.A.R.):
Women who see a connection between sexism and speciesism. TRAVEL
Bedtime gift:
Not chocolates, but fables about coyotes, on your pillow at the Inn of the Anasazi in Santa Fe, N.M.
DRINK
House water:
Private-label sparkling water bottled for Gurney's Inn, Cafe Un Deux Trois, Da Noi and Splash.


Miss Rasmussen, Peter Grunwald
Mr. and Mrs.
Ross K. Rasmussen of Hot Springs, Ark., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rebecca Jane Rasmussen, and Peter Alfred Grunwald, the son of Henry Anatole Grunwald of New York and the late Beverly S. Grunwald.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rasmussen, 36 years old, is the principal in Rebecca Rasmussen Architects in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Virginia.
Her father, who is retired, was a sales manager in Hot Springs for the Weyerhauser lumber company.
Her mother, Lois Rasmussen, is an antiques dealer in Hot Springs.


Catching On In Cartoons
Brian Lacey and Peter Keefe aren't Walt Disney, and their cartoon character Mr.
Bogus isn't Donald Duck, but in the fiercely competitive business of animated children's television shows, their company, Zodiac Entertainment, has carved out a small but growing niche.
With about $7 million in annual revenue, Zodiac, based in New York and Los Angeles, is not quite ready to challenge Disney or Warner Brothers.
But two of Zodiac's cartoon shows -- "Widget" and "The Mr. Bogus Show" -- are doing well in the ratings; the company has strong financial backing (its corporate owner is Central Independent Television of Britain), and Mr.
Lacey and Mr.
Keefe believe they have the right strategy for long-term expansion.


Elizabeth Hodder and Barclay Corbus
Mr. and Mrs.
Melville T. Hodder of Cambridge, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Espy Hodder, to Barclay Fleming Corbus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
Barclay Corbus of Arvada, Colo.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Hodder, 29 years old, graduated from Harvard University and Oxford University.
She is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University, as is her fiance.
Her father is a senior vice president at Lehman Brothers in Boston, and her mother, Elizabeth Hodder, is an instructor and research assistant at Harvard.


Movies Turn Convent Life Upside Down
Some of us are suckers for nun jokes: they're cheap, they're easy, they're irresistible.
It isn't necessary to have lived through parochial school to be a connoisseur of nun jokes, but it helps.
So for the benefit of the parochially deprived who might not have the advantage of my comic education -- having been taught first grade by Sister Gregory, a wizened woman with steel-gray hair and a malfunctioning hearing aid -- here are the two basic categories of nun humor: sister as unworldly innocent and sister as repressed storm trooper.
The first category is kinder, beloved by good Catholics and non-Catholics alike.
The storm-trooper category is usually favored by Sister Gregory's students and other lapsed Catholics.
It's tougher but makes for a much better movie.
The new Whoopi Goldberg film, "Sister Act," is one long, sugary nun joke.
Ms.
Goldberg plays Deloris Van Cartier, a Diana Ross wannabe who witnesses a murder committed by her married mobster boyfriend (Harvey Keitel).
She hides out in a convent where the sisters are so relentlessly upbeat that they make "The Singing Nun" and "The Flying Nun" look like Lucrezia Borgia.


MAYOR OF MOSCOW RESIGNS HIS POST
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia accepted the resignation of Mayor Gavriil K. Popov of Moscow today and issued a presidential decree giving the job of managing this city of 9 million to the current Deputy Mayor.
Mr.
Popov's departure from city politics has been a long time in the making, to the point where his repeated threats to quit were often ignored.
In his latest resignation statement, issued two days ago, Mr.
Popov said he wanted to devote himself to his role as chairman of the change-minded Movement for Democratic Reforms.


MADE TO MEASURE
Ferriss ends her article not with the idea that women should be judged on their abilities and intellect, but rather that " very sexy, procreative, small-breasted women" should be featured in beer ads, on sitcoms and on Cosmopolitan's cover.
She doesn't seek to change the rating system, she only wants to rate within it.
I feel sorry for her.
HELEN GRIFFIN
Little Neck, L.I.


Is Pornography to Blame?
To the Editor:
As the program director of the Freedom-to-Write Committee at the PEN American Center, I must point out that the responses to John Irving's thoughtful essay on the pornography victims' compensation bill mostly failed to address the central issue.
Senate Bill 1521, if passed, would introduce the notion of third-party responsibility for sexual crimes.
Why should distributors of "criminally obscene" material or "child pornography" bear responsibility for assaults they neither planned nor perpetrated?
How can our lawmakers justify passing the buck in this way from rapists and assailants to those whose only crime is that they exercise their First Amendment rights?
SIOBHAN DOWD New York


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, including some special summer activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites
THE CLOISTERS, Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights, Manhattan.
Exhibitions of medieval art and architecture, including sculpture, tapestries, manuscripts and crafts in a medieval-style branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


At 72, Eileen Farrell Hasn't Lost the Knack for Pop
In the last decade, many opera singers -- Kiri Te Kanawa, Frederica Von Stade and Placido Domingo, to name a few -- have made forays into pop music, recording best-selling albums.
But they tend to approach pop as if it were opera, sacrificing the lyrics in favor of vocal display.
Then there's the soprano Eileen Farrell, a former star of the Metropolitan Opera.
Ms.
Farrell is credited with recording the first such crossover album, "I Gotta Right to Sing the Blues," in 1960.
Shifting to a hearty contralto that combined a gutsy blues quality with a flair for pop phrasing, she proved herself to be a gifted pop vocalist, not a classical artist condescending to sing music that many of her peers deemed inferior.


Pruning to a Lilac Canopy
THERE is a stand of very old, very fragrant white lilacs at the foot of my raspberry patch in Maryland.
I think my grandmother got them from her mother's house, a mile up the road, when she married at 16.
They still bloom every spring, but they are growing in a tangle of weed trees and poison ivy.
And I know, if only I could get to them, that they would benefit from a drastic pruning.
Now is the time to prune all lilacs, new and old, as the flowers are just fading.
The old blossoms should be cut off before they go to seed, which takes energy away from next year's growth and flower production.


TALENT SHOW
They don't necessarily have big-time budgets, backers or name recognition.
What they do have is talent.
These seven designers -- all strong individualists -- are quietly causing a commotion in the fashion world.
Their clothes for fall range from softly tailored to strictly sculptural, from serious to satirical, but what they share is a solid appreciation of the female form.
Each has found a source of inspiration: Byron Lars took off on Amelia Earhart's aviator cap and flight jacket; Tracy Reese followed Anna Karenina's hourglass silhouette skating across a Russian pond; Isabel Toledo turned to traditional ecclesiastical colors; Flyte Ostell was drawn to an architectural purity of line.
Men's wear was a big influence: Cynthia Rowley spoofed it; Richard Mishaan and Kenneth Richard feminized it.
Though none have hit the major leagues, it may be only a matter of time.


Beaches
Here is a listing of New York City beaches and outdoor pools.
Unless otherwise noted, all outdoor pools are open from July 3 to Labor Day daily from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Admission is free.
Telephone numbers may not be in service until July 3.
The New York City Department of Parks and Recreation has set up a number for pool information: (800) 834-3832.
BEACHES Brooklyn
BRIGHTON AND CONEY ISLAND BEACH AND BOARDWALK (2.5 miles), on the Atlantic Ocean, from Brighton 15th Street to West 37th Street, (718) 946-1350.


HERE'S BRANFORD
I believe that Keith Jarrett (Letters, May 17, in response to "Here's Branford," by Peter Watrous, May 3) misunderstood what Branford Marsalis was trying to say ("Trane was massive, intense, I wanted to quit.") Marsalis was talking about modesty, and respect for John Coltrane, not competitiveness.


Business Diary/May 30-June 7
COMPANIES Life Styles of the Rich, Famous Insider Traders


MAY 31-JUNE 6: Whose Life Is It Anyway?; Tennessee Case May Guide Others in Embryo Matters
In the confluence of the new reproductive technologies and the old vagaries of the human heart, there are few legal precedents and no Federal guidelines.
So in deciding what should happen to seven frozen embryos from the in-vitro fertilization procedures involving a now-divorced couple, Tennessee's high court last week was guided by recommendations of the 10,000-member American Fertility Society.
The court ruled that in the absence of a prior contract or agreement, the woman, Mary Sue Davis Stowe, could not anonymously donate the embryos to a childless couple against the wishes of her ex-husband, Junior Lewis Davis.


Show of Creations by Artists Who Teach
CRAFT collectors scour galleries, fairs and stores for well-designed, well-made contemporary pieces.
Those in the know also go directly to the craft artists' studios.
In New Jersey, connoisseurs and amateurs alike can find all these resources in one place: the Peters Valley Craft Center.
The six studios at the center, which is actually a restored historic village, are open to the public from 2 to 4 P.M. daily through Aug. 31.
Guided tours begin every Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M. in front of the Craft Store porch.
Free self-guided walking tour maps, which also are available there, include short histories of a Greek Revival house, a church, cottages and barns, all of which are more than 100 years old.


Abroad at Home; Governing By Television
Ross Perot is the most interesting thing that has happened to American politics in years.
He is also the scariest.
He has tuned in brilliantly to Americans' frustration with government, their perception that life in this country is growing worse and politicians do nothing about it.
He has convinced an astonishing number of people that he can fix things if he is put in charge.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Course Mark Gives Burton Share of Lead


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Park Avenue South between 14th and 23d streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Park Avenue South street fair.


Corrections
An article on May 17 about the television producer Lindsay Law referred incorrectly to the financial arrangement between the television series "American Playhouse" and the producers of the film "Sidewalk Stories." The film, produced by Charles Lane and Howard Brickner, was completely financed by Mr.
Brickner.


Beachwear, Barely, For a Sultry Afternoon
BEACH dress has traditionally been an elegant form of undress.
However, for several seasons swimwear has exerted a major influence on the regular fashion collections, with the lean economy of swimsuit shapes turning up on the runways.
The stretch bodysuit, after all, is now the foundation for everything from pants suits to evening clothes.
At the same time, the runway has had a reciprocal influence on swimwear.
This feedback can be seen in several current swimwear trends: the lingerie look for the beach, with wire-supported bra tops or spandex-paneled maillots; animal-print bathing suits; motorcycle-inspired bathing styles, and one-piece suits with sheer panels.
As these designs show, there's no reason for fashion to take a backseat to fun.


Kidnappers Release a Photo Of German Held in Lebanon
Pro-Iranian kidnappers said today in a statement that they were cooperating with efforts to free two German relief workers but that they would first require unspecified "assurances.
A two-page, handwritten statement in Arabic was delivered to the offices of the newspaper An Nahar with a photograph of one of the hostages, 31-year-old Thomas Kemptner, who was seized at gunpoint in south Lebanon with Heinrich Strubig, 50, in May 1989.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Electoral College; Florida Is Rethinking the Way Presidents Are Elected
With nervous political strategists from both parties looking on, the Florida Legislature is considering a proposal that, by abolishing the winner-take-all system of distributing electoral votes, could radically change the way Presidents are elected if it were adopted widely.
Under a bill introduced earlier this year, Florida would allocate its 25 electoral votes on the basis of the winner of the popular vote in each Congressional district.
Now, only Maine and Nebraska have the system.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 23  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 340,000
387 Bleecker Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, 3-story town house; dining room, powder room, 4 fireplaces, full basement, landmark district, 15- by 33-ft. lot; taxes $3,133 (Broker: Leslie J. Garfield &amp; Co.)  SoHo 209,973
480 Broome Street  1,575-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; elevator, 1 bath, original tin ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $910, 45% tax-deductible (Brokers: Sinvin Realty - Tabak Realty)  Sutton Place 365,000
35 Sutton Place (58th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining room, 3 exposures, East River view; maintenance $1,350, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Arthur P. Brooks Realty)  Upper East Side 180,000
345 East 81st Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, balcony, south exposure; maintenance $1,198, 72% tax-deductible (Broker: Century 21/-Lewis &amp; Clark)  Upper West Side 150,000
245 West 107th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, playroom, roof terrace; maintenance $781, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Eden Realty)  BRONX  City Island 165,000
162 Hawkins Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached Cape Cod; den, full basement, garden shed, 33- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Wakefield 240,000
810 St.
Owen's Street  2-family, detached, 27-year-old house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; dining room in each; private driveway, 50- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,548 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN  Flatlands 186,000
1052 East 38th Street  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,490 (Broker: Helmar Brokerage Ltd.)  Park Slope 432,500
734 1/2 Carroll Street  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, study in primary triplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; 17.2- by 138-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Sheepshead Bay 250,000
2523 East 22d Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick and stucco-sided house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room in each; front and rear porches, carport, 24- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,280 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  College Point 163,000
122-18 23d Avenue  2-family, detached, frame house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 2-car garage, 40- by 71-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills 350,000
70-17 Ingram Street  3 bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached Tudor; dining room, sunroom, fireplace, full basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Clove Lakes 49,000
1100 Clove Road  (Fountains)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 780-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, remodeled kitchen; maintenance $583, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: Century 21/ Papp Realty)  Westerleigh 170,000
311 Purdy Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; recreation room, rear deck, 1-car garage, 25- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Salmon Realty)


When Minting Is No Big Thing
CAN one man a mint make?
Beriah Wall did.
In his career as an artist, he made nearly 500,000 coins.
And he gave them all away.
In 150 issues, the Wall coins appeared all over: on window sills, flowerpots, lampposts, just about anywhere that the sand-dollar-size coins could be placed.
Mr.
Wall would leave the house each day with his pockets stuffed.
Wherever he went he'd look for an out-of-the-way spot where he could tuck a coin.


Television
June
"ASHENDEN." Two-part series based on Somerset Maugham's World War I spy stories about a fictional playwright (but clearly Maugham himself) who abandons his career to work for the British secret service.
Arts &amp; Entertainment Network, June 7 at 8 P.M.


Los Angeles Journal; After Riots, a Return to the Extremes That Pass for Normality
Just the other day, 33 days after the riots that turned Los Angeles to flame and terror, the people who preside over such things rededicated the star in the pavement on Hollywood Boulevard that honors Marilyn Monroe.
It would have been her 66th birthday.
The television cameras were there, and when it was over a young man and a woman in tattoos sauntered by the star, just outside the post-modern McDonald's, past the star for Arsenio Hall and toward Frederick's of Hollywood, the famous lingerie emporium that has already been repaired and reopened with a new stock of panties and bras after having been burned and looted.
That night, they held a Marilyn Monroe look-alike contest at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel up the street.


The Case Against the Sun, or, Send In the Clouds
EIGHT years have elapsed since I last appeared on a beach during the summer.
While romping semi-consciously with other brain-charred revelers on the sands of Guadeloupe, a woman told me, "Your head is completely red!"
I was enjoying the sangria-drinking contest so much that I had not noticed my body becoming a human griddle.
My bald pate was now a prize-winning strawberry with a beard and mustache, despite the assiduous application of sun block that vowed not to come off in the water.
At least I won the contest.


The Way It Was at Radcliffe
The Acting New York State Supreme Court Justice was arguing rather vehemently with Manhattan's Borough President.
"Are you sure we weren't allowed to wear pants to class?" Acting Justice Leslie Crocker Snyder of State Supreme Court in Manhattan asked.
She said she thought she could recall riding to Harvard Yard on a bicycle.


Remembering the Young People on Who Died on the Highways
KIM GLIMMANN "was everything that was good," her younger sister, Tara, said.
Kim, 26 years old, loved her job as a beautician at J. C. Penney.
She loved her fiance, Thomas Grecki.
She loved life.
Last month her life ended on the Southern State Parkway in Wantagh.
"It was 8:15 in the morning," Tara said.
"Kim was alone in the car. She was traveling from home in Bohemia to Valley Stream to fix someone's hair for a wedding. That was so like her, to get up early to do something for somebody else."


The Coming Crisis of the American Work Force
In the wake of the Los Angeles riots, many public officials are pointing out that minority workers will represent more than half of the growth in the labor force in the next decade.
They worry that these workers are badly equipped for the demanding jobs of the 21st century, prompting politicians to propose several measures to deal with the problem.
Economists are increasingly concerned that the American economy will pay the price through lower growth in productivity if something is not done soon to address the problem of inadequate education and training.


Zito and Strike the Gold: Winners for New York
It was a Patrick Ewing slam-dunk, a Mark Messier check, a Don Mattingly double into the corner.
It was New York, and Nick Zito loved it.
The moment Strike the Gold crossed the finish line at Belmont yesterday, first in the Nassau County Handicap, Zito shouted, "New York, this is for you!"


Data Bank/June 7, 1992


A Tough Market For Summer Jobs
TWENTY-FIVE years ago, Ervin R. Schanes, then a product manager at General Foods in White Plains, was alarmed by the number of teen-age participants in the Watts riots in Los Angeles.
He came up with an idea to help minority and disadvantaged young people in Westchester understand the workings of American business, by giving them a chance to work in the corporate world.
"The management of General Foods thought the idea was good and decided to develop it into a program called Operation Opportunity," said Deborah Shields, manager of community affairs for the company, which is now Kraft General Foods.
"Since Operation Opportunity began a quarter of a century ago, more than 1,500 junior and senior high school students have gone through the program."


For Mets, It's Either Drought Or Deluge
The triumphs of late have tended to be extravagant and entertaining exorcisms -- explosions of hits and runs.
The victories have briefly rid the Mets of their darker doubts and momentarily banished the hurt of tough losses.
It appears time, though, that the Mets manufacture some consistency.
It is time for the Mets, and the players inside their clubhouse acknowledge as much, to demonstrate that they can pile up victories as well as pile on runs in blowouts.


To the Individual, the Duty to Find a Skill
To the Editor:
The book by Jacqueline Jones covered in the At Work column (May 3) makes assumptions that seem to be totally erroneous.
Her concept that the destiny of displaced workers was determined by economic forces beyond their control flies in the face of the entire American experience.
So many people who migrated here came primarily because they could not find adequate opportunities in their homeland.
They did not remain in their economic quagmire waiting for governmental programs to intervene.
Similarly, as the industrial scene has changed in this country over the decades, they moved on to find new frontiers and new opportunities.
Otherwise, there would be no auto workers -- they would still be waiting for horse-collar and saddle facilities to revive.


Ocean Grove's Own Museum
Concerning the May 10 article on problems at the Neptune Museum ("Residents Dismayed About Cluttered Museum and Its Curator"), the Historical Society of Ocean Grove points out that there is a museum in Ocean Grove, the Historic District of Neptune Township.
Open Wednesday afternoon and Saturday morning, the museum is completely volunteer and is supported solely by the Historical Society in its rental quarters at 53 Central Avenue.
The emphasis is the history of Ocean Grove; we use the early annual reports, old maps and many photographs and memorabilia to portray this history.


Honoring Excellence In Fashion
New York Public Library; June 4, 11:30 P.M.


School Where Facts of AIDS Are the Facts of Life
Within the spare halls of Manhattan's Louis D. Brandeis High School, AIDS is not an academic idea like Manifest Destiny or the theory of evolution.
Three teachers there have died of the disease and so have many relatives of students.
Indeed, it is the kind of school where if a student asks a gym teacher for a condom, the response will not be an interrogation, but only: "Lubricated or nonlubricated?"


Got a Perot Headache? 8-Way Relief: REPUBLICANS; Be Like Boris
A heavy burden of proof is descending on the Bush campaign.
Its task, in the last five months of this election year, is to portray an incumbent President as an agent of change.
It is difficult to underestimate the enormous problems the President will have trying to convince the public that after 12 years of a Bush-Reagan White House a vote for him is a vote for change, but this is what he must do.
To accomplish this task, he must do three things.
First, he must make significant personnel changes in the Administration and the campaign.
This will no doubt be resisted as a sign of panic, but when the car is headed off a cliff, panic is justified.


Starting -Gate
THE EVERLASTING
-gate
combining form is back with us. It all began 20 years ago with
Watergate
; the final syllable was then clipped and applied to other words to denote scandal.
Not just political scandal: the dilution of Bordeaux wines in France was called
winegate
, and cost overruns in Hollywood were called
heavensgate
. But most writers evoked
-gate
for political purposes; when Mario Cuomo was a candidate for Mayor of New York City in 1977, he denounced Abe Beame's suppression of a Securities and Exchange Commission report about Big Apple finances as
Applegate
.


The Kindest Cut of All
OVERHEARD one recent Sunday in a third-floor fitting room at Bloomingdale's in Manhattan:
"I have dimples in places I never had places."


Dust Coats Wet Image of Seattle
Surrounded by water, the city of Seattle is parched with thirst.
Lawns are bronze.
Fish are confused.
Fountains are dry.
Showers are short.
And through it all, the "water police" -- 30 Water Department enforcers armed with ticket books -- patrol the brown hills and valleys of the one American city with a reputation for being wet.
They are on the lookout for open sprinklers and signs of green.


The Secondary Campaign
The Presidential primary campaign, which usually clarifies Americans' choice in November, has just ended, not in clarity but in political parlor games.
If the choice were limited to President Bush or Ross Perot, people ask, whom would you vote for?
A senior figure in Walter Mondale's 1984 campaign says
Bush.
A senior figure in Michael Dukakis's 1988 campaign says
Perot.
And what if the choice were Gov.
Bill Clinton or Ross Perot?
A prominent White House official says
Clinton.
A Republican corporate executive says
Perot
.


Louisville, April 19
To the Editor: Having been married in Louisville, Ky., on April 19, 1942, while my husband was stationed in Fort Knox, we were fortunate to celebrate our Golden Wedding Anniversary on Sunday, April 19, 1992.
What better ending of that most meaningful day than to open the Travel section and find your article, "What's Doing in Louisville"?


Wall Street; The Abused Executive Stock Option
Stock options are emerging as the latest lightning rod in the continuing storm over executive pay levels.
Senate hearings last Thursday did little to clear the air.
Lawmakers threatened to eliminate corporate tax deductions for pay in excess of $1 million a year, but simply nodded at arguments for and against the use of options as a part of Corporate America's pay package.
Critics of excessive executive pay have long lobbied for greater reliance on stock options because they put chief executives in the same boat as shareholders.
If the stock price goes up, everybody in the boat is rewarded.
If it does not, the chief executive suffers along with everyone else.
That, the critics says, is only fair.


Landscapes Have the Look of Au Nature
NATIVE plants are definitely in these days.
These are the plants that belong, that have been growing around the area for centuries and are a part of the natural landscape.
Many of these indigenous plants are truly beautiful to see.
Witness the glorious blooms on the lovely pinkshell azalea (Rhododendron vaseyi).
Its magnificent pink flowers cover the shrubs and decorate sunny hillsides.
Although this particular azalea is essentially a Southern native species of the Blue Ridge Mountains, it is available outside its natural range at nurseries.
This is one woody plant that could be grown more often, but too few gardeners know about it.


Will Alitalia Survive Competition American-Style?
A few years ago Alitalia, the Italian airline, was a joke among travelers.
Executives tell about missing connecting flights in Rome and having to spend the night at a hotel.
Frequent strikes scrambled schedules and left travelers stranded at distant airports.
The airline's employees were often indifferent, and the on-time performance was a disaster.
Lufthansa, the German airline, was building loyalty among Italian business travelers.


Dodge Lets Loose an Old-Style Beast
The cop had been following me for a couple of minutes, switching lanes when I did, pulling up behind me at the stop sign, making the left when I made the left.
He was watching me and I was watching him.
Also, I was being v-e-r-r-r-y law-abiding.
All the same, it came as no surprise when the bubble light started to twirl.
I pulled over and waited while he did the cop thing, getting out, hitching his belt, walking slowly up.


Next Stop: A Deanship
Bonnie Guiton will join a select group July 1.
She will become one of only seven women deans of the nation's 245 business graduate schools accredited by the American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business.
Ms.
Guiton, who is now a member of Gov.
Pete Wilson's cabinet in California, has been named dean of the McIntire School of Commerce at the University of Virginia.
The move represents one more step in a storybook career that has taken her from a family on welfare as a child to posts in the Reagan and Bush Administrations and to the job she is now leaving -- Secretary of California's State and Consumer Services Agency, where she oversees 14,000 employees.


POSTINGS: New in the Northeast; Carefree Homes
A new community of one-family homes for which the homeowner does not have to do exterior or landscape maintenance -- a relatively new concept for the Northeast -- opened last month in New Milford, Conn.
The Village at Sullivan Farm, a neighborhood in the Sullivan Farm Community, will consist of 34 homes, ranging in price from $176,000 to $209,000.
Exterior and landscape maintenance is provided by the Sullivan Farm Association.
Monthly common charges run about $127 to $152.


MAY 31-JUNE 6: Repetitive Stress Injury; Federal Judge Sets Scene For a Precedent
Manufacturing companies were divided last week in their reactions to a judge's potentially far-reaching decision to consolidate 44 separate suits in Brooklyn Federal Court for hand injuries allegedly caused by repetitive motions.
Michael Cerussi, a lawyer for International Business Machines, said he was not necessarily displeased by the ruling of Judge Jack B. Weinstein.
"What'll happen now is that I.B.M. is going to have the opportunity to get heard on the merits of this sooner rather than later."


Story of Portugal Unfolds Through A Varied Collection
THE Newark Public Library is widely known for its holding in prints as well as books and for the expertise of its supervising librarian of special collections, William Dane.
There being neither the space nor the money for costly installations in these marble halls, at 5 Washington Street, the library shows are not glamorous.
But they can be counted on for items rare, beautiful, instructive or entertaining -- or all three -- and they are always well documented.


Suspension Brings Suit
The way the two-time national 800-meter champion, DELISA FLOYD of Houston, has been telling it, the drug that led to her four-year suspension after the world championships in Tokyo in August was a compound the United States Olympic Committee's own Drug Hotline had assured her was a harmless carbohydrate supplement not on any Prohibited Substances list.
Track's world governing body, the International Amateur Athletic Federation, didn't buy the story and turned down her appeal May 31.


Three Variations on a Theme Of Summertime Potato Salad
I DON'T think I have ever met anyone who didn't like potato salad.
For me, it is one of the best parts of a summer meal.
For years, I made it the same way: tossing cooked potatoes and chopped scallions in a rich mayonnaise made with egg yolks and olive oil.
Now that raw eggs are regarded, like raw chicken, as too dangerous to eat, I've had to look for other ideas.
Recently, I spent a weekend at a friend's house where she made a dressing using horseradish, yogurt and olive oil.
I am not one of those people who thinks yogurt does the job when you want the rich taste of egg yolks or cream, so I was a bit skeptical, until I tasted it.
It was superb.


Got a Perot Headache? 8-Way Relief: DEMOCRATS; An Era-Ender
"This era must end."
Thus said a staunch Democrat who was urging me to endorse Ross Perot.


Lisa A. Gutwillig, Brian E. Fee Jr.
Lisa Anne Gutwillig, a daughter of Linda Schoenthaler of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married on Friday in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., to Brian Edmund Fee Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fee of Briarcliff Manor.
The Rev.
Robert Dunn performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Theresa's Church.
Mrs.
Fee, 26 years old, is the manager of Hollywood Inc., a clothing store in Scarsdale.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her stepfather, Robert W. Schoenthaler, is the general manager of E. T. Petroleum in New York.
Her mother is the president of Financial Decisions Inc., a financial and benefits consulting firm in New York.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, and foot that are scheduled during the summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"CHELSEA WALKING TOURS," Manhattan.
A tour of the area with an emphasis on its history, landmark buildings and famous residents of the past.
Sponsored by the New York City Cultural Walking Tours.
Meets at 2 P.M. in front of the Flatiron Building, 23d Street and Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
Also, every Sunday through Aug. 30.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 979-2388.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
THE KILLER SNAILS INVADE
HOW is this for rattling the morning coffee cup?
Giant killer snails may be loose on Long Island.


Katie Jacobs, J. D. Robinson 4th
Katie Louise Jacobs, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremy M. Jacobs of East Aurora, N.Y., was married Friday in Lackawanna, N.Y., to James Dixon Robinson 4th, the son of Mr.
Robinson 3d of New York and Bettye Bradley Robinson of Sun Valley, Idaho.
The Very Rev.
James M. Demske performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Victory Basilica.
Mrs.
Robinson, 25 years old, graduated from Fairfield University and received a master's degree in early childhood development from Boston College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Delaware North Companies in Buffalo, a holding company that owns the Boston Garden and the Boston Bruins hockey team.


Hard Times for Amoros, but Pride Remains
The face is gaunt but still distinguished.
The body has been ravaged by circulation problems; his left leg was amputated at the knee seven years ago.
But Sandy Amoros's outlook on life has never wavered.
"From the days when he played until now, he's always had that wonderful smile," Rafael Sanchez, Amoros's lawyer, said of the man who was a World Series hero 37 years ago.
"You'll look at him and just marvel at that smile."


Mutual Funds; 'Churning' Is Not Just for Stocks
When an 88-year-old Tucson, Ariz., woman died two years ago, she left an estate worth $400,000.
Her daughter, a resident of Schenectady, N.Y., who insisted that her name not be printed, found records and checkbook entries showing that her mother's savings had been switched among 100 mutual funds in the eight years her mother had done business with the woman who was her last stockbroker.
The broker, the daughter said, "was going in and out, switching from one fund to another, and it was easy to see how much money she was making" from her constant trading -- at least $100,000.
The daughter filed a complaint with the National Association of Securities Dealers but decided against suing the broker.
She did not want to gain remuneration as much as to warn the broker to think twice about similar dealings with other investors, she said.


At Work; When Businesses Need Not Fret
Few pieces of legislation have had as malignant an effect -- with less reason, proponents would say -- on the collective blood pressure of business owners as the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990.
But by the time the legislation's first phase, mandating accessibility to banks, hotels, restaurants and the like for the 43 million Americans with disabilities, went into effect in January, most businesses had accepted the inevitable, if grouchily, and some actually began to calculate the potential return from 43 million new consumers.
The next phase, which implements the law in workplaces of 25 or more employees, begins late next month, and once again compliance hypertension is rampant.
It is abetted this time by a new cottage industry of self-taught consultants offering high-priced advice on how to fulfill A.D.A. obligations -- advice typically available at little or no cost from government or private agencies.
Thus much of the energy of disability rights groups is spent soothing nerves.


All Russia Needs Now Is a Lot of Jelly
Of the many things that Russia lacks, peanut butter is one.
To be sure, no one here knew they were missing it.
But this week, in a gesture of self-interested humanitarian aid, the National Peanut Council of America presented this hungry nation with its first peanut butter-and-jelly sandwich.
The formal tasting took place at the Exhibition of National Economic Achievements, a centerpiece of gilded fountains, giant airships and other monuments of the Soviet era.
The first verdict by a troupe from the Moscow Children's Theater was that peanut butter -- or arakhisovoye maslo -- was "on the salty side." No one complained about it sticking to the roof of his mouth.


ROMANCING THE POOR
Jessica Hagedorn's article "Romancing the Poor" (May 10) opens with a description of Smokey Mountain, a garbage dump on the outskirts of Metro Manila, and goes on to describe the newest megamalls in the city.
May I point out that Smokey Mountain is like any other dump site in a large city, and that megamalls are also part of a growing metropolis?
But neither are representative of Metro Manila or the entire Philippines.


Lake Michigan Car Ferry Back
The 100-year-old ferry across Lake Michigan is back after a break of a year and a half, with a new focus: passengers.
The newly renovated Badger, which had been used primarily to transport railroad freight cars as well as a few automobiles and passengers across the lake, began daily round trips last month, carrying passengers and their cars between Ludington, Mich., and Manitowoc, Wis.
The 60-mile crossing takes four hours.
The Lake Michigan Carferry Service, the only cross-lake ferry operating on the Great Lakes, provides access to beaches and resorts.


Laura Bull, Michael R. Bailey
Laura Catharine Bull, the daughter of Dr.
Marcia B. McCrum and Dr.
Sherman M. Bull, both of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Robert Bailey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wendell Bailey of Willow Springs, Mo.
The Rev.
Thomas Speers, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in New Canaan.
Mrs.
Bailey, 28 years old, is a vice president of the LCP Group, a New York real-estate investment firm.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is a general and pediatric surgeon with a private practice in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother is the chief of cardiology at the Stamford Hospital in Stamford.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Peggy R. Bull and A. Bliss McCrum Jr., both of New Canaan.


Dance
June 8 to 20
AMERICAN BALLET THEATER, Metropolitan Opera House.
Eclecticism and fine dancing are the operative words here.
Highlights of the company's last two weeks at the Met include almost all of the spring season's new works, among them ballets by Agnes de Mille, Mats Ek, Ulysses Dove, John Selya, Glen Tetley and Michael Smuin.
The full-evening "Don Quixote" will also be danced, as will the de Mille classic "Fall River Legend" and "Bruch Violin Concerto," by Clark Tippet.
Performances are Mondays through Fridays at 8 P.M. and Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $95; standing room $8 to $12.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
June 8 to June 28
NEW YORK CITY BALLET, New York State Theater.
The new and the old will both be represented in the last three weeks of the company's spring season.
Dances from the company's Diamond Project for developing new ballets will be featured, as well as ballets by George Balanchine, Jerome Robbins, Peter Martins and Richard Tanner, all danced by familiar stars and up-and-coming youngsters.
Performances are Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M., Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M., and Sundays at 1 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $8 to $52.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
June 8
A CONCERT TO BENEFIT THE OUTBACK SERIES, Movement Research, 179 Varick Street, SoHo.
In the last few years, the Outback Series, a monthly showcase at the cozy little Gowanus Arts Exchange in Gowanus, Brooklyn, has become a favorite place for new and familiar choreographers to try out new work.
This benefit will include "Zey," a solo by Christopher Beck for the wise and antic veteran performer Irving Burton, and work by Martha Bowers, Instant Girl, David Parker, Claire Porter and Janine Williams.
The performance is at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $12 for the performance only or $50 for the performance and a reception.
Reservations: (718) 596-5250.
June 9
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE CENTER SEVENTH ANNUAL GALA PERFORMANCE, Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street, Manhattan.
In what tends to be one of the most exuberant dance events of the year, Ailey student dancers on the verge of professional careers perform.
This time they do excerpts from dances by Jose Limon and Bill T. Jones and new works by Raymond Harris and Dwight Rhoden, an Ailey dancer.
The performance is at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
Information: (212) 767-0590, extension 321.
June 18 to 21
WILD SPACE DANCE COMPANY, Bessie Schonberg Theater, 219 West 19th Street, Chelsea.
A chance to see this Milwaukee-based company in work by Debra Loewen that tends to be full of ideas and energy.
Performances are at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 ($9 for the elderly; Theater Development Fund vouchers accepted).
Reservations: (212) 924-0077.
June 19 to 21
ELEO POMARE DANCE COMPANY, Pace University Schimmel Center for the Arts, 3 Spruce Street, lower Manhattan.
What amounts to a retrospective of work by a leading American modern-dance choreographer, from a solo from Mr.
Pomare's signature "Blues for the Jungle" (1964) to two new pieces, one of them set to music by Miles Davis.
Performances are on June 19 and 20 at 8 P.M. and June 21 at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15; $10 for students and the elderly; Theater Development Fund vouchers accepted.
Reservations: (212) 346-1715.
June 20 to Aug. 2
DANCING IN THE STREETS, presenting free performances at two outdoor sites.
"Coney Island Special" features dance by Urban Bush Women, Marta Renzi, Elise Long and Doug Elkins at the Parachute Jump, Coney Island Boardwalk Brooklyn.
June 20 at 4 P.M. and June 21 from 2 to 6 P.M.
"Dances for Wave Hill" features work by Deborah Gladstein, Ariel Herrera, Claire Maxwell, Jennifer Monson and Ms.
Renzi at Wave Hill, 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Performances are on July 18, 19, 25 and 26 and Aug. 1 and 2 at 4 P.M.
Admission to Wave Hill: $4 (the elderly and students, $2; children under 6, free).
Information: (212) 989-6996.
June 22 to July 3
KIROV BALLET, Metropolitan Opera House.
Pristine, august yet curiously fresh, the Kirov represents traditional elegance and purity in the Russian ballet.
It will perform three full-evening ballets -- "Swan Lake," "Romeo and Juliet" and "La Bayadere" -- as well a program of dances by George Balanchine and Antony Tudor.
Performances are at 7 P.M. on opening night, then Mondays through Fridays at 8 P.M., and Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $125.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
Aug. 26 to 28
FIELDWORK MARATHON, Dia Center for the Arts, 155 Mercer Street, SoHo.
A chance for the adventurous to explore uncharted dance territory.
The marathon will feature new and recent work by 36 choreographers -- 12 each night -- in many styles and degrees of experience.
Presented by the Field, an organization that helps develop choreography and produce dance.
Performances are at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (212) 691-6969.


A Bright Idea, Practically Eternal
The United States, the Earth Summit reminds us, is the world's biggest energy user, and thus its biggest carbon dioxide producer.
But it is also the world's best energy inventor, and last week a California company revealed a light bulb that uses one-fourth the electricity of a standard incandescent bulb.
Intersource Technologies Inc., is bankrolled in part by American Electric Power, the Ohio-based multi-state utility that in some years is the nation's biggest customer for coal, a carbon-rich fuel.


Is Pornography to Blame?
To the Editor:
It is certainly educative to reflect upon the ad hominem nature of Roger Rosenblatt's response to my essay "Pornography and the New Puritans," for Mr.
Rosenblatt's letter (May 3) serves to illuminate the vast differences that exist between a literary and a journalistic sensibility -- differences that make it disingenuous of Mr.
Rosenblatt to describe our argument as an "old-fashioned kind of literary fight." The "literary" side of this fight is entirely mine: Bret Easton Ellis's novel "American Psycho" should have been reviewed at the time of its publication, especially in The Book Review.
What's written about any book three months in advance of its publication is mere gossip; Mr.
Rosenblatt, as an eager reporter, was contributing to the gossip.


The MacArthur Truffle Hunt
Like sweeping the lottery or landing a movie contract in a Hollywood soda shop, winning a MacArthur fellowship has become an American fantasy: the ringing phone, the congratulations from foundation headquarters, the neighbors' awe, the colleagues' grinding envy, the lifetime of lonely creative struggle justified, the fat quarterly checks.
Those designated MacArthur fellows have learned of their no-strings grants while mowing a suburban New Jersey lawn, dining in a San Francisco artist's loft, climbing the Wind River Range in Wyoming, camping with Australian aborigines.
First reactions are seldom inventive:


Helene Berenholz, A. D. van Beuren
Dr. and Mrs.
William Yarrow of Elkins Park, Pa., have announced August wedding plans for Mrs.
Yarrow's daughter Helene Berenholz and Archbold Dorrance van Beuren, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. van Beuren of Middletown, R.I.
Miss Berenholz is also the daughter of the late Victor Berenholz.
A graduate of Temple University, she owns Glass Options, a glass restoration and design company in Philadelphia.
Her father was a women's clothing manufacturer in Philadelphia.
Her stepfather is a physician in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Irene Yarrow, owns the Domestic Employment Agency in Jenkintown, Pa.


CRIME
Like the fine Victorian literature whose style and period it brilliantly evokes, THE VANISHED CHILD (Ballantine, $20) tells a grim tale of murder and duplicity in stately prose that subtly enhances the psychological horrors.
Sarah Smith's "intellectual, immoral and unstable" hero, Baron Alexander von Reisden, becomes enmeshed in the tortured history of a New York family named Knight when the family's aged physician notes his resemblance to young Richard Knight, who vanished 20 years before, on the same evening in 1887 that his grandfather was murdered.
For reasons that have more to do with his own clouded childhood than with matters of inheritance, Reisden impersonates the missing heir while secretly searching for his murderer.
"Someone killed Richard," he reasons.
"Now Richard wants to know why."
But the complexity of Reisden's position becomes unbearable to him when he falls in love with the present heir's 17-year-old fiancee, a Jamesian innocent whose awakening to the worldly "Richard" sends the story into a delicious romantic swoon.
Ms.
Smith conveys this passion with delicacy and formality; but a quiet rage rises when she writes of the social mores and male attitudes that conspire to keep the girl in bondage.
By the time we learn what actually became of Richard, the author has prepared for the shock by displaying in stunning detail both the privileged life of upper-class society and the cruel forms of abuse and repression from which it secretly drew its strengths.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Jeff Faino and Leif McKinley, pitchers, and Tony Sheffield, outfielder.


Stamp of Approval
It may not set off a wave of letter-writing, but the selection last week of the youthful Elvis Presley for a new 29-cent postage stamp to be released in 1993 seemed destined to create thousands of new stamp collectors.
Going directly to the people for the first time, the United States Postal Service invited Americans to vote on whether the rock king should be memorialized as a handsome youth or as the older, more experienced idol he became.


Taking N.B.A. Officials to Task
To the Sports Editor:
I was always taught that rules of games were established so all players would be treated equally in similar situations.


A Man Of Courage, Too
To the Editor:
Charles Sterling is as great a scholar and as felicitous a writer as he is portrayed by John Russell in "The Louvre Honors a Patron Saint of French Painting"  [ May 17 ] .
In addition, he is courageous, a virtue as rare in the art world as in all others.


After a Fresh Look, U.S. Decides to Still Steer Clear of Iran
In the course of three and a half years, Bush Administration officials have made it a habit, when asked about the state of relations between the United States and Iran, to respond in the same kind of shorthand President Bush used in his inaugural address in January, 1989.
"Good will begets good will," said the President, who in 1990 seemed so open to improving ties to Teheran that he took what he thought was a phone call from Iran's President, Hashemi Rafsanjani, only to discover well into the conversation that he was talking to an impostor.
So it seemed natural that Washington might reward Teheran after it stayed neutral in the Persian Gulf war in early 1991 and used its influence -- and its money -- to persuade Iranian-backed groups in Lebanon to free the last American hostage last December.
Indeed, earlier this year, Richard N. Haass, the chief White House aide on the Middle East, launched the first formal review of American policy toward Iran since the first months of the Bush Administration.
He floated the idea that the Administration consider a strategy of "constructive engagement" by lifting some economic sanctions, according to participants in the review process.


Democrat's Advisers Divided on Options: Attack, or Let Him Self-Destruct?
As they rest here after a bruising primary campaign, Gov.
Bill Clinton and his aides are of two minds about how to handle Ross Perot, who changed the rules of the campaign just as the Arkansas Governor was seizing the Democratic Presidential nomination.
Some would like to attack Mr.
Perot more directly; others favor holding back.
They appear to have settled on something in between, a course that reflects Mr.
Clinton's own ambivalence about how to take on the opponent who has assumed the outsider role that Mr.
Clinton had coveted for himself.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ARTS CENTER'S MARKS 20TH YEAR
The Farmington Valley Arts Center in Avon is celebrating its 20th anniversary with an Open Arts Day today from 2 to 5 P.M.
An exhibition, scheduled through Aug. 25, will premiere today, featuring the work of more than 40 artists who have had studios at the center since 1972.
Gallery hours are Tuesdays through Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.


Putting Together African Inspiration And Found Objects
TIME was when the only Saar on the scene was the collagist Betye, whose large show has just closed at the University of Hartford.
Then, in the mid-1980's, came Betye's daughter, Alison, following the same route.
And now, her "Inside Looking In" is playing the Neuberger Museum, on the State University of New York's campus here.
Far from downplaying the relationship, Alison opens her show with a piece made by the two of them.
At a time when ego is everything, such a gesture speaks of a rare inner security.
But it could also be regarded as a compliment returned to Betye, who has periodically incorporated Alison's childhood drawings in her work.


Nina Chapin, P. N. de Rochefort
Nancy N. Oliver of Rochester, Vt., and Aldus H. Chapin of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Nancy Higgins Chapin to Pierre Nicolas de Rochefort, a son of the Count and Countess de Rochefort of New York.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Chapin, 32 years old, known as Nina, graduated from Clark University.
She is the international relief services associate for Africa at the American National Red Cross in Washington.
Her father is the president of the United Arts Organization of Greater Washington, an arts fund-raising organization.
Her stepmother, Dolly Langdon Chapin, is an author in Washington.
The bride's stepfather, John B. Oliver, is a retired C.I.A. official.


Laurie Glassman, Adam Wisnewski
Dr.
Laurie C. Glassman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George M. Glassman of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Adam V. Wisnewski, a son of Thomas Wisnewski of Trenton and Jean Dunay of Wickford, R.I.
The Rev.
Janet Cooper Nelson, a United Church of Christ minister who is the Brown University chaplain, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Nathaniel Porter Inn in Warren, R.I.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; Engine Company 22, and a 1901 Rowhouse Concert
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
Engine Company 22
Q.
A photograph shows my grandfather
,
Charles Buschkamper, a fireman with Engine Company 22
,
somewhere in Yorkville.
We think the picture was taken between 1908 and 1910 but we don't know where. . . .
Marlene E. Haresign, Water Mill, L.I.
A.
The Engine Company 22 building shown in the photograph was built in 1863 at 159 East 85th Street.
It was demolished around 1960 for the white-brick firehouse now on the site.
The change from horse-drawn to motorized fire vehicles began in 1907, but it is difficult to date this photo more closely than that.
Around this time your grandfather lived at 534 East 85th Street.
A Concert Site
Q.
The artist Arthur B. Davies attended a concert at 114 East or West 86th Street in April of 1901.
Is it possible to determine who lived there at the time?
The sponsor may have been one of his future patrons. . . .
Bennard
Perlman, Baltimore.
A.
The building at 114 East 86th Street was a convent at this time and thus 114 West 86th Street, a 10-year-old rowhouse, was apparently the site.
In this period there were two major address-related sources for residential occupancy: census listings and the Phillips Elite Directory, a guide to householders, which listed William Roome, a tea importer, at 114 West 86th Street.
The Federal census of 1900 and a New York State census of 1905 are both on microfilm at the New York Public Library.
The 1900 census lists Roome, age 60, with his wife, Christiana, age 55, but no other family.
However they shared the four-story house with three servants and seven boarders: Catharine Clark, 18, Jennie Phelps, 32, Henrietta Woodman, a teacher, 58, Ambrose Roylan, a bookkeeper, 27, Charles Phelps, a traveling salesman, 29, William Savining, a clerk, 23, and Frank Whiting, 27, an architect.
Boarders in fairly new, middle-grade rowhouses were not uncommon in this period.
Franny Eberhardt, in a study of rowhouses built for the Rhinelander family in the 1880's, notes that boarders were often taken into these houses quite soon after they were built. 139 East 66th Street
Q.
Our apartment house, 139 East 66th Street, appears to have had a metal and glass marquee over its front door, since removed.
Can you find a photograph of it at the time of construction? . . .
Walter Deane, Manhattan.
A.
No.
This building was designed by Rouse &amp; Goldstone for the Brixton Holding Company and completed in 1918.
Although no architectural photograph of your building has been located, the apartment house at the northeast corner of 66th Street and Lexington was photographed in 1930.
This was taken from a high point and offers an oblique view of the marquee on your building.
Early large apartment houses were typically built without entry shelters, but in the 1890's a fashion was established for hard-top marquees like this one.
They are rare on apartment houses after 1910, andby the World War I years canvas canopies on pipe frames were becoming typical.
Rouse &amp; Goldstone designed a similar building at 120 West 70th Street in the same year for the same client.
This, too, had a marquee that has since been lost.  14 East 126th Street
Q.
My mother, Helen Beatrice Cohn, was born into the house of her maternal grandfather, Morris Schattman, somewhere in the East 120's.
Did they build it?
How long did they live there? . . .
Edie Brown Eisenberg, Woodmere, L.I.
A.
The brownstone rowhouse at 14 East 126th Street was built in 1875 by Thomas Hanson along with three others, 16 through 20.
Morris Schattman, who operated a clothing business at 477 Broadway, lived at 310 West 46th Street until he bought the 126th Street house in 1887.
Several Schattman and Cohn family members are listed here through the 1910's but the Schattmans lost the house in a foreclosure in 1915.
Zabriskie/Zborowski Mansion
Q.
On Sundays we used to visit my grandmother, Anne Reynolds, the forewoman of Claremont Park in the Morrisania section of the Bronx.
I think the building
she lived in was called the Zabriskie Mansion, but it
i
s now gone. Is there a photograph of it? . . . Msgr. Edward J. Reynolds, Manhattan.
A.
Yes, in The New York Public Library.
There are conflicting accounts about the house although most give 1859 as the date of its construction.
It appears that it was built by Martin Zabriskie, a Polish immigrant who prospered in real estate ventures.
He married Anne Morris, whose family had extensive real estate holdings in the Bronx and city directories show him relocating to the Bronx from a house on West 14th Street in Manhattan in 1859.
Zabriskie died a millionaire in 1878, at which time the family adopted the spelling Zborowski, the name usually attached to the house today.
In 1888, the city acquired the house and land, taking the estate's name, Claremont, for a new park.
By 1912, the house was being used as the office of the Bronx Department of Parks.
It was demolished sometime before World War II.
Hobey Baker
Q.
I am preparing a biography of Hobey Baker, the great collegiate hockey and football star.
In 1915 to 1916, after graduating from Princeton, he lived in a house owned by the Pyne family at Madison and 39th Street.
Did they build it?
What did it look like? . . .
Jay W. Cheek, Manhattan.
A.
No, this big brownstone house at 263 Madison Avenue was built in 1864 by John H. Sherwood, a real estate investor.
The Moses Taylor Pyne family bought the house, which had four stories and a basement, in 1902 and then lived in it.
It was demolished in the early 1950's for the office building now on the site.


Q and A
Mortgage Adjustment Question: I have a mortgage on a condominium in New Jersey that I rent out and I have been unemployed for more than a year.
My mortgage is held by Chase Mortgage Corporation.
When I called to discuss a way of reducing my monthly payments to avoid foreclosure, I was told such assistance is available only after a mortgage holder becomes delinquent.
Apparently the mortgage had been sold to Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and Chase must follow its rules when it comes to changes.
It seems to me that since I would not qualify for a regular re-financing, the lender would be willing to do something to help me stay out of foreclosure.
Is there anything I can do? . . .
Terence Wall, Hillsdale, N.J.
Answer: Probably not.
Ken Mills, a spokesman for Chase Manhattan Bank, of which Chase Manhattan Mortgage Corporation is a subsidiary, said that it is not a Chase policy to wait until a mortgage holder has fallen behind in payments to assist with a loan payment adjustment.
But it is true that any adjustments on loans sold to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac, would have to be made with its approval.


Mimi Melek, Ted Hill
Meryem Y. Melek and Theodore G. Hill were married yesterday at the Brooklyn Society for Ethical Culture.
Dr.
Barbara Raines, an Ethical Culture leader, officiated.
Ms.
Melek, who is 28 years old and keeping her name, is a developmental editor at HarperCollins in New York.
She is known as Mimi.
She graduated from Oberlin College, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Kemal H. Melek.


Rachel Donham, Charles Wray
Rachel Donham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brett Donham of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday in Dover, Mass., to Charles Gregory Wray, a son of Anita E. Stahlgren of Denver and Michael B. Wray of Richmond.
The Rev.
Thomas Niblock performed the Congregational ceremony at the Dover Church.
Mrs.
Wray, 28 years old, is a project manager in New York for the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and has a master's degree in environmental science from the University of Maryland.
Her father, an architect, is a founder of the Boston architectural firm of Donham &amp; Sweeny.
Her mother, Priscilla B. Donham, is a therapeutic riding instructor at Windrush Farm Inc. in Boxford, Mass.


Graf Is Game, but Seles Is Set and Match at the French
Monica Seles provided a guttural soundtrack for this most grand of Grand Slam finales today, and in the end, she didn't lose her voice or her French Open crown.
Steffi Graf provided a silent and tireless threat, and after climbing back from a paralyzing first set, valiantly rescued herself from five match points.
But because of the killer instincts of Seles, the No. 1 player in the world, the herculean effort by the German to reclaim a title she last held in 1988 was in vain, and she lost, 6-2, 3-6, 10-8.


Corrections
The Wall Street column on May 17, about the Reichmann family of Canada, included one company erroneously among those in which the family took a position of 5 percent or more during the 1980's.
The 13-D Research Service, source of the data, now reports that the Reichmanns never had such a stake in Gold Standard Inc., a small Salt Lake City gold exploration company.


TV Turns Israel Elections Into a Family Feud
A television commercial for the opposition Labor Party shows overstuffed men in suits smoking cigars and enjoying what the viewer may assume is an indecently good time with some women in a hotel room.
The message: Government politicians are corrupt.
In a commercial for the governing Likud Party, a lighted cigarette is doused in a whisky glass.
The message: Don't forget the allegations (all denied) that the new opposition leader is a problem drinker.


China Browses for Tanks, Aircraft and Carrier in Ex-Soviet Lands
In a shopping mission that could affect the military balance in Asia, China is browsing in the former Soviet Union for jet fighters, tanks and possibly even an aircraft carrier, specialists say.
Partly enticed by a plethora of Soviet military hardware on the market, China has been aggressively trying to modernize its arsenal with newlyallocated money from its central budget.
Its economic boom has also boosted its financial clout so that it may be possible for China to acquire a long-sought aircraft carrier.


Update; Roaming Black Bear Almost Takes Manhattan
The saga of the wayward black bear that wandered into the heart of suburbia in Paramus, N.J., late last month ended Thursday night in a bumpy encounter with a car just across the Hudson River from Manhattan.
The animal, a 190-pound, two-year old male, was hit at 11 P.M. as it ran across Closter Dock Road near the Palisades in Alpine, N.J.
The bear suffered a dislocated right rear hip and torn tendons; the motorist was not hurt.


Talking: Divorce; Coming To Terms On a Home
EQUITABLY dividing a couple's assets during a divorce is getting more difficult as their home -- normally their prime asset -- -- falls in value in a weakened real estate market.
"The bad market has made all our problems even harder to settle," said Malcolm Petrook, executive vice president of the Bromley Group, a Manhattan financial services publicity firm.
Mr.
Petrook, who had a home in Briarcliff Manor, was divorced last year.


G.O.P.'s Health Insurance Plan Steals Divided Democrats' Thunder
While Congressional Democrats struggled to find a consensus on health-care legislation, House Republicans offered a plan this week that they contend will cure some flaws in existing health insurance and encourage Americans to try to hold costs down.
House Democrats, despite serious disagreements among themselves, continued to press for consensus on a broader measure that they could vote on before the Democratic National Convention opens on July 13, in a move they believe would show support for their party's prospective nominee, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


FILM: Sets Big and Small Challenge Movie Makers; 'Night on Earth': Was Filming Inside a Cab A Deadly Trap?
All right, so there were a few glitches.
Like the night the cinematographer almost got dumped into the East River.
Or the time four actors trapped in a taxi got stranded on trolley tracks in Finland, with trains coming from both directions.
And yes, instead of shooting on five of the tiniest sets in film history, Jim Jarmusch could have made his new movie, "Night on Earth," on a nice, big sound stage.
But then it wouldn't have been a Jim Jarmusch movie.
"Night on Earth" -- the widely praised bittersweet comedy that Mr.
Jarmusch wrote, directed and produced -- is composed of five cab-driver-meets-fare stories that take place on a single night in Los Angeles, New York, Paris, Rome and Helsinki.
Nearly all the action unrolls inside the taxis, which creates a kind of artistic straitjacket, both technically and esthetically.
"It was like working in miniature," said Mr.
Jarmusch.
"But we decided that somehow the limitations of the film would have to become its strengths."


OLD LINKS TO EAST NOW VEX GERMANS
Former dissidents and human rights advocates who were repressed by the Communist Government of East Germany have stirred a national debate by questioning in hindsight the wisdom of Ostpolitik, the West German policy of seeking closer ties with the Communist East.
It is a debate that reflects the reunited Germany's troubled efforts to come to terms with its divided history, when the Berlin wall separated Germans physically, politically and spiritually.


Update; Ailing Map Company Saved by Merger
It looked as if 80 years of mapping American roads would end in February, when the venerable General Drafting Company of Convent Station, N.J., was acquired by an Ohio telephone marketing group that provides travelers with computerized trip routing.
Admired for decades by mapmakers, geographers and business travelers for the clarity and style of its maps, General Drafting's cartographic division had nevertheless been a money loser in recent years.
Its new owners, Family Vacation Services of Columbus, Ohio, said at the time that G.D.C. needed to be merged with another company.
"We're going to see it through," said Rick Milenthal, president of the Ohio group.


Delegates at Earth Summit Plan a Watchdog Agency
Diplomats attending the Earth Summit said today that they had achieved a broad consensus in favor of setting up a high-level watchdog group to insure that governments respect the pledges they make here.
The new international body, to be called the Sustainable Development Commission, would rely heavily on evidence gathered by private environmental groups.


John Charles Doerfer, 87, Is Dead; Headed F.C.C. in Era of Scandals
John Charles Doerfer, who headed the Federal Communications Commission during controversies over payments to disk jockeys and quiz shows scandals and who was forced out of office for vacationing on a broadcaster's yacht, died on Friday at his home in Boston.
He was 87 years old and died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Lake Michigan Car Ferry Back
The 100-year-old ferry across Lake Michigan is back after a break of a year and a half, with a new focus: passengers.
The newly renovated Badger, which had been used primarily to transport railroad freight cars as well as a few automobiles and passengers across the lake, began daily round trips last month, carrying passengers and their cars between Ludington, Mich., and Manitowoc, Wis.
The 60-mile crossing takes four hours.
The Lake Michigan Carferry Service, the only cross-lake ferry operating on the Great Lakes, provides access to beaches and resorts.
The Badger's new owner, Charles Conrad, a local entrepreneur, says that more than $500,000 was spent on improving the vessel and adding two restaurants and lounge and enclosing a deck.


On Sunday; A Wild Streak Is Uncovered At Princeton
THE judge stared coldly at the 22 defendants and asked if they understood the charges they were about to plead guilty to.
"Derek Austin?"
"I don't know if I was disorderly, judge," said the Princeton sophomore.
"But I was naked."


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
OVER THE GREEN HILLS.
Written and illustrated by Rachel Isadora.
Greenwillow. $14. (Ages 4 and up) Richly colored illustrations capture a pleasant day's adventure as Zolani and his mother and baby sister visit Grandma Zindzi.
The sky is open and blue, and the South African landscape is vivid.


Corrections
An article on May 17 about Sigourney Weaver misidentifed the actress's first film.
It was "Madman," made in 1976.


Cynthia Sinnott, Daniel Offermann
The engagement of Cynthia Marie Sinnott and Daniel Allen Offermann, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Offermann of River Forest, Ill., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Sinnott of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sinnott, 26 years old, graduated from Curry College and is the assistant cosmetics buyer at Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
Her father is the president and a co-chief executive officer of the Marsh &amp; McLennan insurance brokerage in New York.


Italy Faces Peril of Unwanted Balkan Refugees
As if to remind her of the explosiveness of her portfolio, Margherita Boniver, Italy's Immigration Minister, keeps the tail fin of a mortar round on her desk -- a souvenir of a stay in Dubrovnik last year, when she oversaw an evacuation of women and children from the besieged Croatian port.
As if to reinforce the point, an aide has decorated an anteroom with photos of thousands of skinny and half-clad Albanians, clinging to and leaping from a rusting freighter, who tried to force their way into Italy as economic fugitives and were repulsed.


'Peter Pan' In Its Surviving Version
THE Children's Theater Series of the Candlewood Playhouse here is not to begin performances for another week or so, but that is only a technicality.
Even though "Peter Pan," which opened the professional summer season on May 26, bears the imprimatur of Broadway, the production is so minor it might as well be "Peter Rabbit."
Forget that in any version J. M. Barrie's 1904 play is a rueful -- some say, bitter -- contemplation on vanished youth.
A New York Times review in 1916 put it this way: "Peter Pan is not children at play, but an old man smiling -- and smiling a little sadly -- as he watches children at play."


Cape Ann
Massachusetts's other cape has somehow remained both undiscovered and unspoiled.
Jutting out in the Atlantic roughly 40 miles north of Boston and 40 miles south of New Hampshire, Cape Ann has elements of virtually every New England landscape.
Wide, sandy beaches contrast with a harsh, rocky coastline that surrounds the island.
Deep woods are dotted with plunging granite quarries.
There are miles of rocks bordering the sea to hike along, yet the cape rises to a great enough height for picnics on a grassy knoll with expansive ocean views.
While there are a number of tiny villages and communities that make up Cape Ann, all roads lead to the two major towns: Rockport and Gloucester.
Rockport is a picturesque New England village with historic bed and breakfasts, galleries and its famous crafts shopping area, Bearskin Neck, alongside Rockport Harbor.
Adjoining Gloucester is America's oldest fishing port with a working fleet that adds a rough authenticity to this community rich with local artists.
While the cape's population grows noticeably on a hot summer's day, a traffic jam by Long Island Expressway standards is unheard of, and the local flavor of the two towns is not lost in a flood of tourists.


MADE TO MEASURE
Is Ferris for real?
I have one breast, instead of two, the result of a recent mastectomy, and have no plans for reconstructive surgery.
I am too busy trying to save my life to worry about things cosmetic in nature.
I never gave implants a thought.
When will women realize that the size of their bust is of no consequence?
LINDA BALDWIN
Butler, N.J.


Eli, a Star Talker, Is Afraid of Crank Calls
People are always telling Eli from Westchester that he's bigger in real life.
"I'll be talking to someone and all of a sudden they'll say, 'Hey, aren't you that guy who calls all the radio stations?' " said the 235-pound electronics salesman.
"They tell me they thought I was a little guy, like Spike Lee with those glasses he has."


Pastrami, Po' Boys (Even Focaccias!) to Go
MUCH of what there is to say about food in New York can be summed up in a sandwich.
The deli sandwich, classically corned beef or pastrami (or both), or a bagel with cream cheese and smoked salmon represent New York as graphically as the Empire State Building.
But so does the old-fashioned tuna salad sandwich, thanks to which the per-capita consumption of canned tuna is higher in New York City than anywhere else in the country.


U.S. Documents Raise Questions Over Iraq Policy
Newly declassified State Department documents provide further evidence that even as the Reagan and Bush Administrations forged ahead with a policy of conciliation toward Saddam Hussein, they were amassing evidence of Iraq's military capabilities and regional ambitions, its harboring of Palestinian terrorists and its eradication of political opponents.
While senior officials publicly portrayed the Iraqi President as having curbed his radical impulses, some privately characterized him as a totalitarian leader whose world view, in the words of one State Department memo in September 1988, "is that of a conspirator who believes that power comes from the barrel of a gun."


MAY 31-JUNE 6: Haiti; Choice of Prime Minister Won't Win Washington
Amid growing popular calls for the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the military-backed Government nominated Marc L. Bazin as Haiti's new Prime Minister last week.
The action was widely seen as a bid by the Haitian Army to find a formula short of restoring Mr.
Aristide that will persuade the international community to lift a crushing economic embargo.
For years, Haitian intellectuals and political activists, particularly those on the left, have referred to United States policy as the "American Plan," which they said was intended to prevent Haiti's development so as to preserve it as a cheap labor pool.
To many of these Haitians, nobody was more associated with this supposed policy than the 60-year-old Mr.
Bazin, a former World Bank official who is as fluent in conservative development theories as he is in accent-less English.
If his long cozy relations with Washington were expected to obtain the United States' acquiescence in attempts to finally dispose of Father Aristide, however, initial signs suggest they have failed badly.


Is Pornography to Blame?
To the Editor:
As the executive director of the Nassau County chapter of the New York Civil Liberties Union, I would like to respond to Andrea Dworkin's attack on John Irving for opposing a bill that would make pornographers responsible for sex crimes.
Ms.
Dworkin abandons the usual claim that pornography causes crime in favor of the claim that pornography is a crime itself because it degrades all women and recruits as participants those who, like her, have been sexually abused.


Got a Perot Headache? 8-Way Relief: DEMOCRATS; We Fear the Future
My advice to Governor Clinton is simple.
Listen to what the people are saying because their message reveals a glacier of discontent.
The people are restless.
They are angry and they are frustrated.
We are restless because we feel pushed against the wall by forces we cannot fight alone and Washington is not on our side.
Our jobs are disappearing and our children are without prospects.


Nuclear Fingerprints All Over, but Try to Find the Hands
In the 12-state archipelago of toxic blight that is the Government's nuclear-bomb production complex, there are thousands of environmental horrors, chemical and radioactive pollution that would take tens of billions of dollars to stabilize, let alone clean up.
But there has been only one criminal conviction for causing such damage.
It was last Monday against Rockwell International, which for 15 years made plutonium triggers for hydrogen bombs under contract with the Department of Energy at its Rocky Flats plant near Denver.
The company, in a plea bargain, admitted to 5 felonies and 5 misdemeanors and agreed to pay $18.5 million for mishandling wastes.
There are unlikely to be any other convictions.


Barbara Pape, Andrew Aaron
Barbara Pape and Andrew Stephen Aaron were married yesterday at the Hudson, N.Y., home of Peter Aaron, the bridegroom's brother.
Thomas D. Schindler, a justice of the Town of Claverack, N.Y., officiated.
Ms.
Pape, who is 31 years old and keeping her name, is the manager of physician billing systems at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
A graduate of Rutgers University, she is a daughter of Eileen P. and Kenneth L. Pape Jr. of Matawan, N.J.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a systems engineer for International Business Machines in Cranford, N.J.


Film
June
"HOUSESITTER." Steve Martin, who can make anything funny, tries to pass off Goldie Hawn as his wife in this romantic comedy.
Frank Oz, who also made "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels" and was the voice of Miss Piggy, can be a pretty funny director himself..
Opens June 12.
"BATMAN RETURNS." Michael Keaton returns.
The director Tim Burton returns.
Mega-publicity returns.
The tantalizing newcomers are Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman and Danny DeVito as the Penguin.
Opens June 19.


Theater
June
"THE PRICE." Two estranged brothers meet after many years to dispose of their dead father's belongings in this revival of Arthur Miller's 1968 drama.
The cost of furniture is debated.
So is the cost of one's actions.
Hector Elizondo, Eli Wallach, Jonathan Banks and Debra Mooney make up the cast; John Tillinger directs.
Currently in previews; opens June 10.
Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: $35 to $39.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


LOW-COUNTRY COMFORT
PAWLEYS ISLAND is a small stretch of sand that lies about 25 miles and a couple hundred light years south of Myrtle Beach on the South Carolina coast.
If they've heard of it at all, Northerners identify Pawleys with the rope hammocks made there.
Those who have actually set foot on the place tend to speak of it in hushed tones, perhaps fearing it might disappear if they talk about it too loudly.
Having spent a week at Pawleys for all but one of the past 17 summers, I think the reverence may be overdone -- but not by much.
With its four miles of sandy white beach and endearingly motley collection of cottages -- many with a view of the Atlantic Ocean in the front and lush marshland out back -- Pawleys is unquestionably lovable.
For years, the term "arrogantly shabby" has been attached to it.
While many of the houses blown away by Hurricane Hugo a couple of years ago now have much grander replacements, that description still fits.


The Collaboration In the Night Kitchen
CHRISTOPHER BEACH, director of the Performing Arts Center here on the campus of the State University of New York, did more than name-drop when he announced the center's impressive lineup of artists for next season.
He also introduced a literary figure as beloved to parents as to the children who happily snuggle up with his books.
Maurice Sendak, the author and illustrator of such books as "Where the Wild Things Are" and "In the Night Kitchen," took the podium on the stage of Theater B to describe to an invited audience his new venture, the Night Kitchen: A National Children's Theater.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, percent change
1.3
0.7
Consumer credit, in billions
$1.61
$0.10
Thursday
Retail sales, percent change
0.9
0.5
Producer price index, percent change
0.2
0.3
Friday
Consumer price index, percent change
0.2
0.3
Monday: Pentecost holiday, markets closed in much of Europe
Tuesday: Non-farm productivity * European Community economic and finance ministers meet
Thursday: Weekly jobless claims
Friday: Real earnings
(Sosurce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Anne S. Moffitt, Ian D. Williams
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Moffitt of Fairfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Stewart Moffitt to Ian Douglass Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Williams of Leesburg, Va.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Moffitt, 27 years old, is a teacher at St.
David's School in New York.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is a financial consultant in Fairfield.


Dreams Deferred: A Class of '85, 7 Years Later/A special report.; Certain Only of Uncertainty, Ex-Classmates Seek a Future
The smokestacks along the Ohio River Valley still make the nighttime mists glow red, but they barely warm the economies of old river communities like Marietta, Ohio; Parkersburg, W. Va., and the once-prosperous town of Sistersville.
If these towering cylinders are already an icon of America's past, the young men and women of Sistersville are an emblem of its uncertain present.
Seven years after graduation, two-thirds of the Sistersville High School Class of 1985 is still here, 25-year-old men and women depending on dead-end jobs or part-time work, or scrambling for one of the dwindling number of lucrative factory jobs.
Like Many Towns
Some who have good jobs are upbeat about their futures.
Others, though flush with annual incomes of $35,000 or $40,000, have little confidence that the good times will last or that they can find something better elsewhere.


Conversations/Two Families in Tajikistan; An Empire's Retreat Strands Exiles In a Place They Had Called Home
Valery B. Akhadov, a film maker who is half-Tajik but speaks only Russian, is charming, impish, cosmopolitan and increasingly at sea in the country of Tajikistan, a fragment of the broken Soviet Union that is defining itself by its Persian and Islamic roots.
He tells a lot of silly and extremely funny jokes over a long and lavish dinner, and then, suddenly, one full of poignancy.
A Georgian walking on a beach hears someone out at sea, crying for help, but in Russian.
He walks on as the cries continue, and then finally turns and yells out toward the water: "Better than learning Russian you should have learned how to swim!"
Mr.
Akhadov's wife, Zulfiya Mirshakar, an ethnic Pamir and professor of Russian, has no doubt heard this joke before, but still averts her face.


Pamela Norrell, Nicholas West
Pamela Jan Norrell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Norrell of Mission Viejo, Calif., was married yesterday in Los Angeles to Nicholas Salter West, a son of Patricia Bradshaw of New York and the late Davenport West Jr.
The Rev.
Carroll Barbour, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride and groom.
Mrs.
West, 38 years old, graduated from the University of Kansas.
She is a freelance interior designer in Los Angeles.
Her father is the western region sales manager in Mission Viejo for the shoe division of Etienne Aigner, the accessories company.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Written In Indelible Ink
To the Editor:
Oh, what memories Ethan Mordden brought back in his article "When the Go-Everywhere Song Grew Exclusive"  [ May 17 ] .
At age 84, I recall George and Ira Gershwin attending rehearsals of my only hit Broadway show: "Tip-Toes," starring Queenie Smith and Alan Kearns.
I was a chorus boy; I still remember the lyrics.
After that musical -- my first Gershwin show -- came flop after flop for me.
Is it any wonder I left Broadway and joined the circus as an acrobat?
CARL K. MELTZER Liberty, N. Y.


Jocelyn Campbell, John Palmer
William G. Campbell of Pelham Manor, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Jocelyn Wight Campbell, to John Wentworth Palmer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Palmer of Haverford, Pa.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Campbell, who is also a daughter of the late Marilyn Knapp Campbell, is a securities analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Smith College, and she and the bridegroom-to-be received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.
Her father is a managing director of Campbell, Cowperthwait &amp; Company, an investment advisory concern in New York.


Informal Concerts For Serious Reasons
At a Baltimore symphony Casual Concert two seasons ago, David Zinman told a story before conducting a Tchaikovsky symphony.
The Soviet musicologist Irina Bubulina -- "a leading correspondent for Pravda, Rolling Stone and The National Enquirer" -- had produced evidence that Tchaikovsky staged his own death and burial, then secretly immigrated to Baltimore.
Several aged local musicians actually remembered how Tchaikovsky sipped tea from a samovar while telling stories of the old days.
Mr.
Zinman even played a tape recording of one such reminiscence: "He spit a lot. He was sort of creepy looking. I only knew he was some old guy who used to write music."
A second tape -- a wax cylinder recorded by Thomas Edison, with whom Tchaikovsky worked on such inventions as the light bulb, the phonograph and his-and-her Band-Aids -- revealed
Tchaikovsky's own voice
.
And so Mr.
Zinman's audience heard Tchaikovsky himself, through decades of sonic grit accumulated by the old recording, describe the program for his Fourth Symphony.


For the Museum-Shy, Science on the Streets
Science, typically confined to the laboratory and classroom, is about to spill out to the streets of New York.
The New York Hall of Science has already set up one prototype exhibit and hopes to start setting up the rest next month at 30 or so points around Manhattan, and a few in Queens.
The exhibits, together called Science City, will be at bus stops, in parks, by the docks of the East River, on the sides and tops of buildings, in the subways, in airport terminals -- any public space where people may be lured to consider the science and technology of everyday life.


The Perfect Gift for U.S. Team: a Tie
When the outside of his right foot was called upon to deliver a soccer ball into Italy's waiting net from 13 yards, John Harkes had little time to ponder 58 years of United States soccer futility.
"I wasn't thinking about that," Harkes said after his goal in the 23d minute gave the United States national soccer team a 1-1 tie with Italy and clinched the United States Cup title.
"There were four or five of us scrambling around. I was busy screaming at Tab Ramos to touch the ball to me in the box.


Starters Still Bringing Yankees Down
Just as the Yankees were repairing to answer questions about their bullpen, what with the possibility of a forced leave facing Steve Howe, another crisis has reached out and tripped up the team.
Starting pitching, that variable the Yankees had so tenderly nursed through the start of the season, last night continued to give new meaning to the term "June swoon." Scott Kamieniecki, unable to extract himself or his fellow rotation members from the doldrums of a June without a victory, was roughed up mightily by the Detroit Tigers, who powered their way to a 6-2 victory.


An Uptick for Home Sales in the Region
SPURRED by low interest rates and lower prices, the residential real estate market in the New York metropolitan region, which has been dramatically deflated by a three-year recession and rapidly changing demographics, appears, for the most part, to be taking a slight upward turn.
Few real estate analysts, however, expect a sharp rise in sales volume for one-family homes, co-op apartments or condominiums anytime soon.
Nor do they expect sale prices in the foreseeable future to return to the heights of the middle to late 80's.


Sarah Watts, Charles Beneke 2d
Sarah Elizabeth Watts, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Watts of New York, was married yesterday to Charles Claus Beneke 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Beneke 2d of Suffolk, Va.
The Rev.
Charles Haskins performed the ceremony at Christ and St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Beneke, 24 years old, graduated from Kenyon College.
She is an assistant teacher at the Brearley School and will teach at Collegiate School in the fall.
Her father is a senior partner at Dewey Ballantine, a corporate and litigation law firm in New York.
Her mother, Edith Watts, is an educator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Landscapes Have the Look of Au Nature
NATIVE plants are definitely in these days.
These are the plants that belong, that have been growing around the area for centuries and are a part of the natural landscape.
Many of these indigenous plants are truly beautiful to see.
Witness the glorious blooms on the lovely pinkshell azalea (Rhododendron vaseyi).
Its magnificent pink flowers cover the shrubs and decorate sunny hillsides.
Although this particular azalea is essentially a Southern native species of the Blue Ridge Mountains, it is available outside its natural range at nurseries.
This is one woody plant that could be grown more often, but too few gardeners know about it.


A Simple Thank You, Thanks
The cards are small and white, with or without colored border, containing short, scrawled messages.
These little missives mean only one thing: you're about to be stroked.
Lately they've been pouring in from all quarters, a Niagara of effusive appreciation.


Are Our Values for Hair Or Humanity?
With great outrage, we read your story about Mineola High School's unusual "hair fashion style"  [ "Hair Statements," Long Island Journal, May 10 ] .
What values do we bring up our youth today?
If it had to be, could it not have been a "library with little books" or a "museum with little paintings"?
But the Long Island Expressway with cars on top?


Landscapes Have the Look of Au Nature
NATIVE plants are definitely in these days.
These are the plants that belong, that have been growing around the area for centuries and are a part of the natural landscape.
Many of these indigenous plants are truly beautiful to see.
Witness the glorious blooms on the lovely pinkshell azalea (Rhododendron vaseyi).
Its magnificent pink flowers cover the shrubs and decorate sunny hillsides.
Although this particular azalea is essentially a Southern native species of the Blue Ridge Mountains, it is available outside its natural range at nurseries.
This is one woody plant that could be grown more often, but too few gardeners know about it.


A Good Way to Ease Jail Overcrowding
The article "The Struggle to Ease Jail Overcrowding" (May 3) discusses a number of strategies being tried in New Jersey, like parole, work release, home confinement and weekend sentences.
But it makes no mention of what I believe to be the most successful strategy of all -- the Intensive Supervision Program (I.S.P.) conducted by the Administrative Office of the Courts.
I.S.P. differs from most other alternative sentencing programs in that it is tailored to the needs and circumstances of individuals, provides close supervision and support and actively strives to rehabilitate people rather than simply monitor them.
Since its inception in 1983, nearly 1,000 people have completed the program, and less than 5 percent have been involved in any subsequent criminal activity.


It Was Neck and Neck, And Neck, in Stretch
The three horses had taken three very different routes to get to this moment but they arrived at the top of the stretch at the same time, as leaders in the Belmont Stakes.
And down that legendary straightaway yesterday they took turns at one another: A.P.
Indy being whipped on the right side by Eddie Delahoussaye, My Memoirs being whipped on the left side by Jerry Bailey, and Pine Bluff, whose jockey Chris McCarron wondered whether he could keep that slim lead.


Wendy Crum, Stiles Bennet
Wendy Susan Crum, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
M.
Colyer Crum of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to William Stiles Bennet 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bennet 2d of Concord, Mass., and Center Harbor, N.H.
The Rev.
Benjamin LeFevre, a Reformed Church minister and an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at Squam Lake in Center Harbor.
Mrs.
Bennet, 27 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the professor of investment management at the Harvard University School of Business Administration.
Her mother, Lois D. Crum is a counselor-educator in Brookline and Worcester for the Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts.


Mitterrand Gambles the Farm on European Union
Faced with growing questioning of his vision of a united Europe, President Francois Mitterrand has taken a high-stakes gamble: a French referendum on European union that puts his own political future and that of the Europe he has tried to fashion at the mercy of a single vote.
It was an unlikely decision from a 75-year-old politician known as a man averse to risk.
But after Denmark's rejection this week of the so-called Maastricht Treaty, the European Community's blueprint for political and monetary union, one Elysee Palace aide said Mr.
Mitterrand's move reflected his conviction that "France's place in Europe must have the indisputable authority that only a popular vote can confer."


The Executive Life; Last of the Red Hot Tech Entrepreneurs
The electronics industry used to be both fun and dangerous.
Until about 1980, Silicon Valley seemed like one long Wild West show of booze, fast cars, blood feuds and market shootouts -- a tradition established by the mother company, Fairchild Semiconductor, and perhaps best personified by Jerry Sanders, the president of Advanced Micro Devices, who tooled around in his convertible Bentley, pomade of blond hair catching the California sunlight.
These days, the valley is increasingly a corporate world, of programmer nerds, donning glasses and chinos in an attempt to look like William Gates, the founder of Microsoft, and of priggish executives whose idea of a decadent Saturday night is getting extra sleep for the next morning's 10K run.


Alison Griscom, Hal Wilson
Alison Grace Griscom, a daughter of Nora K. Cushing of New York and Lloyd P. Griscom Jr. of Aspen, Colo., was married yesterday to Henry Tyler Wilson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry H. Wilson Jr. of Richmond.
The Rev.
D.
Lorne Coyle performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Wilson, 26 years old, is an international security analyst for the United States Trust Company in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was the founder of Cybertronics Inc., which published educational computer software in New York.
Her stepfather, Howard G. Cushing Jr., is the managing director of IIC Resources Ltd., a diversified financial services company in New York.
The bride's late grandfather, James Knott, was the owner of the Knott Hotel chain, which included the Westbury Hotels in New York, London and Brussels.


Got a Perot Headache? 8-Way Relief: REPUBLICANS; Look at the Record
Lost in the hype over Ross Perot are the substantive achievements George Bush has piled up as President.
Voters must be reminded that his record in 40 months outshines the accomplishments of most two-term Presidents.
President Bush proposed and signed into law the tax credits that enable parents to choose child care.
He got through Congress a new Clean Air Act, which environmentalists had been pushing for 13 years.
He gathered the nation's governors and conceived America 2000, a plan to improve our schools.
He backed and signed the Americans with Disabilities Act, providing hope and economic opportunity for millions.
His $150 billion Transportation Act will create 600,000 jobs this year.
He got Congress to agree to a cap on spending.


Whiten Sidelined
The wayward bunt that bounced off the bat of Cleveland outfielder MARK WHITEN and struck him in the eye during the Indians's 10-3 loss to Seattle on Thursday night is keeping him out of action this weekend against Boston.
The Indians said Whiten, who had to leave the game with severe bruises around his right eye, would have his condition reevaluated tomorrow. (AP)


ART
Today
RICHARD PRINCE, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
From cool-handed photographs of fashion spreads and magazine advertisements to beautiful white paintings that incorporate jokes and cartoons, this exhibition traces the career of a prominent 1980's appropriation artist, and gets better as it goes along.
Through July 12.
Also at the Whitney: "THE PAINTINGS OF GEORGE BELLOWS." Best known for his action-packed paintings of boxers, this early-20th-century American modernist painted landscapes, seascapes, portraits and New York street scenes with often astounding flair, in styles ranging from realistic to nearly visionary.
This exhibition is the first thorough examination of his work in more than 35 years.
Through Aug. 30.
Hours: Thursdays, 1 to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays and July 4.
Admission: $5; $3 for the elderly and students; free for children under 12; free for everyone on Thursdays, 6 to 8 P.M.
Starting July 1, admission is $6 ($4 for the elderly and students).
Information: (212) 570-3676.


Star Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Productivity 1st Qtr.
Consumer Credit April  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Producer Prices May Retail Sales May Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Price Index May Business Inventories April


Review/Dance; Maiden and Death Meet in a de Mille Ballet
"The Other," a more or less new ballet by Agnes de Mille for American Ballet Theater, starts out just fine.
The music is by Schubert, as it has been in earlier versions of the work, and consists chiefly of the composer's art songs, although the ballet begins with an impromptu on the piano.
The last composition, "Death and the Maiden," indicates the work's allegorical theme.
The New York premiere of "The Other" on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House opened with Amanda McKerrow, dressed in a rich red cloak and robe, breaking her initial stillness as she raised her arms.


Chronicle
Several years ago, A. E. HOTCHNER, the writer, organized a benefit for the camp he and PAUL NEWMAN started for children with cancer.
Mr.
Hotchner's daughter, HOLLY HOTCHNER, director of the New-York Historical Society, was impressed.
"Museums are just as needy. Why not do one here?" she asked him.
"One can't very well refuse one's daughter's request for something you know will be a lot of work," Mr.
Hotchner said the other day, explaining how he had plunged into the 1920's for a party tonight called "The Roaring 20's in New York" at the society, on Central Park West.


There's Plenty Wrong With Gun Registration; Index for Bullets
To the Editor:
You advocate a register of guns and their serial numbers (editorial, May 16).
Please extend the idea to keeping a fired bullet or its image.
If we can computerize files of fingerprints, we should be able to index bullet images, so that merely a found bullet would identify the gun that fired it.
TOM OLIPHANT  Albany, May 16, 1992


Camdev Corp. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Designcraft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


MRRM Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


United Kingdom Fund Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Executive Changes
ADVANTA CORP., Horsham, Pa., a direct marketer of consumer financial services, named Milton Riseman senior vice president of administration.
ANN TAYLOR, New York, named Marie Holman-Rao senior vice president and general merchandise manager.


Don't Cancel This Wrestler's Invitation
A sign in Chris Campbell's office reads, "No pain, no Spain." The 37-year-old lawyer has used it for motivation and to rationalize the physical and emotional sacrifices necessary to get to Barcelona as a member of the United States Olympic free-style wrestling team.
For Campbell, the pain began in 1980 when he was a member of the United States Olympic team that ended up boycotting the Summer Games in Moscow.


Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Books of The Times; A Decline and Fall in the Northwest
Hole in the Sky  A Memoir  By William Kittredge  238 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
Confronted with the title of William Kittredge's bitter and biting memoir, "Hole in the Sky," one thinks first of the ozone layer.
This is probably not unintended on the author's part, for the hell that this book envisions for the future of America's Northwest is framed in ecological terms.
Yet what Mr.
Kittredge specifically means by his title is twofold.
In the first sense, Hole in the Sky is a ceremonial entrance through a totem pole to the family lodge that members of the Tsimshian Indian tribe, of British Columbia, believed was occupied by all their people, living or not, "the dead at least to the extent that they were remembered by anyone." Mr.
Kittredge adds: "It is a lovely notion, the space inside the house connecting to the landscape of communal imagination, the actual place bound together with story and recollection."


Tucker Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Summit Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Who Is Quickest On the Drawl?
A scorecard to choose the real Texan, page A12.


Hanoi Journal; Talking in Vietnam, Few Now Use the Party Line
Old-guard Communists still wield power here in what remains a sternly ruled one-party capital.
Red banners proclaiming fidelity to the legacy of the late President Ho Chi Minh are strung across the streets of this lovely city of traditional Vietnamese and French colonial architecture.
But after decades of reticence toward foreigners and uniformity of expressed views, people in Hanoi now speak in many and varied voices.


American Medical Alert reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


It's Whole New World For Many Pro Rejects
Sacramento Surge quarterback David Archer, whose National Football League demise and World League rebirth have symbolized what is right and what is wrong with both leagues, took to the soapbox shortly after his team rallied to beat the Orlando Thunder, 21-17, here at Olympic Stadium on Saturday night in the second World Bowl.
"One of my main purposes for playing in this league was to show people who turned their back on me and looked the other way that I can play this game," Archer said, standing on a raised platform in the Sacramento locker room and sounding like a populist political candidate.
"I hope I opened some eyes. I hope I turned some people around to say, 'Hey, we'd better check this guy out.' Wherever I go, I hope the competition will be head to head, because I'm ready."


New Book Reports 5 Suicide Attempts by Princess of Wales
In one of the most serious blows to the prestige of the British royal family in years, the marriage of the heir to the throne, Prince Charles, and his wife, Diana, the Princess of Wales, was portrayed credibly this weekend as being on the rocks.
A new book, serialized today in The Sunday Times for a reported $:250,000 ($410,000), says that the Princess tried five times to commit suicide after her marriage to Prince Charles in 1981 because he was cold, aloof and indifferent to all her emotional needs.


Celebrating New Poetry
New poetry from established and small-press publishers is being celebrated in the Poetry Publication Showcase through Saturday at Poets House, 72 Spring Street, SoHo.
The festival is to include book displays and readings by Sonia Sanchez, Eileen Myles, Quincy Troupe and Hayden Carruth.
There will also be panel discussions by writers, editors and publishers, including Barbara Smith of Kitchen Table Press, Nancy Bereano of Firebrand Books and Jonathan Galassi of Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
Information: (212) 431-7920.


In Nigeria, Repression Remains the Norm
To the Editor:
Your May 26 report on riots in Nigeria states that the military Government is intent on restoring order and is exercising a tightly controlled transition to civilian rule.
However, you do not note that the Nigerian Government's response to the unrest is still another example of the unlawful and harsh measures taken throughout this lengthy transition.
The Nigerian Government has consistently justified its draconian decrees to suppress critics as necessary for the transition to democracy.
Since coming into power, the Government has passed military decrees that suspend fundamental constitutional rights, including freedom of speech and association.
It has established a parallel system of courts with military personnel sitting with judges and has instituted indefinite detention without trial, all in the name of democracy.


Weekend in Pittsburgh Leaves Mets Wobbling
The early-season showdown ended with the Mets shut out and shut up.
Four games against the Pirates had resulted in not enough runs, too many losses and no excuses.
Oh, the Mets could say that months remain in the season.
The Mets could promise that next weekend at Shea Stadium will be different.
But this much the Mets had to concede after today's 3-0 surrender: On June 7 -- 55 very meaningful games into the 1992 season -- Pittsburgh is the superior club.
The Pirates' position atop the National League East isn't a mistake.
And their taking of three of four from the Mets wasn't a fluke.


Verdix Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Sudden Breakaway That Broke His Fellow Bikers
There were 14 miles remaining today in America's richest ($110,000) and longest (156-mile) one-day bicycle race, the CoreStates United States professional road-race championship.
After the crest of Strawberry Hill, the field was bunched, struggling in the 90-degree heat and 57-percent humidity.
Bart Bowen turned to Paul Willerton, his Subaru-Montgomery teammate.


Sodarcan reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Roxy Jo Shane, John N. Cooper 3d
Jo Schein, a sculptor known as Jo Shane, and John Newton Cooper 3d, a portrait photographer, both in New York, were married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the interdenominational ceremony with the Rev.
Henry Fehrenbacher, a Roman Catholic priest.
Ms.
Schein, 36 years old, teaches at the School of Visual Arts in New York.
She graduated from the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn.
She is the daughter of Carole Starr Schein of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and the late Arthur H. Schein.
Her father was a partner at Sumner Schein Architects and Engineers, now Cambridge, Mass.
Her mother is a photographer in Boston.


Commerce Dumps on the Consumer
The Commerce Department is waging war against American consumers.
It declared Toyota and Mazda guilty of selling mini-vans for too little money -- a crime known as "dumping." If Commerce gets its way, Americans will pay thousands more for their mini-vans.
Anti-dumping laws are supposed to prevent foreigners from unfairly taking over U.S. markets by selling at prices below cost.
But the laws are often misused to assist politically muscular American corporations.


You Just Can't Keep This Holy Terror Down
The French have a term for someone like Jeannie Longo: monstre sacre.
Picasso was a monstre sacre and so were Stravinsky and the young Andre Malraux.
The words literally mean asacred monster -- an extraordinary character who dominates a field, often controversially, with slight regard for the niceties.
A less literal translation might be "a holy terror."


Connecticut Begins Cleanup From Severe Floods


Endowment Head Draws Protests And Praise
Criticism of the National Endowment for the Arts may be as loud and sustained under the fledgling stewardship of Anne-Imelda Radice as it was under her predecessor, John E. Frohnmayer.
But if Ms.
Radice has antagonized many in the arts world, it appears that she has gained what her predecessor lost: the confidence of the Bush Administration.
Last month, only a few days after she became acting chairwoman of the endowment, Ms.
Radice (pronounced rah-DEE-chay) refused to consent to grants for two college art exhibitions that included sexual imagery, even though both had been strongly recommended by the National Council on the Arts, the 26-member body that advises the chairman of the endowment.


Krone Switches To the Jump Seat
JULIE KRONE entered the weekend as Belmont's leading rider.
But that's only one of her talents.
She enjoys jumping competition as well and was aboard her jumper, Chicago, for a demonstration yesterday morning.
"Jumping is a much more technical skill than riding," she said.
"You've got to be aware of everything at just the right moment."


Lawmaking By Citizens Faces Hurdles
A legislative drive for a constitutional amendment to allow citizen lawmaking is to begin this week, but the prospects for placing such a measure on the ballot in November are clouded by a choice of two very different proposals.
The Assembly's State Government Committee is considering the two proposals for citizen lawmaking -- known generally as initiative and referendum -- but has been unable to decide between them.


Goran Capital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ms. Leinhardt, Earle Giovanniello
Kathryn Rau Leinhardt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter F. Leinhardt of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday in Mamaroneck, N.Y., to Earle Giovanniello, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Giovanniello of Cedarhurst, L.I., and Brooklyn.
David Klein, a Mamaroneck Town Justice, performed the ceremony at Beach Point Club.
Mrs.
Giovanniello, 30 years old, graduated from Yale University, where she will be a medical student this fall.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison in New York.


Cauthen Does The Continental
STEVE CAUTHEN returned to Belmont for the first time since he rode Affirmed to the Triple Crown in 1978, and he saw VIRGINIA FUTTERMAN, the daughter of his former agent, LENNY GOODMAN.
Cauthen, who has been riding in England and France, greeted her with a hug and kisses.


Geodyne Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nicholas Thorne, 71, Who Assisted Refugees
Nicholas G. W. Thorne, an American military and diplomatic officer who directed missions to resettle 50,000 Indochinese refugees and monitor an Egyptian-Israeli buffer zone, died on May 28 in the Philippines.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manila.
He died of complications of lymphoma, his family said.


Fletcher Leisure reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Synthetech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Penril DataComm Networks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


There's Plenty Wrong With Gun Registration; For Police Safety
To the Editor:
In response to "Too Quick on the 9-mm. Draw" (editorial, May 27), which opposes adoption of 9 millimeter semiautomatic pistols by New York City police officers, I would like to shoot some holes in the Police Department's flintlock ballistic philosophy, which you seem to embrace.
For example, not until many police officers were injured in demonstrations and riots in the 1960's did our department, strongly exhorted by the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, issue safety helmets.
In 1978 the department ridiculed soft body armor, and so our association undertook a program of contributions to outfit members with protective vests.
In the early 80's, we demanded speed loaders to ease reloading in combat situations, a demand ignored until 1986, when officer Scott Gadell was gunned down trying to reload his revolver, while the miscreant who killed him kept firing his higher-round-capacity 9 millimeter.


No Star Emerges From the Mother Goose
The country's best 3-year-old fillies met yesterday at Belmont Park in the second race in the Triple Tiara series, and followed in the footsteps of the colts who completed the Triple Crown series the day before: different races, different winners.
The pattern became clear when Turnback the Alarm won the Mother Goose Stakes by more than two lengths over Easy Now, who were both sent off at 7-1 and were trailed by a 52-1 shot, Queen of Triumph.
Meanwhile, far back in the field of seven came the favorites: Prospector's Delite, who opened the series by winning the Acorn Stakes two weeks ago, ran fifth this time.
And Pleasant Stage, last year's juvenile champion, ran last.


An Empire Built on Steel Rods
While some people look at old steel plants as symbols of faded industrial might, unsuitable for anything but abandonment, James A. Todd Jr. has a vastly different vision.
To Mr.
Todd, the chairman of the Birmingham Steel Corporation, these shuttered and unprofitable plants are opportunities that are waiting only for the right mix of capital and management.


International Yogurt reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rescuers Hit on Highway
Two paramedics were hurt yesterday morning when a driver hit their ambulance as they helped victims of an earlier accident near 174th Street on the Cross Bronx Expressway, the police said.
One paramedic, Frances Hayes, 30 years old, was pinned between the ambulance and the expressway wall, the police said.


Potent Mix Of Country Music and Good P.R.
If the name Branson makes you think of country music, don't be surprised.
This tiny Ozark town has been featured on the CBS News program "60 Minutes" twice in the last six months.
"CBS This Morning" devoted its Memorial Day program to it.
"Inside Edition" and "Entertainment Tonight" have been here, as have USA Today, Time, Entertainment Weekly and numerous travel and country music writers.


Review/Pop; 77-Year-Old Bluesman And a Battered Guitar
On Wednesday night, the Bottom Line could have been a time capsule from the days when the white rock audience was first discovering gospel music and country-blues.
Roebuck (Pops) Staples said from the stage that he first shared a bill with John Hammond, a blues singer, 30 years ago; surprisingly little has changed.
The concert did offer a rare chance to hear the 77-year-old Mr.
Staples performing solo for a portion of his set, without his daughters, the Staple Singers.
He played songs from his new album, "Peace in the Neighborhood" (Pointblank/Charisma), accompanied only by his battered Stratocaster guitar.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: TUESDAY
Chesapeake Corp  CRI Ins Mtg Assn Inc  Fleetwood Entrps Inc  Flightsafety Intl  HRE Pptys  Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec  Pep Boys, Manny Moe &amp; Jack  Premier Indl Corp  Toro Co  Wyle Labs WEDNESDAY


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Stock prices dropped in slow trading in Tokyo this morning as investors continued to avoid the market ahead of Friday's expiration of contracts on futures options.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished 134.98 points, or 0.76percent, lower, at 17655.06.
At midday, the index was was down 355.27 points, or 2 percent.
On Friday, the Nikkei lost 174.03.


Butterflies and Knots Set In
Howard Bartlett's mind was a caldron of conflicting emotions as he prepared to embark Monday morning on the Coast-to-Coast Bicycle Classic, a 48-day charity ride that will cover 3,400 miles, cross three mountain ranges and traverse 11 states.
"My stomach has been in a knot for two weeks at the thought of doing this," Bartlett, a 47-year-old Seattle lawyer, said.
"I say to myself: 'Oh my gosh. What have I gotten myself into? I can't possibly do this. I'm an old man.' But I'm excited, too.


Corrections
An article on the Health page on May 20 about "male menopause" characterized a possible reason for severe testosterone deficiency incorrectly.
It could result from surgical treatment of testicular cancer, not from the cancer itself.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  DEBATE OVER ARMS TALKS  Although the United States and Russia have narrowed their differences over how to make more cuts in nuclear arms, critics say a cold-war mentality is preventing the Administration from closing the gap.
A1  JAPAN ON TRADE OFFENSIVE  In a new strategy for confronting the United States on trade issues, an advisory Government council in Japan has turned the tables and accused the Americans of breaking a series of international rules.
A1  SARAJEVO, SORROWFUL WASTELAND  What is happening in Sarajevo, a European city that survived two world wars with only minor damage, is hard to grasp for many of the residents enduring it.
After two months of civil war, the Bosnian capital is a skeleton of the thriving, accomplished place it was.
A1  Russian rightists accuse their Government of betraying the Serbs.
A6  ISRAEL REFLECTS ON 25 YEARS  A historian, a writer, a lawmaker, a physicist, an Arab teacher and a citizen who braved mob violence offer thoughts as Israel marks the anniversary of the 1967 war.
A10  CZECHS RIGHT, SLOVAKS LEFT  News Analysis: Czechoslovakia's voters have demonstrated one of the hard truths reshaping Eastern Europe's politics.
Just as the impulse for democracy once brought people together, the democratic process is now helping to split them apart.
A7  NO ENVIRONMENTAL LOBBYISTS  Fearing demonstrations against President Bush, the United Nations has drawn up plans to close the Earth Summit conference center to representatives of private environmental groups.
A5  Mr.
Bush wants to know who leaked an environmental memo.
A5  CORAZON AQUINO'S LEGACY  When Corazon Aquino yields the Philippine presidency, many in Manila's slums will be content to see her go.
Six years after the "people power" revolution, the country is mired in poverty and corruption.
A3  POWER STRUGGLE IN PORTUGAL  Rivalry between President Soares and Prime Minister Cavaco Silva is assuming the dimension of a constitutional crisis in Portugal.
A9  BLOW TO BRITISH ROYAL FAMILY  In one of the most serious blows to the prestige of the royal family, the marriage of Prince Charles and his wife, Diana, was portrayed credibly as being on the rocks.
A10  National A11-13, A16, B6  POLITICAL HIGH NOON IN TEXAS  When President Bush and Ross Perot square off in Texas for the Presidency, it could take on elements of a barroom brawl.
As one Texan predicted, "It will make the Alamo seem like a love-in." A1  SHIPMATES REMEMBER PEROT  As a midshipman and as a Navy officer, Mr.
Perot showed not only traits like a can-do attitude but also an intolerance for anyone that played too loose with the rules, his classmates and shipmates said.
A12  DEMOCRATS DEVISE A PLAN  Democratic leaders have put together a plan to help convince voters that the party's likely Presidential candidate is politically relevant.
A13  SCHOOL OF LAST RESORT  A private program for helping unemployed youth escape the streets of Boston through job training has been so successful that it has spread to seven other cities and is planned in six others.
A1  PHILADELPHIA TO DEATH ROW  Philadelphia courts have sent more people to death row than any city but Houston, and some experts fault the system of state financing of the defense in capital cases involving poor defendants.
A11  CHALLENGE FOR A CHURCH  Leaders of the Christian Science Church will try to convince members at its annual meeting this week in Boston that it is responding to accusations of financial and religious impropriety.
A16  CHIEF UPSETS CITY HALL, AGAIN  A threat by Chief Daryl F. Gates of Los Angeles to postpone his retirement has produced hand wringing among his critics in City Hall and a call for a special lawyer to help decide what to do.
A11  A Chicago police officer shot and killed a 12-year-old boy.
A11  Metropolitan Digest, B1 NEW EQUALITY IN QUEENS  An analysis of the latest census has generated a finding that some demographers say is nothing short of astounding: the median household income for blacks in Queens has virtually matched that of whites.
Demographers say that while national comparisons are still incomplete, they believe that Queens is the largest political subdivision where blacks and whites share a common median income.
A1  HEALTH PLAN IN ALBANY  Legislative leaders and Governor Cuomo have tentatively agreed to an overhaul of New York State's health insurance system, including a provision that would compel commercial insurers to accept all applicants, no matter how sick.
The plan would also forbid insurers from charging higher rates for individuals and small groups based on factors like age and sex.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Italian movie outruns star-laden American imports.
C11  Endowment's new leadership.
C11  Musical AIDS benefit.
C16  Film: "Lost Prophet." C16  Music: Lionel Richie.
C11  Pops Staples.
C13  A "Butterfly" in St.
Louis.
C14  Los Lobos.
C16  Sports C1-10  Auto Racing: Crash study begins.
C9  Baseball: Mets outclassed by Pirates.
C7  Yankees beat Tigers, 6-5.
C7  Basketball: Bulls take 2-1 lead.
C1  Uphill now for Blazers.
C4  Cycling: CoreStates event to Bowen.
C3  Frenchwoman's road to Olympics.
C3  Golf: Edwards wins Memorial playoff.
C3  Soccer: U.S. searches world for help.
C4  Tennis: Courier takes French Open.
C1  Obituaries B10  John Charles Doerfer, former F.C.C. head  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials A14  Blood tide rising.
Commerce and dumping.
End the free ride.
Courtroom cameras.
Letters A14  Leslie H. Gelb: Missile defense traps.
A15  William Safire: Eyeless in Gaza.
A15  Letty Cottin Pogrebin: Give Hillary a break.
A15  Edward Kahn: The house that George built.
A15


Market Place; A Dose of Reality For Drug Stocks
INVESTORS in drug company stocks were jolted last week when their shares plunged amid new and bleaker assessments of the industry's prospects.
Many drug stocks remained down at the week's close, still dizzy from their tumble Tuesday after the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company surprised Wall Street with a lowered earnings forecast.
Bristol-Myers stock dropped more than 9 percent that day, and dragged many competitors down with it.
Bristol-Myers' stock closed Friday at $65.75, down nearly 11 percent for the week.


Ailing Italian Film Industry May Be Reviving
For the first time in years, an Italian movie has outrun star-laden American imports to earn the biggest profits ever recorded for a movie here.
The film, "Johnny Stecchino," starring and directed by Roberto Benigni, grossed $25 million at the box office.
Moreover, Italian movies brought home coveted foreign prizes this year, including an Oscar for "Mediterraneo" as the best foreign-language film and the Cannes Grand Jury Prize for Gianni Amelio's "Stolen Children."


People
*
David W. Dixon, 32 years old, and Alice Ericsson, 39, were named senior vice presidents and group creative directors on the L'Oreal account at McCann-Erickson New York.
They were previously creative directors at Grey Advertising, New York, working on the Pantene, Camay and Revlon accounts; Ms.
Ericsson was a senior vice president and Mr.
Dixon a vice president. *
Marcia Essig, vice president and associate creative director at Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, was promoted to senior vice president and group creative director.


Quotation of the Day
"They will try to out-tough each other. You have got to prove your manhood down here whether you're a man or a woman, let me tell you." -- GOV.
ANN W. RICHARDS of Texas, speaking of President Bush and Ross Perot.  [ A12:1 ]


Sherry Goldman Abel, Editor, 88
Sherry Goldman Abel, a retired managing editor of Commentary magazine, died on May 28 at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 88 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She had suffered from a stroke and respiratory illness, friends said.


Blood Tide Rising
Bosnia, now being ripped apart by bombs and pogroms, screams out an urgent warning.
A blood tide is rising in Eurasia's ethnic archipelago, islands of human settlement shaped by centuries of migration, colonization and conquest.
Demands for ethnically homogenous states threaten civil wars, mass expulsions and unending cycles of revenge.
The only alternative is to construct, quickly, ways to protect the political, economic and human rights of threatened minorities within existing borders.
Such constitutional protections need to be backed up by international guarantees, enforceable by, say, NATO, the U.N.
Security Council, or even some ad hoc coalition of military powers.
If that seems wishful, then the present "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia may be only a prelude to wider disaster.


Edwards Outlasts Fehr In Memorial Gloaming
A wet and wild day at the Memorial tournament ended in deep twilight today with journeyman David Edwards parring the second hole of a sudden-death playoff to defeat Rick Fehr.
The longest day on the PGA Tour so far this year came to an end after Fehr's drop from the casual water on the 17th fairway settled into a difficult lie, from which he left his 5-iron approach short of green.
Fehr pitched to eight feet, and after Edwards two-putted for par from 20 feet, missed his putt to keep the tie alive.


American Franchise Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Flanigan's Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Essay; Eyeless In Gaza
"We will go to Gaza," said Ariel Sharon, Israel's Housing Minister and most controversial hawk, strapping his bulk into a small helicopter.
His purpose was to show me a group of Jewish settlements in Gush Katif.
The outposts -- "occupied by Egyptian forces that invaded in 1948," in his words -- now lie between the Arab population in the city of Gaza and the border between Israel and Egypt, only five miles from the Sharon farm.


Erika Klein, James Schwartz
Dr.
Erika Lynn Klein, a daughter of Dr.
Estelle M. Raben and Dr.
Donald F. Klein, both of New York, was married yesterday on Shelter Island, L.I., to Dr.
James Morris Schwartz, a son of Dr.
Gail Garfield and Dr.
Lester J. Schwartz of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Howard Cronin, a town justice of Shelter Island, officiated at the Ram's Head Inn.
Dr.
Klein, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from New York University.
She and her husband both received M.D. degrees from Case Western Reserve University and each will begin a residency this month; she in obstetrics and gynecology at Bay State Medical Center in Springfield, Mass., he in family medicine at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester, Mass.


First Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSH WOULD OUST RIO MEMO'S LEAKER
President Bush said today that he would like to dismiss the official who made public a confidential memo suggesting revisions that might reverse the American position on an international treaty to protect plants and animals.
"Help me find him," the President said at a news conference at Camp David, Md.
"He'd be gainfully unemployed."


As Hand Injuries Mount, So Do the Lawsuits
Lawyers say hundreds of lawsuits blaming manufacturers of computer keyboards and other equipment for severe arm, wrist and hand injuries are being prepared for filing within a few weeks at the Federal District Court in Brooklyn after Tuesday's decision by a Federal judge to group all such cases together.
The surge in litigation is expected to encourage similar lawsuits in other states, pitting telephone operators, supermarket cashiers, journalists and a variety of clerical workers against many of the world's biggest manufacturers and a number of smaller makers of high-technology equipment.


Free Dance in Central Park
Sixteen dance companies and soloists are to perform in the free Central Park Summerstage 1992 festival at 8:30 on Friday nights at the Rumsey Playfield, midpark at 70th Street.
Participants are Doug Elkins and Hot Foot (June 19); Molissa Fenley and Cyndi Lee (June 26); Fred Darsow and Randy Warshaw (July 3); Carlota Santana and Doug Varone (July 10); Zvi Gotheiner and Eleo Pomare (July 17); Steve Elson, Marta Renzi and Jane Goldberg (July 24); the Everett Dance Company and Rhythm Technicians (July 31), and Samulnori dancers and drummers from Japan (Aug. 7).
The festival will open on June 17 with music by the Kronos Quartet and Foday Musa Suso and will close on Aug. 9 with music by Tito Puente and Los Macondos.
Information: (212) 360-2777.
There will be three benefits, featuring music by Simply Red, the Brand-New Heavies, the Neville Brothers and John Prine.
Information: (212) 507-8900.


There's Plenty Wrong With Gun Registration
To the Editor:
Re "Treat Guns Like Cars" (editorial, May 16):
For you to disparage as "a simplistic view of safety" those Los Angeles citizens who, in the absence of effective police protection, arm themselves against the potential of mob violence to person and property is disturbingly elitist and out of touch.


INSIDE
Injuries Mount; Lawsuits Too  Lawyers say hundreds of lawsuits blaming manufacturers of keyboards and other equipment for severe arm, wrist and hand injuries are being prepared for filing.
Page D1.
Questions in Editor's Death
The slaying of a crusading Hispanic journalist in Queens is still unsolved three months later, and many Hispanic leaders are growing impatient with the police.
Page B1.
Divided They Vote
Elections in Czechoslovakia, and their divisive effect on the two parts of the country, drive home the point that democracy can be a splintering as well as a unifying force.
Page A7.
Gates Says He May Linger
The Los Angeles police chief threatened to postpone his retirement, prompting his critics in City Hall to call for a special lawyer to help decide what to do.
Page A11.
Bulls Take 2-1 Lead
Chicago used a stifling defense to defeat the Portland Trail Blazers, 94-84, in Game 3 of the N.B.A. championship series.
SportsMonday, C1.
Since the '67 War: Israelis Look Back
"The blessing of 1967 was that Israel proved again that it was viable and not, as the Arabs imagined, something that could be wiped off the map without much effort," said Shabtai Teveth, a historian.
"It was a return to the land of the Bible. Suddenly, Israel became the Land of Israel."
"The curse of the blessing of 1967," he added, "is that we are now a house divided against itself." Page A10.


Chronicle
STANLEY WILLIAMS is hardly a household name outside the world of ballet, but it is a revered one at the School of American Ballet, where he is co-chairman of the faculty and where he has taught some 3,000 students in the last 30 years.
Tonight he is to receive the school's $10,000 Mae L. Wien Award at its annual performance at the Juilliard Theater, followed by a dinner dance at the Rose building.
Mr.
Williams's students have included PETER MARTINS, RUDOLF NUREYEV, EDWARD VILLELLA, MIKHAIL BARYSHNIKOV and DARCI KISTLER.


Bus Strike Affects Queens and Brooklyn
Union workers at five privately owned bus companies walked off their jobs early this morning, raising the propect of massive traffic delays as 225,000 Brooklyn and Queens commuters were left stranded by the walkout.
The strike by more than 2,000 drivers, mechanics and dispatchers affects riders throughout most of Queens and in southeastern Brooklyn where the private bus lines are the primary, and sometimes only, form of mass transportation into Manhattan.


American Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Loewen, Ondaatje, McCutcheon reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Slow Start At Europe's Disneyland
Euro Disneyland, which opened with immense fanfare almost two months ago, has encountered teething problems, and its normally ebullient executives are backing away from their unbridled optimism.
Euro Disney stock plunged 5 percent Friday, to 109.5 French francs on the Paris bourse, more than 20 percent below its price when the park opened and more than 30 percent below its high.


LNH REIT reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Capital Housing &amp; Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Devran Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Connecticut Towns Question Impact of Rail Link to Hartford
When regional transit officials proposed building a 16-mile light-rail trolley line from downtown Hartford up through this suburb and eventually to Bradley International Airport, Bloomfield immediately embraced the idea.
While the other three communities on the route hesitated, planners in Bloomfield pledged that if the rail line came, the town would rezone to allow higher-density housing and stores within walking distance of the stations, a proposal that would create a whole new town center.
Transportation planners here and across the country hailed the notion of a town willing to think beyond the car culture and quarter-acre zoning.
But now Bloomfield is finding that its decision has raised insecurities in neighboring towns along the proposed Griffin Line -- Hartford, Windsor and East Granby -- and that what seemed a straightforward way to bolster the fortunes of the community has become wrapped up with questions of municipal rivalries, race and class.


There's Plenty Wrong With Gun Registration; Federal License Needed
To the Editor:
The Los Angeles riots have roused the consciousness of American taxpayers on crime, guns and self-defense.
It has also given Washington the moment to break the stalemate between the pro- and anti-gun factions.
This stalemate contributes to an ineffective system of gun control that allows criminals unlimited access to guns.
The principle you depict in "Treat Guns Like Cars" (editorial, May 16) -- universal gun licensing and regulation, requiring fingerprint back ground checks (with instantaneous checks as an option), education and safety training -- is a sensible solution.
Such a law could satisfy the demands of both the National Rifle Association and Handgun Control Inc., and win the endorsement of law enforcement agencies.


Brajdas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Review/Film; A Grown-Up Wild Child Evokes Audience's Past
Michael de Avila's "Lost Prophet" is an arty, low-budget horror fantasy that doesn't attempt to be shocking or scary in a conventional way.
The movie, which opens today at Le Cinematographe in SoHo, inaugurates the theater's showcase of young film makers, First Film/First Chance.
In following the wanderings of a disoriented young man who grows progressively more agitated, it tries to induce in the audience a childlike emotional state that is equal parts fear and wonder.
As played by Jim Burton, an unshaven actor with frightened, burning eyes, the character is a sort of grown-up wild child adrift in the countryside who finds his way to a castlelike resort hotel that has been shuttered for the season.
Various oddball characters wander around the premises.
They include three sinister punks who drink themselves into oblivion, a woman who spouts mystical Indian lore, a foul-mouthed young boy and a fiendish character antagonist named Mick Prophet (Drew Morone).


NCH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


To Protect Bush, U.N. Will Limit Access to Talks
Fearing demonstrations against President Bush, the United Nations has drawn up plans to close the Earth Summit conference center to representatives of private environmental groups and to sharply reduce credentials for official delegations, United Nations officials said today.
Starting Thursday, the day before President Bush and as many as 110 heads of state and government are to meet here, a new credential system will bar virtually all private sector environmentalists from the center and will limit official missions to four delegates from each country, a United Nations official who attended an emergency security meeting on Friday said.


Courier Wins in Paris


Barrington Petroleum reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


CPI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Partners Preferred Yield Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Diagnostek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Miscellany
*
The talk-show host Kathie Lee Gifford was named the spokeswoman for Charles of the Ritz skin-care and cosmetics product lines.
A television, print and point-of-purchase campaign featuring her is scheduled to begin later this month.


U.S. TELLING RUSSIA IT MUST DISMANTLE ITS LARGEST ICBM'S
In the last few months, the United States and Russia have quietly narrowed their differences over how to make additional cuts in their nuclear arsenals, well beyond those agreed to in the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.
But the inability to close the remaining gap has led critics of the Bush Administration to say the United States is missing an opportunity to obtain radical reductions in the Russian arsenal because the Administration is too wedded to cold-war strategic theories.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: Alco Health Distribution Corp., 7.5 million common shares, 6 million in the United States.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.


Transmation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Results Plus
GOLF  Okamoto Ends L.P.G.A.
Drought  Ayako Okamoto of Japan won her first Ladies Professional Golf Association tournament in two years yesterday with a three-stroke victory at the McDonald's Championship in Wilmington, Del.
Okamoto shot a 69 to finish the rain-shortened, 54-hole tournament at eight-under-par 205 and take home the first prize of $112,500.
The 41-year-old golfer started the final round in a first-place tie with Brandie Burton.
But Burton, less than half Okamoto's age at 20, folded with two double-bogeys and a bogey during a closing round of 72.
Burton, Deb Richard and Pat Bradley tied for second at five-under 208.
Bradley shot a 66, while Richard had a 70. (AP) Bies Takes Senior Event: Don Bies took advantage of Lee Trevino's 17th-hole bogey yesterday to win the PaineWebber Invitational tournament in Charlotte, N.C., with a tournament- record 13-under-par total.
Bies shot 66 for a total of 203 while Trevino had a 68.
It was the first victory for Bies since he won the 1989 GTE Kaanapali Classic.
Bies moved into position for his sixth senior title on the 501-yard 16th, reaching the green with a 3-wood and two-putting from 80 feet.
Trevino, who had won five of the last eight senior events, maintained his perch as co-leader throughout the day.
Playing with the next threesome, Trevino duplicated Bies's birdie on the same hole and set the stage for the dramatic finish. (AP) Irish Open to Faldo: Nick Faldo of England won his first European Tour event in 12 months, beating Wayne Westner of South Africa on the fourth playoff hole of the Irish Open in Killarney.
Faldo shot a 75 yesterday and had to hole a 12-foot putt on the 18th to tie Westner at 274 and set up the playoff. (AP) TENNIS  Fernandez and Wheaton Triumph  Mary Joe Fernandez and David Wheaton won singles titles yesterday at Beckenham, the opening tournament of the English grass-court season leading up to Wimbledon.
The top-seeded Fernandez beat Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia, 6-4 6-2, taking just 52 minutes.
The third-seeded Wheaton downed Christo Van Rensburg of South Africa, 6-3, 1-6 6-1. (AP) CYCLING  Simon of France Wins 15th Italian Stage  Francois Simon of France captured the 15th stage of the Tour of Italy, outsprinting four other cyclists to the finish line in Palazzolo Sull'oglio.
Miguel Indurain of Spain, who finished 7 minutes 4 seconds behind the winner, retained the overall lead for the 13th day in a row. (AP) AUTO RACING  Rahal Is First in Detroit Grand Prix  Bobby Rahal drove a heady race and came away the winner of the chaotic Detroit Grand Prix after a slick pass on the narrow Belle Isle circuit.
Rahal, a two-time series champion and the current leader, took the lead 21 laps from the end of the 77-lap event by passing Paul Tracy and Michael Andretti as they were locked in a wheel-banging battle for the top spot.
But it was Rahal's Chevrolet-A-powered Lola that came away in front and stayed there.
Rahal picked up his second victory of the season and 22d of his career, averaging 81.988 miles an hour.
Rahal beat Raul Boesel of Brazil to the finish line by 8.56 seconds.
Rahal built his series lead to 19 points, 79-60, over Al Unser Jr., who hit a tire wall and finished ninth. (AP) Irvan Comes Back for Nascar Victory: Ernie Irvan, black-flagged for jumping the start and thereby bumped to last place, battled back to win the Nascar Save Mart 300 in race-record time at Sears Point International Raceway in Sonoma, Calif.
Irvan, who beat the pole-sitter, Ricky Rudd, to the line at the start of the 74-lap race, pushed his Chevrolet past Terry Labonte's Oldsmobile on lap 67 and held on for the victory.
Irvan's winning average speed was 81.412 m.p.h., a race record, and he beat Labonte by 3.19 seconds. (AP) ROWING  Springer Wins 3d Olympic Trip  Greg Springer, who once vowed never to pick up an oar again, won a third trip to the Olympics yesterday by winning the men's doubles rowing competition in the United States Olympic trials at West Windsor, N.J.
Springer, who rowed in the 1984 and 1988 Games, had been involved in rifts with the United States Rowing Association over team selection and officiating.
Policy changes and the chance to train with the former Soviet national coach Igor Grinko got Springer back into the sport.
He and teammate Jonathan Smith were timed in 6 minutes 26.32 seconds, winning by more than 2 1/2 seconds. (AP)


Partners Preferred Yield II reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For the Urban Young, Carpentry Skills and Hope
The story of Rudolph Griffith's escape from the streets is much like those of some other young men in Boston's wasted inner city community of Roxbury.
He left school in the 11th grade.
His father, penniless and unemployed, left home.
Mr.
Griffith lived with his mother sometimes, sometimes with an aunt.
Now 25 years old, he lost seven years to the streets, loitering, drinking, seeing his girl, becoming a father.
"I happened to keep away from drugs," he said. "but I came close."
He kept looking for a real job.
"I knew I could work," he said.
"But nothing worked out. They wouldn't even review your application." His girl took their two children and returned to her parents.


Audio/Video Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


International Contour Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Irving Laurie, 95, a Former Executive And Philanthropist
Irving Laurie, a retired businessman and a philanthropist with many causes in New Jersey, died on Friday at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He had turned 95 years old the day before.
The nature of his illness was not specified.


Confessions Of a Onetime Price Tamer
No one will ever mistake Paul A. Volcker's new book for "You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again," but the former Federal Reserve chairman does let loose with more than a few barbs in a narrative of the ups and (mostly) downs of the dollar over the last five decades.
He mocks "starry-eyed Reaganauts" who believed tax cuts were a "magic elixir" that would make deficits go away.
He calls John S. Reed, the Citicorp chairman, "young and rather brash." He faults former Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan for being oblivious to the harmful effects of the soaring dollar in the early 1980's and for "being more than a little impolite"' to the finance ministers of the big industrial powers.


Diversco Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


B&amp;H Bulk Carriers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tocor II Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Failure To Communicate
Want to know why it's tough to win at the track?
Why even experts have problems?
Consider this incident involving one of the races that preceded the Belmont Stakes, an incident that illustrated a two-way failure to communicate:
A trainer spoke to his jockey and said: "I want you to stay behind the '4.' Just stay near him. Don't go to the front and don't take him head on."
The jockey nodded.


Starstream Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Following the Fickle Fates of Favorites
On the day after they stood at the starting gate in the one, two and three stalls along the rail, the three horses who had been favorites for the 124th Belmont Stakes on Saturday offered stark proof that racing fortune can make you rich or poor, humble or proud, better or worse.
A.P.
Indy won the race and public acclaim as America's star 3-year-old colt.
Pine Bluff lost the race but won the $1 million Triple Crown bonus.
And Casual Lies lost the race, lost the bonus and suffered a cracked hoof.


Arimetco International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


On the Trail
BUSH FINDS SOMEONE TO LISTEN ABOUT PEROT PROBLEM
WASHINGTON, June 7 (Special to The New York Times) -- Although President Bush has been refusing to talk about Ross Perot in public, he indicated today how worried he is about the likely independent challenger by revealing that he had unburdened himself in private on the subject to a friend, Prime Minister John Major of Britain.
"I cannot tell a lie," Mr. Bush said. "His name came up."
At a news conference in Camp David, Md., where for two days the two leaders talked about world affairs and American politics and drove around in golf carts, Mr.
Bush said Mr.
Major had listened to his political problems with an attitude that the President found hard to describe.
"He listened, I thought, with great fascination," Mr.
Bush said.
"It may have been boredom. I don't know." HIGH-RANKING CONGRESSMAN WON'T RUN AGAIN
JACKSONVILLE, Fla., June 7 (AP) -- Representative Charles E. Bennett of Florida, the second most senior member of the House, announced his retirement today, saying his wife's poor health had made him change his mind about seeking a 23d term.
Mr.
Bennett, an 81-year-old Democrat, said he changed his mind about running after his wife, Jean, suffered a stroke on Monday.
Mr.
Bennett becomes the 75th member of Congress to quit at the end of this term.
He is also the sixth House member from Florida to decide to leave Congress.
With four new seats created after the 1990 census, that leaves 10 of the state's 23 seats open.
Three Democratic Representatives -- Dante B. Fascell, William Lehman and Lawrence J. Smith -- and two Republicans, Andy Ireland and Craig T. James, had announced they would not run again.
Mr.
Bennett is among House members who would be allowed to convert to their personal use the amount of campaign funds on hand on Nov. 30, 1989, if they leave office this year.
Neither he nor members of his staff could be reached by telephone to determine whether he intended to do so, and the amount now on hand is uncertain.
A Congressional Quarterly report of such accounts last year said that Mr.
Bennett had $317,943 in campaign money on hand on the 1989 cutoff date.


Pleasant Surprise for Leyritz and Yanks
Expecting a pinch-hitter, Jim Leyritz glanced into the dugout.
Experiencing a shortage of catchers, Buck Showalter, the Yankees' manager, did nothing.
Capitalizing on a rare opportunity to hit against a right-handed pitcher, Leyritz hit a game-winning home run.
"I came back into the dugout, tapped Buck on the leg and said, 'Thanks for letting me stay in there,' " said Leyritz, after his fifth-inning homer helped the Yankees end a four-game losing streak by edging the Detroit Tigers, 6-5, yesterday at Yankee Stadium.


Goldfarb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Her Term About to End, Aquino 'Hasn't Made Much Difference' to the Poor
In a few weeks Corazon C. Aquino will leave the presidency of the Philippines much the way she came in: in a blaze of her signature yellow, amid international praise for restoration of democratic rule to this country.
Here in the fetid slums surrounding Manila, however, Olivia Oracoy and her neighbors say they will be just as happy to see her go.
Mrs.
Oracoy's 15-month-old son died of malnutrition and diarrhea last year, a frequent cause of death in her garbage-strewn neighborhood, less than two miles from a sparkling new strip of shopping centers and fast-food restaurants.
The Government gives her two gallons of milk a week to keep her four children alive; a fifth has already been placed in an orphanage.
On a good day her husband comes home with $3 earned at construction sites.


Rain Soaks Connecticut And Floods Trailer Park
"This was nothing compared to the flood we had 10 years ago," said 77-year-old Walter Rosborg, as he hosed the mud off the driveway near his trailer home.
"But this time it came quicker, and we didn't have much time to get out."
Mr.
Rosborg was among 53 people, most of them elderly, who returned to their flooded trailer park in Wallingford, Conn., late yesterday and began to clean up the damage caused by the rain-swollen Quinnipiac River.
Early Saturday morning, the river overflowed its banks in low-lying areas along a 20-mile stretch, which began in central Connecticut near Meriden and went south to the Long Island Sound.


Greenman Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


'Foreign Aid' Is N.C.A.A. Question
One of the most exciting National Collegiate Athletic Association track and field championships in years ended Saturday and served as an Olympic preview -- not only for the United States, but also for several dozen other nations.
The number of foreign athletes competing, including 14 of the 36 individual champions, sparked a renewal of a years-old controversy: Should American universities recruit foreign athletes for the purpose of winning American collegiate championships or should those scholarships be used to help develop American athletes?


Japanese Owned, American Made
TSURUMAKI TOMONORI, the Japanese industrialist who owns A.P.
Indy, took a quick course in diplomacy after receiving the trophy for winning the Belmont Stakes on Saturday.


Elizabeth Karr, Mitchell Rodbell
Elizabeth Hersey Karr, the daughter of Christy Karr of Agawam, Mass., and Elizabeth F. Karr of Springfield, Mass., was married yesterday in New York to Mitchell Rodbell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Rodbell of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, a Methodist minister, performed the interdenominational ceremony at the Metropolitan Club, assisted by Rabbi Martin Zion.
Mrs.
Rodbell, 34 years old, is a vice president of Lord &amp; Taylor in New York.
Her father is the president of the American Association of Industrial Management in Springfield.
Her mother teaches English at Commerce High School in Springfield.


Well Fiddledeedee
Horsefair is supposed to be a celebration of the horse.
Accordingly, dozens of booths lined the side of the track: You could buy paintings of horses, T-shirts, boots and saddles, jewelry and books on handicapping.


Carole Weinberg, 49, A Modeling Executive
Carole Mills Weinberg, a modeling agent and executive, died on Thursday in Little Rock, Ark.
She was 49 years old and lived in Rye Brook, N.Y.
She was in Little Rock for treatment for cancer at the University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Center, her husband said.


World Economies


Dance in Review
School of American Ballet  Juilliard Theater
Among dance's pleasant rites of spring are the workshop performances of the School of American Ballet, the New York City Ballet's official school.
This year was the 28th anniversary of these events, and the programs on Saturday afternoon and evening featured remarkably assured dancing in George Balanchine's "Allegro Brillante" and "Who Cares?"
At the matinee, "Allegro Brillante," an exhilarating ballet to Tchaikovsky, posed few problems for a cast led by Jennie Somogyi and John Winfield.
Miss Somogyi was not only light and quick, but she was also blessed with an unforced grandeur of bearing and a beautiful fluidity of her arms.
Unlike some other students, who move in a correct but puppetlike fashion as if their limbs were detachable entities, she suggested that each movement flowed outward from the center of her body.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.66 percent, and the six-month bill was at 3.80 percent.


The Death of a City: Elegy for Sarajevo -- A special report.; A People Under Artillery Fire Manage to Retain Humanity
As the 155-millimeter howitzer shells whistled down on this crumbling city today, exploding thunderously into buildings all around, a disheveled, stubble-bearded man in formal evening attire unfolded a plastic chair in the middle of Vase Miskina Street.
He lifted his cello from its case and began playing Albinoni's Adagio.
There were only two people to hear him, and both fled, dodging from doorway to doorway, before the performance ended.


Forbes to Include Ads on Floppy Disk
More than 700,000 copies of the June 22 issue of Forbes will carry a bound-in floppy disk offering interactive ads with animated color graphics from 10 marketers.
Forbes and the Interactive Marketing Group in New York, which jointly sold the project, are calling it the "Deciding Factor." Readers can insert the 5 1/4-inch floppy disk into personal computers and select from a menu of options like browsing through Jaguar's "Electronic Showroom"; playing "Who Stole the Glenlivet?" a mystery game sponsored by the single-malt whisky, and investigating "guaranteed savings" from the United States Postal Service.


Giants' Wilson Stymies Astros With a 2-Hitter
Giants 3, Astros 0
SAN FRANCISCO, June 7 (AP) -- Trevor Wilson pitched a two-hitter and Cory Snyder continued his hot hitting with his eighth r.b.i. in two days as the San Francisco Giants beat the Houston Astros, 3-0, today.
Wilson (5-5) stopped a personal three-game losing streak in throwing his first shutout since Oct. 5, when he beat Los Angeles on a two-hitter.
In winning for the first time since May 19, Wilson joined Billy Swift as the only Giants to throw a complete game.
Swift, who has three, is on the disabled list.


Four A's Addresses Dearth Of Training for the Young
AT one graduation ceremony last week, caps and gowns were out; copywriting and growth strategies were in.
The Institute of Advanced Advertising Studies, a program developed by the American Association of Advertising Agencies, honored 40 young agency executives who completed a 16-week course sponsored by the association's New York council.
Their studies, which were scheduled around their regular, full-time jobs, extended beyond the theoretical.


Blacks Reach a Milestone in Queens: Income Parity
In the late 1980's, when Wall Street boomed and the rich got richer, Winston St.
Kitts, a subway-car maintenance man who emigrated from Guyana 14 years ago, discovered the American Dream in Queens.
Mr.
St.
Kitts, who is 38 years old, moved to Queens two years ago from an apartment in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
He bought a two-family house in Jamaica, where he hopes to raise a family.


Irwin Toy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article on Thursday about business discussions that Ross Perot was reported to have conducted with Vietnamese officials in 1987 rendered the name of a business associate incorrectly.
He is Harry McKillop.


Inter-Provincial Diversified Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A P.R. Firm's Big Push Into Finance
As banks and insurance companies struggle to overcome their bad loans and brokerage firms cope with insider trading and all three fight to expand into each other's business, some public relations experts think the time is ripe for a new push into the financial-services industry.
At Burson-Marsteller, which says it has surpassed Hill &amp; Knowlton as the world's largest public relations agency, this opportunity has led to a hiring binge that has doubled the size of its financial group, to 10 people.


Gwil Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


3 Reasons to Put Aside Worries About Inflation
With recent increases in the price of oil and other important commodities and signs that economic recovery will not fade this year the way it did in 1991, some credit market participants are starting to worry that the best news on inflation may be about over.
But such market concerns are not shared by a wide range of current and former policy makers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazine Notes; Soap Operas Attract a Fan on Wall Street
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the corporate buyout giant, has been the star of many a Wall Street soap opera, most notably the $25 billion takeover of RJR Nabisco in 1988.
Now, an affiliate of the investment firm is planning to start a magazine about soap operas -- the television variety, of course, where the intrigue is more likely to be found in the bedroom than the board room.


FPA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The 1992 Campaign: The Texans; 2 Urban Cowboys Duel for Heart of Texas
Spurs Tavern, a local beer joint or "ice house," as it is known, is a manly place.
The walls are covered with skulls and horns and hides of Texas steers.
Confederate flags hang from the ceiling.
The pool tables are crowded and Merle Haggard spits out his songs from the jukebox.
It is proper etiquette to leer at waitresses and drink beer straight from the bottle.
And the ladies' room is filled with pictures of John Wayne aiming rifles.


Prime Motor Inns Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Williams Graduates Are Asked to Help Others
John Hope Franklin, the professor emeritus of history at Duke University, told graduates at the 203d commencement at Williams College to fight racism, urban decay and homelessness by participating in politics.
Calling the government "guilty of the most outrageous conduct in defrauding you and me as well as those in need," he said that graduates could remedy inequality by spending an hour or two each week to aid the homeless or teach the illiterate.


Comair Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Forces Join to End Crippling Crashes
Even an exciting finish -- in which Al Unser Jr. beat Scott Goodyear by .043 seconds, the closest margin ever for the Indianapolis 500 -- could not diminish the sense that this May was a bad one at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
Rookie driver Jovy Marcelo died, three-time world champion Nelson Piquet had his career ended by a practice crash, and Jeff Andretti, Mario Andretti's son, suffered serious leg and foot injuries.
And that was merely the worst of it.


Who's No.1 in Lisbon? Portuguese Leaders Clash
After three electoral victories and seven years in office, Portugal's Prime Minister, Anibal Cavaco Silva, evidently finds it irritating to be far less well known abroad than the country's President, Mario Soares, whose job is meant to be purely ceremonial.
But it is also apparent that Mr.
Soares, who first became known in the 1960's as an opponent of Portugal's dictatorship and who himself served as Prime Minister after democracy was restored, is reluctant to end his long political career doing nothing more than cutting ribbons.


Cinram Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pharmacy Management Services reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Christian Science Leaders, Accused of Improprieties, Face Members Today
Facing persistent accusations of financial and religious improprieties, leaders of the Christian Science Church will try to reassure alarmed members at the church's annual meeting today by outlining sharp cuts in spending.
The meeting will be the board's first public accounting since a long-simmering dispute about the church's recent policies erupted last February in a wave of resignations by respected church workers.


Kirsten L. Bloomberg, Mark A. Feldman
Kirsten Louise Bloomberg, the daughter of C. Eric Bloomberg of Old Saybrook, Conn., and Geraldine Kellogg of St.
Augustine, Fla., was married yesterday to Mark Allen Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Feldman of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Dr.
Robert Bersom, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, officiated at the Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Feldman, 25 years old, is the design coordinator for Edwin Schlossberg Inc., a design firm in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
She is also the stepdaughter of Barbara Bloomberg of Old Saybrook and of Dennis Kellogg of St.
Augustine.


Win, Place, Show And All That Jazz
JOEY BUSHKIN, the jazz pianist who played with TOMMY DORSEY, ARTIE SHAW and SARAH VAUGHAN, among others, visited one of his favorite joints Saturday: Belmont Park.
"I used to own horses with Bing on the Coast," Bushkin, fresh from receiving an honorary doctor of music degree from Hamilton College, said, referring to BING CROSBY.


PLAN TO BROADEN HEALTH INSURANCE
Legislative leaders and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have tentatively agreed to a major overhaul of New York State's health insurance system, including a provision that would compel commercial insurance companies to accept all applicants, no matter how sick.
The plan would also forbid insurers to charge higher rates for individuals and small groups based on factors like age, sex or medical condition.
The Democratic Governor and the Democratic-led Assembly have long sought such a plan and were finally able to win agreement from Republican leaders in the State Senate after Mr.
Cuomo threatened to go along with a request by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the largest health insurer in the state, for a major rate rise this fall if no compromise was reached.
Similar System in Vermont
State officials said that if New York passed such legislation, it would be the first state to outlaw discrimination in health insurance against people who are sick or in high-risk groups.
Only one state, Vermont, has a similar system, they said, and Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey has said he would propose legislation like New York's plan.


Cedar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


End the Free Ride for Driving to Work
Free parking at work is an untaxed fringe benefit for millions, worth hundreds of dollars a year.
But employees who get free passes or tokens from their employers to commute by mass transit are taxed on the full amount if the subsidy exceeds $21 a month.
The energy bill recently passed by the House would reduce this glaring disparity.
It's high time.
There are no precise statistics, but it is estimated that employers provide free parking for some 60 million cars every day but give transit subsidies to only 100,000 individuals.


MCI Is Going To a Wedding
It is not that unusual for satisfied customers to write thank you notes to companies, praising their products or services.
But it is out of the ordinary when a customer invites a top executive of a $9.5 billion company to attend a wedding, which then becomes the focus of television commericals.
In April, Jim Sloat, a 25-year-old graduate student at Duke University in Durham, N.C., wrote to Bert C. Roberts Jr., president and chief executive of the MCI Communications Corporation in Washington.
In the letter, Mr.
Sloat praised MCI's "Friends &amp; Family" program, which offers savings on long-distance telephone calls made to regularly called numbers.


Oil Washes Up on Shore, Closing Robert Moses Park
The beach at Robert Moses State Park on the South Shore of Long Island suffered the worst erosion in 30 years during storms over the weekend, and when the fog cleared today, the sand was covered with large oil balls that had washed in during high tide, state officials said.
The beach was ordered closed to bathers as hundreds of state park workers from around the island converged on the park to clean it up, repair damage from the storms and search for the source of the oil.


Review/Opera; A 'Butterfly' Dedicated to Simplicity
This was originally going to be a piece about a wall.
But as it turned out on Wednesday night at the Loretto-Hilton Center here, what happened in front of the wall -- a performance of Puccini's "Madam Butterfly" -- was so alluring that the wall faded into the background.
That was, after all, precisely what it was supposed to do.
The wall in question is a new set designed by Derek McLane for the Opera Theater of St.
Louis.
This accomplished company's annual season is compressed into May and June; four operas are staged, representing a wide range of repertory.
Its season, in fact, is more like a festival, using a 950-seat theater at Webster University as a home.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Perot in Navy: Dynamic and Popular
Within days after they arrived at the United States Naval Academy in the summer of 1949, plebe classmates recall, a pint-size kid from East Texas started to sweep them up in an organizational tornado.
First as coxswain of a winning whaleboat crew, later as head of the honor committee and then as class president, Ross Perot, his classmates say, displayed the same hard-charging attitude that has propelled him to the top of Presidential public-opinion polls.


Critic's Notebook; Unannounced Candidate And TV Journalism
At the same time that Ross Perot has been roiling the Washington political establishment, he has also been cocking a snook at the network journalism establishment.
In pursuing ever more direct means of making his case to millions, the unannounced candidate has taken the scene of action away from the evening news.
NBC's Tom Brokaw, ABC's Peter Jennings and CBS's Dan Rather, personifications of the medium at its most respected, responsible and influential, find themselves bumped from the limelight by CNN's Larry King, monarch of the call-ins.
Mr.
Perot has tried a variety of talk shows since letting it be known in March, on "Larry King Live" of course, that if admirers worked hard enough in his behalf he might condescend to run for President. (He has not yet tooted his horn for Arsenio Hall.) It has not taken him long to learn that his interests are not best advanced by tightly controlled traditional news programs, where professionals ask the questions.
What he seeks are opportunities to reach viewers without journalistic interference, as he tried to do last month in his campaign rally by satellite and as he promises to do if he is President via an electronic town hall.


The U.N. Belongs In New York City
To the Editor:
I agree wholeheartedly with your statements in "New York Rediscovers the U.N." (editorial, June 2) that "the U.N. is viewed as a jewel in the city's crown" and that the benefits of its being based here are multifaceted.
Mayor David N. Dinkins's administration has been involved at the highest levels for months in formulating a serious, competitive counteroffer and campaign to keep all United Nations agencies.
The city has evaluated and proposed short-term inducements and is considering a long-term plan.
We have communicated at length with senior officials of the Secretariat and top management of the four agencies considering relocation.


Etz Lavud Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


John Charles Doerfer, 87, Is Dead; Headed F.C.C. in Era of Scandals
John Charles Doerfer, who headed the Federal Communications Commission during controversies over payments to disk jockeys and quiz shows scandals and who was forced out of office for vacationing on a broadcaster's yacht, died on Friday at his home in Boston.
He was 87 years old and died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Foreign Affairs; Missile Defense Traps
The Bush Administration may be brain dead on domestic policy.
But it is doing a clever job of setting mini-Star Wars traps for Russia, NATO allies and Congress.
And the White House is about to spring those traps.
President Bush will meet with an ambivalent President Yeltsin next week and try to extract more leeway from the 1972 treaty restricting missile defenses.
The Pentagon is busily luring wary allies with lucrative contracts.
Key Congressional Democrats, playing their own tricky game, are being sucked into the very traps they are trying to avoid.


Voices of Israel: To Many, the Fruits of the '67 War Taste Bitter
On the 25th anniversary of the 1967 Middle East War, Israelis are talking about the road their country has traveled since that June.
The war, from June 5 to June 10, was the most significant event for Israel since its war of independence in 1948, a dazzling victory over neighboring Arab countries that left the Israelis with far more territory and breathing room but also with many more domestic divisions and international disputes.


Publishers' Best Seller: The Backlist
The book is a publisher's dream: a sure-bet novel by a popular author, but there are no big advances, no artist's fee for a cover design, no big cross-country promotional tour for the author and no bad reviews that could mar the debut.
What's the catch?
There is none, and the truth is there are thousands of books just like it at virtually every publishing house.


Uptown Girl Cuts Loose
She wore a designer home-on-the-range outfit: floor-length trail coat, chaps, a broad-brimmed hat.
But CHRISTIE BRINKLEY came to Belmont Park to work yesterday, giving an exhibition aboard her cutting horse.
There were many such events around Belmont Stakes week, dubbed Horsefair '92.


Czechs Right, Slovaks Left; Nationwide Elections Yield No Natural Alloy
Voters in Czechoslovakia this weekend demonstrated one of the hard new truths reshaping Eastern Europe's political landscape: just as the impulse for democracy once brought people together, the democratic process is now helping to split them apart.
Only 30 months after millions joined in the so-called Velvet Revolution in 1989, which gained free elections and an end to Communist rule, people in the two halves of Czechoslovakia handed down completely contradictory mandates in voting that ended Saturday.


Trimel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Insured Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Montclair Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Beau Canada Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
Gina Gibney  St. Mark's Church
Gina Gibney's "Landings," performed Friday night, deals ingeniously with the ways bodies fall, rise and position themselves in space.
But the five-part work, set to music by Stephen Scott, Daniel Lentz and Paul Dresher, is a good deal more than a dry disquisition on the properties of flight.
With the exception of ensemble dancing at the piece's start and close, each action, encounter and separation is imbued with unstated emotions.
These are heroic bodies, pushed by an insistent lyricism in ways reminiscent of Jose Limon.
There are some deeply satisfying, sometimes wittily surprising juxtapositions of sculptured-looking bodies, curves echoing or bisecting each other, a body tilting back then straightening into a forward-tilting exit.
A woman swims through the air perched on her stomach across her bending partner's back.
And some configurations and sequences stand on their own as in what looks like a reversal of a discus thrower's windup and heave.


Pantorama Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Trail Blazers Had That Sinking Feeling
They could sense that something wasn't right tonight, sense that this game was simply slipping away from them with every missed shot, every turnover, every lost rebound.
The Portland Trail Blazers were not shocked into silent disbelief.
They knew what happened.
They even found the words to articulate their 94-84 loss to the Chicago Bulls in Game 3 of the National Basketball Association finals.


Morgan Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 3


Fires, Frost, Now Moths: A Forest Skips Summer
It has been a hard spring for large sections of the New Jersey Pinelands.
At the beginning of May, wildfires burned some 15,000 acres of the vast forest preserve.
Then came large clouds of pine looper moths, whose larvae will soon begin eating vast sections of the pitch pine forest for the second year running, having somehow skipped the 10-year interval between infestations that have been the rule until now.
Then shortly after the moths laid their eggs a severe frost struck, shriveling the fresh oak leaves over a wide area and giving large parts of the million-acre preserve the look of fall.


BPI Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Port Authority Has Gulled Us for 70 Years
To the Editor:
In arguing against oversight of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey (editorial, May 27), you laud the Port Authority as "the region's economic engine." But that engine has dragged our economy down an unforeseen and mistaken track.
Many forget that the Port Authority, as its name implies, was founded 70 years ago to improve New York's chief asset: the world's second-greatest natural deep-water port, after Hong Kong.
The Port Authority was sold to the public as the vehicle for a much-needed railroad tunnel from New Jersey to the Brooklyn docks.


Newbridge Networks reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Datapoint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Private Agencies Fight For Funds to Help Poor
"They also serve who only stand and wait" may have been John Milton's credo.
But emerging groups of black, Hispanic and Asian social-service agencies are getting tired of waiting to serve.
Their decision to take a stand is reverberating within some of the venerable philanthropic agencies, many of whose original charges long since ascended into the middle-class and whose board members and officials no longer reflect the race, ethnicity or religion of their current clientele.


Chemi-Trol Chemcial Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PolyMedica Industries reports earnings for Year to March 31


The Sudan Trying to Join Capitalism to Islam
With a copy of the Koran in one hand and the economic theories of Milton Friedman in the other, the Sudanese Government is trying to wed unbridled capitalism to militant Islam.
"An Islamic society should reconcile material and spiritual progress," Finance Minister Abdel Rahim Hamdi said, "which is something that is decidedly lacking in Western civilization now."


Nancy Val Lesk, Jonathan Ivar Polk
Nancy Val Lesk, a daughter of Alan and Marilyn Lesk of Fort Lee, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Ivar Polk, a son of Herbert and Irene Polk of Manhasset, L.I.
Rabbi David E. Fass performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Miss Lesk, 26 years old, graduated from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is the corporate senior vice president and chairman of the intimate apparel division of the Leslie Fay Companies Inc. in New York., manufacturer's of women's clothing and accessories.


Tricks of the Trade
WOODY STEPHENS, the only man to saddle five consecutive Belmont Stakes winners, is often asked by other trainers what the trick was.
"The Belmont is an awful funny race," said Stephens.
"A rider means an awful lot. A lot of horses don't want to go one and a half miles. I'm a man who sits down with a rider and talks to him. Some trainers don't see their riders until just before the race. I explain to them what I want."


Grandmother Tries to Stay Cool as Granddaughter Tries to Ride a Bike


Gates Threatens to Delay Leaving
Playing his last political card, Chief Daryl F. Gates of the Los Angeles Police Department threatened over the weekend to delay his retirement this month, pointing to his critics and saying: "Vengeance is taking place. Vengeance."
His remarks caused hand-wringing at City Hall, which has found itself unable to deal with Chief Gates's caprices since its failure to remove him after the videotaped police beating of Rodney G. King 15 months ago.


At Roseland, a Benefit Concert for AIDS
The Pet Shop Boys and Salt-n-Pepa are to perform at 9 tonight at Roseland in Manhattan in a benefit concert for Lifebeat, the music-industry's organization to fight AIDS.
The concert is to be the first in a series of music and other events to be held around the country to raise money and foster awareness about AIDS, said a spokesman for LLifebeat, a nonprofit organization founded this year.
Proceeds are to go to local AIDS service organizations in each locale.
The concert tonight is to benefit the People With AIDS Coalition of New York; God's Love We Deliver, which takes hot meals to homebound people who have AIDS; the Community Research Initiative on AIDS, and the T. J. Martell Foundation for Leukemia, Cancer and AIDS Research.


Forstmann &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


General Leaseholds reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A NEW EQUALITY IN EARNINGS IN QUEENS


Don't Blink at Court Cameras
New York, which produces some of the nation's most important trials, is now debating whether to rejoin the many states that allow courtroom photography.
Regrettably, members of the State Senate are rallying opposition to a compromise measure approved by the Assembly.
The bill would renew, for 30 months, experiments with cameras that lapsed a year ago.
Despite several flaws, including its temporary nature, the bill merits passage.


Howe Leaves to Face Charges
Yankees relief pitcher Steve Howe left the team yesterday and headed to Missoula, Mont., where a hearing will be held today on off-season charges of drug possession.
The left-handed mainstay of the Yankee bullpen, with a 3-0 record and 6 saves, Howe is expected to plead guilty in exchange for no jail sentence.
An admission of guilt by the player, however, who has been suspended six times by baseball, is likely to bring a suspension from Commissioner Fay Vincent.


ARM Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
A Japanese Government advisory council has turned the tables and attacked the U.S. for breaking international trade rules, in the first step toward an aggressive new trade strategy.  [ Page A1. ]
Euro Disneyland has encountered teething problems after opening with immense fanfare two months ago.
Its ebullient executives are backing away from their unbridled optimism.  [ D1. ] Companies


Tracor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Talent Search a Success
Give me your tired, your poor, your rangy defenders with American fathers, your explosive forwards with American wives.
This slight modification has not yet been inscribed on the pedestal below the Statue of Liberty, but United States Soccer Federation officials might well be chiseling sometime soon.
With the recruitment of several foreign-raised and foreign-trained athletes, the United States national soccer team has come of age in a sporting era without borders.


Network Cuts May Help TV Show Syndicators
In the wake of CBS's radical new plans for paying affiliated stations to carry the network's program lineup, many television executives are predicting that the changes in the network-affiliate relationship are only beginning.
Though no one sees an imminent break in a business relationship descended from the early days of radio, many executives expect more conflict as the networks continue to cut their compensation to stations.


Radio and Fragrance Awards Presented
Awards for radio and fragrance advertising were presented last week in New York.
At the first Mercury Awards presentation, sponsored by the Radio Advertising Bureau's Radio Creative Fund, the Richards Groupin Dallas won the top prize, the $100,000 Mercury Gold Award, for a spot for the Motel 6 lodging chain.
The Molson Breweries campaign, featuring smart chat between a sophisticated couple, won the most awards, four, for the Moving and Talking Picture Company.


Dimensional Medicine reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aryt Optronics Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Portraying Clinton as Logjam Breaker
Governors Bill Clinton and Mario M. Cuomo and the leadership of the Democratic Party appear to have joined forces in an effort to save the probable Democratic nominee from becoming politically insignificant as a three-way race for President unfolds.
Governor Clinton, back in his home state for a break in his Presidential quest, said today that he would announce a plan within the next few weeks outlining a legislative agenda he would pursue in cooperation with the Democratic leaders of the House and Senate.


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Bridge
The Pan-American Championships, which began on Saturday in Corpus Christi, Tex., might more appropriately be called the Split-American Championships.
The World Bridge Federation has decreed that teams from the same country must eliminate each other as early as possible, a regulation that has a major impact on the teams from the United States.
They are virtually playing a competition against each other until the final day.
There are four strong American teams in the open series, in a field of 24, and if they survive two days of qualifying play, as is likely, they will have to play each other in the quarterfinal and semifinal stages.
The Women's Teams, in a field of 14, are similarly restricted.
The result in each series, almost inevitably, will be a final between an American and a non-American team.


Corrections
An article on Friday about Congressional debate over a proposed constitutional amendment to balance the Federal budget rendered a Harvard law professor's name incorrectly.
He is Laurence H. Tribe.


Circumstances In Philadelphia Fill Death Row
Less than 30 hours before Henry P. Fahy was to be executed on Jan. 14 for rape and murder, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court sent his case back to a lower court here for review, saying he must be given a new lawyer.
His previous court-appointed lawyer -- the one who was assigned to appeal his conviction -- had literally done nothing for him.
In that respect, legal experts say, Mr.
Fahy is not alone.
They say inadequate legal representation is a leading reason that Philadelphia's courts have condemned more people to death than those in any other city but Houston, which has sent about 100 people to death row in Texas.


Gonzalez Goes Deep 3 Times For Texas
Rangers 5, Twins 4
ARLINGTON, Tex., June 7 (AP) -- Juan Gonzalez had three home runs, including a two-run shot in the eighth, as the Texas Rangers beat the Minnesota Twins, 5-4, tonight.
Gonzalez became the fourth player in Rangers history to hit three homers in a game and the first since Larry Parrish in 1985.


Japan Is Trying New Approach In Trade Battles
In what Japanese officials say will be the first step toward an aggressive strategy for confronting the United States on trade issues, a Government advisory council has turned the tables and attacked the United States for breaking a number of international trade rules.
In a report released this morning, the United States was described as having the most unfair trade among the world's industrialized nations.
An official of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said the underlying aim of the council's report was to provide a blueprint for Japan's new strategy for handling trade disputes -- trying to move away from the past practice of negotiating directly with the United States over trade problems and instead referring them to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the world organization that oversees trade. 'The Basis for Discussions'
"The intention is to use GATT frequently," the official said.
"This report will be a guideline for our approach to solving trade problems, the basis for discussions with our major trading partners."
Whether the full Japanese Government adopts this policy as a vigorous new approach, and how successful it might be, remain to be seen.
However much Japan may prefer the multinational arena, it is likely to be forced to deal with Washington directly when members of Congress, the Administration or prominent American industries have major complaints.
But such a shift could have a big impact on Japan's often bitter relationship with its largest trading partner.
In Washington, Kathleen A. Lydon, the assistant United States trade representative for public affairs, said the United States believed that resolving trade disputes through GATT was "one of the best" approaches to take.
In its report, a subcommittee of the Industrial Sector Council, a private-sector advisory group to the trade ministry at the heart of Japanese policy-making, examined how closely Japan's trading partners adhered to rules governing international trade.
It concluded that the United States failed in 9 of 10 areas.
The report accused the United States of these unfair trade practices:
*Washington too often imposes unilateral solutions on trade problems, instead of seeking to settle matters through international forums.
*The United States abuses rules that permit a country to halt the sale of other nations' products at prices below cost or below fair market value, a practice known as dumping.
*The United States arbitrarily alters tariffs and frequently resorts to negotiating "voluntary" restraints on another nation's exports, as it did with Japan on autos, steel and machine tools.
*"Buy American" laws, some of which were enacted after President Bush's trip to Japan in January, restrict Federal Government purchases to mostly American goods and services and discriminate against Japanese products.
American trade officials have frequently made this complaint about Japan.
Ms.
Lydon said she had not seen the report and could not respond to its specific complaints but added, "Everybody knows that the United States has the most open markets in the world, and our interest is in seeing that other nations follow suit."
As for the criticism of voluntary restraint agreements, she said, "We would much prefer to see them open their markets than to manage the number of items they export."
The report ranked the European Community next to last among Japan's trading partners, failing in six categories.
Hong Kong and Singapore were cited as the fairest traders.
Other countries examined were Australia, Canada, Indonesia and Malaysia, South Korea and Thailand.
The document comes as Japan is under pressure from a number of countries over its trade practices.
Although Japan's trade surplus with the United States appears to have stabilized at about $40 billion a year, its surplus with Asia and the European Community has been rising sharply.
Japan's overall surplus this year is expected to be more than $110 billion, the largest in the world.
Japan feels the GATT rules offer it a better forum, since they give far less weight to trade imbalances by themselves.
The report dismissed such imbalances as meaningless.
"Although some point to Japan's large trade surplus as evidence of a closed market, this argument is refuted by basic lessons of economics," it insisted.
The United States conducts an annual trade survey in which it judges how open the markets of its trading partners are.
Japanese officials said Tokyo's unfairness report would also be an annual exercise from now on.
Japan is negotiating with South Korea over the large Japanese trade surplus with Korea, and Japan's surplus with the European Community was a record $27.4 billion last year, a 48 percent increase from 1990.
It appears likely to grow this year.
Nonetheless, Japan was angered when the European Community recently expressed its disappointment at the growing size of the trade gap.
The Europeans issued a formal review of their relations with Japan that emphasized the trade problems.
That prompted the Japanese Government to say it was sending a tough letter in reply, expressing its unhappiness that the community chose to emphasize trade over political and other areas where Japan believes relations have improved.
The new report said it had three objectives.
The first was to come up with a new definition of unfair trade, largely by referring to GATT rules.
But it excluded trade in agricultural goods, an area in which Japan is often criticized because of its ban on the import of rice.
The second objective was to suggest that all countries deviated from the GATT rules to some extent.
And last, the report was an attempt to move away from direct discussions between countries for resolving trade disputes and toward taking them to GATT instead.


Charter Power Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Pop; The Sadness of Los Lobos
The complexities of the recording studio and simplicities of live performance clashed a bit at Los Lobos' show at the Bottom Line on Thursday night.
The band has just released a new album, "Kiko" (Warner Brothers), which features a series of carefully constructed songs that owe a good part of their texture to the technological possibilities of a recording studio.
Guitars sound as if they've been sent spinning backward, odd noises gurgle in the background and choirs chant in the far distance, voices electronically modified.
Those sort of textures are hard to pull off onstage, and for the first handful of songs at the Bottom Line, taken from the album, the band sounded a bit unsure of itself.
The band's saxophonist and keyboardist, Steve Berlin, played samples from his keyboards to get some of the sound, whether it be a tricky percussion part or a gauzy texture, and the band was forced to accommodate the technology, which seemed a bit invasive.
It wasn't until the band performed some of its older material that the members loosened up and began to move toward the euphoria of rock.


Beverly Hills Fan Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Odetics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Pop; Lionel Richie's Manilow Possibilities
Friends had been wondering, Lionel Richie told the audience at the Ritz on Friday night, "Why in the world are you playing such a small place?" During the 1980's, when he sold tens of millions of albums, he was used to arenas, and he'll no doubt return to them on his incipient tour, his first in five years.
On Friday, he said he wanted to perform where he could see the audience.
He didn't mention the obvious: that the show was being videotaped, with cameras onstage and in the balconies.
Mr.
Richie is promoting "Back to Front" (Motown), his first album since 1986.
He described it as "a greatest-hits package"; it also includes three new songs.


Dylex Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of Boston Corp., Boston, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $750 million of debt and $300 million of preferred stock.
*
Dillard Department Stores Inc., Little Rock, Ark., is offering $100 million of 7 3/8 percent notes due on June 15, 1999, at 99.43 to yield 7.481 percent, through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


American United Global Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Death of a Crusader With Enemies; 3 Months Later, Police Are Still Searching for Editor's Killer
Throughout his life, Manuel de Dios Unanue took fierce pride in his willingness -- some would say compulsion -- to say "what others won't say." That, in fact, was the title he gave to the Spanish-language radio program and magazine columns that he used to excoriate things he thought duplicitous, unjust or corrupt.
Now, Mr. de Dios has become the focus of the type of controversy he loved to write about and, when possible, provoke: a morality tale about international drug trafficking and vicious gangsters, shadowy informers and crusading journalists.


Question Box
Koufax vs. Ryan
Q.
Did Nolan Ryan ever pitch against Sandy Koufax?
A.
Like the batters who faced both, their careers missed connecting.
When Ryan, the right-hander with seven no-hitters, was dipping his pitching toe into the big league waters, Koufax, the left-hander with four no-hitters, was dipping his pitching elbow into whirlpool baths.
That was in 1966, a year the ninth-place New York Mets called up the raw Ryan for a late-season look-see and the first-place Los Angeles Dodgers were sweating out a late-season let's-see with the fragile Koufax, whose arthritic elbow forced him to call it a career after the World Series that fall.


Russian Nationalists Protest Vote Against Serbia
Russia's vote to join United Nations sanctions against Serbia has set off a protest from right-wing nationalists in the Russian Parliament, who are accusing the Government of "betraying" their Slavic brothers and selling out to "pro-American interests" in Europe.
Moscow's about-face on Yugoslavia has proved to be a litmus test not only of Russia's longstanding historical and cultural ties to Serbia, but also of the perception in some political circles here that Russia has had to fall in line behind the West's policy as the price for Western credits and aid.


Universal Security Instruments Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Viceroy Homes reports earnings for Year to March 31


Biomedical Waste reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Teen-Ager's Lawyer Considers TV Offers
The lawyer for a Long Island teen-ager accused of shooting her lover's wife is trying to sell the rights to interviews with his client in order to raise bail money, a television station reported yesterday.
The lawyer, Eric Naiburg, told WCBS-TV that he had approached "a few" television organizations in the hope that one of them would put up money to get his client, Amy Fisher, out of jail in exchange for exclusive interview rights.
Mr.
Naiburg would not tell the station which networks he was speaking with.


Courier Can't Stop Cranking Victories
The carrot-topped automaton, currently performing as the world's No. 1-ranked male tennis player, put himself on automatic pilot this afternoon and sandblasted his way to his second consecutive French Open title and his second Grand Slam championship for 1992.
"I never felt unbeatable," said Jim Courier, who was routinely compared to a machine as he went calmly about the business of dismantling seven opponents here over the last two weeks.
"Until it was over, I treated this like just another match. But it's extraordinary. It's an adrenaline rush."


Advanced Tissue Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bulls Get Defensive And Top Blazers
Relying on superb defense, the Chicago Bulls handcuffed the Portland Trail Blazers tonight and regained the upper hand in the National Basketball Association championship series.
Chicago prevailed, 94-84, in Game 3 at Portland Memorial Coliseum.
The victory recaptured the home-court advantage for the Bulls, who now have two days to regroup before Game 4 of the four-of-seven-game series here Wednesday night.


Spinnaker Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
"The Sleeping Beauty"  American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House
"The Sleeping Beauty" can be particularly deadly if dancers get tired of performing it in extended runs.
But the casts presented by American Ballet Theater last Monday and Wednesday nights danced the work with remarkable verve and attention to detail toward the end of a run of eight performances, making each evening freshly enjoyable.
Christine Dunham and Steven Heathcote stepped into the lead roles of Princess Aurora and Prince Desire on Monday.
Ms.
Dunham was a radiant, spirited Aurora, stressing the excitement of being young and loved in big bold jumps and an open upper torso while underplaying, regrettably, the ethereal poetry of Aurora as a vision.
But Ms.
Dunham may have been responding to Mr.
Heathcote, a guest from the Australian Ballet, a healthy young prince who didn't waste much time on melancholy in the Vision Scene.
He is a dream of a partner, though, and survived the pyrotechnics of the Grand Pas de Deux with impressive polish.


Southeastern Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Professional Dental Tech. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Wall St. Housecleaning
To the Editor:
I write to correct a fundamental misstatement of fact in "Rough Justice for Salomon" (Topics of The Times, May 22).
While we in the previous management at the Wall Street securities house of Salomon Brothers have been criticized for acting too slowly, even the Securities and Exchange Commission's complaint against Salomon makes clear that it was the "old" Salomon that fully investigated, found and voluntarily disclosed Paul Mozer's improper bidding practices.


Hispanic Group Challenges Redistricting Plan
Arguing that New York City's Hispanic residents would be shortchanged, an advocacy group is asking the Federal courts to strike down a Congressional redistricting plan that the State Legislature is expected to approve this week.
Arthur Baer, a lawyer with the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, said his organization was seeking an injunction from Federal District Court in Brooklyn that would invalidate any plan that did not include at least three districts with a majority of Hispanic residents.
The plan before the Legislature provides only two districts with Hispanic majorities.


Ahold nv Inc. reports earnings for 16wks to April 19


Newport Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Chambliss Eliminates the Excuses
BEFORE this baseball season started, Chris Chambliss turned down a job in the major leagues to keep one in the minor leagues.
What Chris Chambliss did was "courageous," said Tom McCraw, the hitting coach for the Mets.


Kewaunee Scientific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Wall Financial reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Kit Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Barrington Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article on May 20 about the autopsy of President John F. Kennedy included an erroneous reference from The Journal of the American Medical Association to the history of statements by the doctors who performed the autopsy and others who treated him in the emergency room.
Some of them spoke previously in public about the matter; they were not breaking a 28-year silence.


Kodak Dealt a Setback In Antitrust Case Ruling
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Eastman Kodak Company must stand trial in an antitrust suit that has important implications for the ability of manufacturers to control the markets for the parts and servicing of the products they make.
By a vote of 6 to 3, the Court rejected Kodak's argument that it was legally entitled to dismissal of the suit, brought in 1987 by 18 companies that sell replacement parts and service for Kodak's line of sophisticated business machines.


Avon to Shut Plant in Spain
Avon Products Inc. said yesterday that it would shut its manufacturing operation in Spain as part of its worldwide restructuring.
The company said closing the plant, which is in Alcala de Henares, would help eliminate excess production in Europe.
Manufacturing will be shifted to underutilized factories in Como, Italy; Northampton, England, and Munich.


End of the Line For Kingsmen?
With Brooklyn College facing more than $5 million in budget cuts and the costs involved in complying with Federal Title IX provisions, a committee at the school has recommended abolition of all its intercollegiate athletic programs, a college official said yesterday.
"Right now it's an option, not definite, something that is proposed but unless something is changed, it will go into effect July 1," said Molly Perdue, the assistant athletic director in charge of women's programs and also the women's basketball coach.


Winnie Mandela Fights to Hold Political Posts
As Winnie Mandela fights for political survival after her marital separation from Nelson Mandela, she is proving nearly as much of a headache for the African National Congress as she has been for the white minority Government.
After the Mandelas announced their separation on April 13, Mrs.
Mandela resigned under pressure as head of the congress's social welfare department, prompting a premature assumption that she would retire altogether.


Battle Looms Over Paying To Rewire U.S. for Phones
Armed with ambitious blueprints to build a communications network for the next century, the nation's local telephone companies are racing to replace their aging copper wires with optical fibers.
In time, the companies say, they hope to deliver everything from television images to libraries of data at a moment's notice -- services that cable television companies also hope to deliver.
The catch is that the telephone companies want their customers to foot much of the bill up front -- and the cost during the next 20 to 30 years is expected to run well over $100 billion.


Delta Lowers Trans-Atlantic Fares
Only three days after the major carriers ended their latest domestic air war, Delta Air Lines fired another salvo last evening when it lowered trans-Atlantic fares for business travelers up to 45 percent.
The fares, available today, apply to full coach, business and first-class fares on round-trip flights from the continental United States to any of Delta's 36 trans-Atlantic destinations.


Inquiry Panel on British Press Deplores Reports on Princess
An independent watchdog committee set up last year in the hope of discouraging excesses of the British press said today that "prurient reporting" on the marriage of the Prince and Princess of Wales this weekend had reached new a low in dirt-dishing.
The press complaints commission was only one of many British institutions and public personalities wringing their hands today over the spectacle of newspapers, including The Sunday Times, outdoing themselves over the weekend with sensational details, including five reported suicide attempts by the Princess, in the early 1980's.


L.I. Beach Still Closed; Crews Start Oil Cleanup
As a thick mist lifted, a dozen workers in white jumpsuits moved down along the shrunken, debris-strewn beach at Robert Moses State Park this morning, sifting oil out of the sand.
It was a lamentable image for Long Island beaches at the start of a summer season in a year in which storms have caused havoc, sweeping away towering dunes and ocean-front homes and washing up thousands of goblets of oil on the pristine state beaches.


Cooper Industries Is Looking for a New Conquest
Cooper Industries rose into America's manufacturing elite over the last 30 years by buying businesses like Champion Spark Plug, McGraw-Edison and Crouse-Hinds and sharpening their operations.
The list includes more than 60 companies and product lines, which raised Cooper's revenues to $6.2 billion from $62 million.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Slobodan Milosevic referred to him incorrectly.
He is President of Serbia, the dominant republic of Yugoslavia; the Yugoslav presidency is vacant.


Business and Health; Trying to Curb Price of Drugs
THE pharmaceutical industry is under growing Congressional pressure to slow the rise of prescription drug prices.
Even though executives of several large drug companies have pledged to restrain their increases voluntarily, drug prices are still increasing at almost triple the general inflation rate.
Prescription drug prices rose 9.4 percent in the 12 months ended in April, the Labor Department said in its latest report, while the Consumer Price Index increase was only 3.2 percent.


ABBOTT SHARES FALL BECAUSE OF PROBLEMS WITH DRUG
Abbott Laboratories said yesterday that it would take a charge against second-quarter earnings to cover costs associated with removing its Omniflox antibiotic from the market.
The confirmation, as well as speculation that the charge would be hefty, sent Abbott stock plunging 13 percent yesterday, or $4.125 a share, to $27.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Abbott voluntarily withdrew the new drug on Friday after reports of three deaths and dozens of severe adverse reactions.


7 Who Raced Reynolds May Also Be Suspended
A senior official of the world governing body for track and field said yesterday that the seven athletes who competed against Butch Reynolds in a 400-meter race Saturday in San Francisco are likely to face suspension.
Reynolds won the race in 44.98 seconds to qualify for the Olympic trials, starting next week in New Orleans.
But he is currently under a two-year drug suspension by the world body, the International Amateur Athletic Federation, which reserves the right to sanction anyone who competes against a suspended athlete or, in severe cases, all other athletes in the meet.


STANDARD CHARTERED TO BUY FIRST INTERSTATE BUSINESS
Standard Chartered P.L.C. said yesterday that it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire the First Interstate Bancorp's trade and related businesses, primarily in the Asia-Pacific region.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.
The sale calls for Standard, based in London, to purchase Los Angeles-based First Interstate's corporate finance, international correspondent banking and global trading operations, with a total of 23 offices in 15 countries.


Grant Gets All Wrapped Up When Duty Calls
The bandage that Horace Grant wore over his left eye today comes with his territory.
Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen get most of the glory and the commercial contracts for the Chicago Bulls.
Grant gets the rebounds, the bumps and the bruises.
Every championship team has players willing to accept roles, and Grant excels at accepting his.


Oshman's Sporting Goods reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Victor Alexander, 79, Owner of Dress Shops
Victor Alexander, a designer of women's fashions and co-owner of the Countess Alexander dress shops, died on May 11 in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 79 years old and lived in Palm Beach and Southampton, L.I.
Mr. Alexander died of cancer, said his nephew, Garo Alexanian.


Ivy League Builders
America's great universities are losing presidents at a record pace.
The list reads like a Who's Who of higher education: Hanna Holborn Gray at The University of Chicago, H. Keith H. Brodie at Duke, Donald Kennedy at Stanford.
The Ivy League has been stunned by two presidential resignations in two weeks.
The first came from Benno C. Schmidt Jr., a relative newcomer at Yale.
Next was the venerable Michael I. Sovern of Columbia, who will have served 13 years.
Both men leave leadership gaps that will be difficult to fill, particularly since their successors will preside in an era of diminished resources.


A Sanction Minuet; To Bosnia, Diplomacy Is Merely Nice; Serbs Seem to Understand Only Force
With Sarajevo enduring the most devastating attack on a European city since World War II, United Nations sanctions on a predominantly Serbian Yugoslavia are not biting soon enough or hard enough to stem the violence.
"Before we run out of Coca-Cola here in Belgrade, there will be no water to drink in Sarajevo," said Stojan Cerovic, a journalist and critic of the Yugoslav Government, summing up the growing impression that the sanctions will not stop the furious Serbian assault on the Bosnian capital.


Ocean Bio-Chem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Quiet Exodus by the Young Leaves the Future of Family Farms in Doubt
For three generations, the lessons of farming have been passed down in the fields here on Rural Route 1, where the Rogers family has planted corn every spring for nearly 100 years.
"I remember when horses plowed the fields," Orris Rogers said.
"And my father and I would pick corn by hand."


Nationalist Elected President in Azerbaijan
The leader of the nationalist Popular Front claimed victory today in Sunday's presidential elections.
Abulfez Elchibey, campaigned on a promise to detach Azerbaijan from the Commonwealth of Independent States and to keep Nagorno-Karabakh, a region populated mostly by Armenians, in the country.


Mr. Bulb reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dycom Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Market Place; General Dynamics Shares Jump on News of Buyback
Saying that with the military business shrinking it had no good ways to invest its cash, the General Dynamics Corporation said yesterday that it would buy back up to 30 percent of its common shares for between $824 million and $975 million.
The announcement sent General Dynamics shares soaring on the New York Stock Exchange, leaping $5.625 each, to $71.


Accounts
*
H.
P.
Hood, Boston, placed its account, with billings estimated at $4 million to $5 million, in review.
A spokesman for the dairy products company confirmed a report in this week's Adweek that the incumbent, Ketchum New York, was not among five shops asked to participate.
Three are based in Boston: Arnold Fortuna Lane, Houston Effler &amp; Partners and Lawner Reingold Britton &amp; Partners.
The other two are based in Providence, R.I.: Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly and Pagano Schenck &amp; Kay.


Meridian Point Realty reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Silent Decades Ended, Dozens Accuse a Priest
Frank Fitzpatrick had a successful business as a private detective and an insurance adjuster, a wonderful marriage, two well-adjusted children and a comfortable home.
So why, he wondered, was he so depressed, feeling like crying every day.
It was then, three years ago, that the memories began comingback, memories that he had repressed.
Mr.
Fitzpatrick, now 41 years old, says he recalled how he had been sexually assaulted by a priest 30 years earlier, when he was an altar boy at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church here.


P.&amp; G. Says It Offers Driest Diaper
The diaper war is entering the "smart weapon" phase.
Using words like "breakthrough" and "revolutionary," the Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it had developed the driest diaper ever, one that a company scientist said would be far more absorbent than current diapers.


Haiti's Refugees Stir Memory of an Old Shame; Blockade Goes Too Far
To the Editor:
"Fight Haiti's Thugs With Oil" (editorial, May 19) unfortunately couples well-meaning sentiment with extralegal thinking.
It is one matter for the Organization of American States to take multilateral action to show disfavor with the regime in Port-au-Prince: the oil cutoff you recommend, trade restrictions, denial of visas.
In international law these measures do not constitute direct intervention in the internal affairs of an independent state.
However, it is audacity for you to propose that if the embargo does not restore civilian rule in Haiti, the O.A.S. might impose a naval blockade.


Haiti's Refugees Stir Memory of an Old Shame
To the Editor:
Your May 27 photograph of Haitian refugees being fingerprinted by Haitian police on their forced return home by the United States Coast Guard left me with a frightening sensation.
What came to mind were pictures of equally hapless passengers of the ill-fated liner St.
Louis, whose Jewish refugees the United States refused to accept 50 years ago and who returned to Europe to be annihilated at the hands of the Nazis.
I thought we had made a national moral promise never to repeat that unfortunate historic event.
A half-century later, we seem not only to have breached our promise, but actually to be delivering refugees into the hands of their alleged persecutors.


Meridian Point Realty VII reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


House Prepares to Debate Balanced-Budget Plans
As its backers worked on refining the precise language of a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget, Representatives on both sides of the issue made last-minute preparations for a week of conflict in the House.
Supporters and opponents of the proposed amendment, which would require that Federal outlays not exceed revenues, were canvassing for votes and polishing arguments they would offer before Thursday's vote, which all sides said would be close.
It takes a two-thirds majority, or 290 ayes if all members vote, to pass.


Telling Up From Down
SCIENTISTS at Cornell University, who have found a way to trick plants into thinking they're upside down when they're not, may end up overturning a 100-year-old theory of how plants sense gravity.
For the past century, the dogma has been that falling starch grains inside plant cells told a plant which way was down.
New studies suggest instead that a plant cell works something like a water balloon, with the grains simply acting as ballast along with all the other protoplasm in the cell, pushing on the end pointed down and pulling away from the end pointed up.
These Cornell researchers say a protein called integrin in the cell's membrane may be the molecule that actually tells the cell where things are pushing or pulling against it.


Norman Is an Open Alternate
GREG NORMAN may miss the United States Open after settling for an alternate's spot in qualifying yesterday.
Norman, who has a reputation for coming close to winning golf's major tournaments but losing in heartbreaking ways, was part of an eight-way playoff for the final four spots available at The Lakes Club in Columbus, Ohio, one of 10 qualifying sites.
The Open will be at Pebble Beach on June 18-21.


Review/City Ballet; The Wastrel Is Off, and Running
George Balanchine's "Prodigal Son" was as eloquent as ever when the New York City Ballet offered this choreographic parable on Sunday night at the New York State Theater with Peter Boal in the title role.
In the work's opening moments, Mr.
Boal gazed longingly into the distance, then burst into movement with a ferocity that made it clear that the young man he portrayed was willing to defy everyone to run off on his own.
Mr.
Boal thereby immediately established his character's wistfulness and impulsiveness.


A New Look at an Ancient Remedy: Celery
MORE and more these days it seems that medical science is proving the validity of old folk remedies.
One of the latest examples is celery, an ancient herbal remedy put to the test in the laboratory by researchers on high blood pressure.
The work, by researchers from the University of Chicago Medical Center, involves a chemical extracted from celery.
In laboratory animals, the researchers found, it can lower blood pressure by relaxing smooth muscles that line the blood vessels.


Linebacker Pleads Not Guilty
KANAVIS McGHEE, a linebacker for the Giants, pleaded not guilty yesterday to three charges stemming from an early morning argument with a police officer and a motorist last May 17.
Municipal Court Judge JERRAMIAH HEALY set a court date of June 30 for McGhee to be tried on charges of simple assault, resisting arrest and a disorderly persons offense.


Albany Grudgingly Passes Bill Letting Cameras in Court
The New York State Senate today narrowly passed a bill that would once again allow television cameras in state courtrooms.
The bill, which had already passed the Assembly and now goes to the Governor, is a watered-down version of an earlier experiment with cameras in the courts that expired a year ago.
The bill, which passed by a slim margin in a vote of 31 to 26, had encountered unexpected opposition in recent weeks.
Some senators said they would not vote for it because of the media's arrogance in criticizing new provisions in the bill aimed at protecting many witnesses in criminal trials; others said that recent news events, including the Amy Fisher case on Long Island, had convinced them that the media tend to sensationalize crime stories.


William McGowan Is Dead at 64; A Challenger of Phone Monopoly
William G. McGowan, a maverick entrepreneur who changed the shape of the nation's telephone industry, bringing lower cost long-distance service to millions of American households and businesses, died yesterday in Washington.
He was 64 years old.
Mr.
McGowan, the longtime chairman of the MCI Communications Corporation, died of a heart attack, said Bert C. Roberts Jr., the company's president and chief executive officer.
Mr.
McGowan had a heart transplant operation in 1987 but continued as chief executive until six months ago.


Lawyer in Shooting Case Offers Girl's Story for Bail
The New York State Senate unanimously passed a revised "Son of Sam" law yesterday, even as the lawyer for Amy Fisher, the Long Island teen-ager accused of shooting her lover's wife, raced to make a deal to sell her story.
Under the new law, victims of crimes would be able to lay claim to at least a portion of any profits by the criminal over 10 years.


Light Notebook and Light Price
THE Dell Computer Corporation unveiled a three-and-one-half-pound notebook computer yesterday, setting new standards for lightweight personal computing.
The Dell 320SLi notebook, which the company said would be available in mid-July, is about half the weight of current notebooks of comparable power and features.
The price is light, too.
For a suggested list price of $2,149, the Dell 320SLi comes with an Intel 386SL microprocessor, 2 megabytes of system memory, a 60-megabyte internal hard disk drive, a battery that Dell says is good for three to five hours of solid use, an astonishingly small external diskette drive, an internal slot for a modem about the size of a credit card, DOS and Windows operating system software and all the necessary cables.


William W. Green, 92; Founded Motor Club
William W. Green, the founder of the Motor Club of America and its chief executive from 1926 to 1986, died on May 29 at his daughter's home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 92 years old and lived in Palm Beach and Manhattan.
Mr. Green died of Alzheimer's disease, said his son, Robert.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Women; Primary Victories Bring Year of the Woman Closer
Last Tuesday's California primary, in which two women won Democratic Senate nominations and 16 nonincumbent women of both parties won House nominations, has convinced officials of women's political organizations that the hour of their breakthrough is at hand.
"This is no longer some isolated emotional triumph of women backed by women," said Harriett Woods of the National Women's Political Caucus.
"This is a whole state changing its mind at once. This represents a watershed shift in public attitudes."


With Park and Path, New York Tries to Link Asphalt to Water
After 50 years of bickering and frustration over the condition of New York's seedy waterfront, a new conservation drive has taken its first halting steps toward reclaiming the city's enormous, watery edge.
Fueled by an unlikely combination of pragmatic environmentalists, developers beleaguered by recession and politicians who have seized upon the public clamor for use of New York's 578 miles of waterfront, the drive may soon provide every borough with at least some new access to the city's varied shores.


Gates Retreats on a Threat To Postpone His Departure
Nearing the end of the last act of what has become a tragic 14-year tenure as Chief of Police, Daryl F. Gates retreated today from his threat to stay in the job and was greeted by a chorus of catcalls from city officials.
"I admit that it was a threat, a bluff," said the Chief, jaunty as ever and professing puzzlement over the stir he had created.
"But it's the only thing a lame duck has these days, and it's a good threat because of the screwed-up system in this city."


Emily Lodge Clark, 86, Widow of a Politician
Emily Sears Lodge Clark, the widow of Henry Cabot Lodge, the Senator and Republican Vice-Presidential nominee in 1960, died Saturday in her house in Beverly, Mass.
She was 86 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said her son Henry Sears Lodge.
Mrs.
Clark was married to Forrester A. Clark, a retired investment banker, in 1987, two years after Mr.
Lodge died.


Carrington Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Howe Leaves Yanks With a Void
Steve Howe's corner locker in the Yankee clubhouse was still full of memories yesterday, even after the pitcher was suspended indefinitely from major league baseball by Commissioner Fay Vincent.
Howe's No. 57 uniform hung untouched on a hook and there were Yankee caps and baseball bats from Bat Day for his two children.


New York's Senate Approves a Redistricting Plan
The New York State Senate tonight passed a new Congressional redistricting plan that would shrink the size of the state's delegation from 34 members to 31.
The plan, which passed by a 39-to-20 vote, would also create a new open seat, covering parts of Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens, with a majority of Hispanic voters.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  BUSH'S FOREST INITIATIVE FALTERS
President Bush's top-priority effort for the Earth Summit, a broad statement of principles on conserving the world's forests, was stymied at the Rio de Janeiro conference.
Poor nations resisted the move as an intrusion on their autonomy.
A1  A PLEA FROM SARAJEVO
In the wake of 72 hours of relentless bombardment that has turned large areas of Sarajevo into ruins, the leader of Bosnia appealed to President Bush for air attacks on Serbian gun positions.
A1
News Analysis: U.N. sanctions may be inadequate to stem attacks.  A10
U.N. to increase peace force by 1,100 to reopen Sarajevo's airport.  A11
Tape recording has Serbian commanders discussing attacks.  A10  ISLAMIC CENTRAL ASIA
After more than 70 years of official atheism, dispersal of nationalities and suppression of Islam, the ideas of independence and democracy in formerly Soviet Central Asia have taken on an Islamic coloration.
A1  P.L.O.
AIDE KILLED IN PARIS
A leading P.L.O. intelligence official was shot to death in front of a Paris hotel.
He was reportedly killed by shots fired from a gun with a silencer.
The P.L.O. chairman blamed the Israeli secret service.
A9
Questions of identity in Demjanjuk appeal case in Israel.
A6  THE SOVIET (EX-) JUGGERNAUT
In Congressional testimony, American intelligence officials sketched a picture of a rapidly disintegrating military-industrial complex in the former Soviet Union, with factories near bankruptcy.
A3  BAKER AND RUSSIAN NEGOTIATE
Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Kozyrev of Russia sought agreements on further cuts in nuclear warheads.
They agreed to meet again today.
A3  IMBROGLIO OR FLEET STREET FARCE?
A British panel set up last year in the hope of discouraging press excesses asserted that "prurient reporting" on the marriage of Charles and Diana had reached a new low.
A12  Lima Journal: The frustration of would-be U.S. adoptive parents.
A4  Winnie Mandela, now separated, fights to retain A.N.C. posts.
A5  Romanian leader seems less than eager for an electoral verdict.
A7  Bill to allow Japanese forces to serve abroad clears a major hurdle.
A13  Slovak former Communists win a major role in coalition politics.
A14  In Irish debate over European union, a distinctly contrary voice.
A15  National A18-25  PHONE LINES FOR THE FUTURE
Local telephone companies are racing to replace aging copper wires with optical fibers, and they are asking customers to pay the $100 billion-plus bill now.
A1  ABORTION-CLINIC RULING DELAYED
The Supreme Court said it would defer until next term a ruling on whether Federal judges have authority under a civil rights law to order protesters to stop blocking access to abortion clinics.
The case was one of the most closely watched of the current term.
A1  CUOMO TELLS CLINTON WHAT TO DO
Governor Cuomo has recently lifted his eyes from state business to heap unsolicited advice on Governor Clinton of Arkansas, the apparent Democratic Presidential nominee.
A1  WOMEN'S NEW SUPPORTERS: MEN
The results of the California primary have convinced many political experts that it is indeed the year of the woman.
If the two female Senate hopefuls had faced an all-male electorate there, they still would have won, voter surveys showed.
A24
'800' numbers aside, politicians have been slow to innovate.  A25
Clinton's choice of No. 2 carries more weight than usual.  A24  FAMILY FARMS DWINDLE
The family farm, an icon of America, is disappearing as children of farmers follow careers far from the cornfields.
Since 1980 the number of farmers under the age of 25 has dropped by half, while the number of those over 65 has held steady.
A22  GATES CALLS HIS BLUFF
Chief Daryl Gates of Los Angeles said he was only bluffing when he threatened to delay retirement, and livid city officials responded with a chorus of catcalls.
A18  DOZENS ACCUSE FORMER PRIEST
Several dozen men and women are claiming they were molested or raped by a Roman Catholic priest 30 years ago in a Massachusetts town.
Some are threatening to sue the Catholic church, and one accuser said the priest, who has since left the priesthood, may have molested up to 300 people.
A18  CHURCH OPENS ITS BOOKS
Officials of the Christian Science Church provided its members with the most detailed financial report in church history, in a response to accusations of financial and religious improprieties.
A20  Boston's Mayor called for a ban on high-powered squirt guns.
A18  The balanced-budget bill faced an unsure fate in the House.
A23  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-10  Part of the ear seems to transmit its own sounds C1  A chromosome structure that may limit the life of the cell C1  Voyages of the imagination into the heart of darkness: black holes C1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Making a movie about a man on the edge.
C11  Tony Walton's set designs.
C11  Theater: "Any Place but Here." C13  Dance: "Prodigal Son." C11  Fashion Page B7  Adolfo's 25th-anniversary party  Sports B8-13  Baseball: Mets lose.
B9  Howe suspended after pleading guilty.
B9  Blue Jays top Yanks.
B11  Saberhagen broaches possibility of surgery.
B11  Basketball: Grant gets notice.
B12  Column: Anderson on Steve Howe B9  Football: Plan B in court.
B9  Olympics: Track official nominated to be U.S.O.C. president.
B12  Obituaries D28  WILLIAM MCGOWAN DIES AT 64
As head of MCI, the maverick entrepreneur changed the shape of the nation's telephone industry, bringing lower-cost long-distance service to millions.
A1  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  Worse than unbalanced.
The wrong terrible Ivan?
Perotxysms.
Ivy League builders.
Letters A26  Russell Baker: Accordion man hails sax.
A27  A. M. Rosenthal: Racing with Perot.
A27  Theodore Roszak: Green guilt and ecological overload.
A27


OFFICIAL OF P.L.O. IS KILLED IN PARIS
A leading security official of the Palestine Liberation Organization was shot and killed early today in front of a hotel in Paris where he was staying.
The official, Atef Bseiso, 44 years old, the top intelligence aide to the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, was killed by shots fired by at least one gun equipped with a silencer, Palestinian and French officials said.
Two gunmen escaped after the killing.


Review/Theater; Whenever a Door Opens The Cold Wind Blows In
The floor of the apartment is littered with leftovers; socks and underwear are drying on a lamp shade and Chucky is curled up as a couch potato watching pap on television.
Caridad Svich's "Any Place but Here" (at INTAR Hispanic American Arts Center) wants to explore spiritual and emotional bankruptcy in contemporary society.
But there is no exploration here, only a surface depiction of depressed working-class lives, with no present as well as no future.
What you see is what you see: two couples in a New Jersey town arguing vociferously while snacking on junk food.
The play itself is like a bag of barbecue chips.
It fills a gap but is lacking in nutrients.
Intended as a black comedy, the work is bleak and unfunny.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Technology Brought In To Add Personal Touch
Last September, Edmund G. Brown Jr. made political history by joining the ranks of television evangelists and salesmen of low-cost aluminum siding and $9.99 slicer-dicers.
Though such products and services had been marketed with "800" numbers for 25 years, no major political candidate had successfully used one before the former California Governor.
In late May, Ross Perot managed to create a minor sensation by linking lustily cheering supporters in six states by satellite.
Such satellite linkups have been a standard fixture at business conferences for nearly a decade.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arizona Public Services Co., a unit of Pinnacle West Capital Corp., Phoenix, is offering $100 million of 7 5/8 first-mortgage bonds due June 15, 1999, at 99.732 to yield 7.675, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable bonds are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Inc. and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Coastal Corp., Houston, filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $500 million of debt securities.


Ad Executive Quits Bush-Quayle '92
Don Sipple, one of three original members of President Bush's re-election advertising team, has resigned, a spokesman for Bush-Quayle '92 said yesterday, confirming a report in this week's issue of Advertising Age.
The spokesman, Tony Mitchell, attributed Mr.
Sipple's decision last week to "professional and personal reasons" that limited the time he could devote to the campaign.
He added that Mr.
Sipple's offer to work part time would be accepted.


Commercial Clutter Is Still on the Rise
The latest report monitoring commercial "clutter" on television showed another increase in the time devoted to material other than programming.
The Commercial Monitoring Report, released yesterday by the American Association of Advertising Agencies and the Association of National Advertisers, said that overall clutter increased on ABC, CBS and NBC in March compared with the last report, in November.


Aero Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Get Set for Curtain to Go Up on a Second Season
They call it "the second season" in racing, and it's about to begin.
It will be staged in places like Belmont Park, Saratoga, Monmouth, Louisiana Downs and ultimately Gulfstream Park in Florida.


Comnet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


WORKERS ARE RECALLED BY GOODYEAR IN U.S. AND CANADA
The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company said yesterday that it had recalled 840 workers who were laid off at tire plants in Gadsden, Ala.; Union City, Tenn., and Valleyfield, Quebec, and at a hose and belt plant in Lincoln, Neb.
It also said 230 new workers had been hired or would begin work soon at plants in Napanee, Ontario; Cartersville, Ga.; St.
Marys, Ohio; Beaumont, Tex., and Houston.


Sechura Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RCM Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Chess
The progress of many players is retarded by their shying away from the end game.
They think it dull without ever having given it a fair measure of their attention.
Their prejudice is that the end game is lengthy and humdrum and offers insufficient opportunity for sparkling play.
They are right that end games are often long, but wrong about everything else.
Asked what his most interesting game had been in the St.
Martin Open in the French West Indies, which finished on May 9, Dmitry Gurevich, a 35-year-old Chicago grandmaster, at once singled out his Round-6 end game with the Russian grandmaster Andrei Sokolov.
His other, much shorter, middle-game victories could not hold a candle to it, he said.
His tournament tally, 7-2, put him in a four-way tie for first place.


New Campaigns
*
Data General Corp. bids mainframe computers farewell in a print and television campaign for its Aviion systems created by Lois/U.S.A., New York.
A spot shows a smashed mainframe hurtling through space, landing near the pizza box that Lois uses to symbolize Aviion's compact size.
The campaign carries the theme "Data General, where the world is going!"


OUSTER OF CASCADE INTERNATIONAL BOARD IS SOUGHT
The creditors of Cascade International Inc. have asked a Federal bankruptcy judge to authorize the appointment of a trustee and a retail consultant to run the company.
The two appointees would replace Aaron Karp, chairman of the women's apparel retailer; John T. Sirmans Jr., president, and the board, said Cori Lopez-Castro, a lawyer who represents one of the creditors, the Barnett Bank of Palm Beach County in Florida.


Scientists Retract Embryo Study, Saying Research Was Fraudulent
USING the bluntest and most candid language possible, researchers have retracted a paper published in a highly regarded scientific journal, saying the main author of the report had fabricated his results.
The retraction throws into question a flourishing subspecialty of biology, the study of critical molecular signals that control mammalian development at the moment a fertilized egg begins its rapid growth into an animal.
The no-nonsense wording of the retraction, which appears in the current issue of the journal Cell, is quite unusual for an announcement of its kind.
In a single paragraph at the bottom of a page otherwise taken up by a book review, the researchers, from the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., said their recent investigations had shown that the experimental evidence supporting the conclusions of their paper published in March 1991 "has been fabricated by one of the authors," Mitchell Rosner, and that the fraud had occurred "without any knowledge by the others."


A Knight of Jazz Enters Its Royal Cemetery; Sir Miles Joins the Duke, a King, and Patriarch and Kindred Spirits in Woodlawn, the Bronx
Helga Borck was driving down the winding roads of Woodlawn Cemetery recently in search of the grave of a turn-of-the-century black vaudevillian when the sight of the cemetery's newest memorial made her forget about the soft shoe.
She hit the brakes, hopped out of her car and stood before a massive slab of shiny black granite that read, "In Memory of Sir Miles Davis/1926-1991."
Less than 10 yards away to her left, just across the thin asphalt strip of Heather Avenue, was the family plot of Duke Ellington, the site adorned by simple stone markers laid in the grass and two stone crosses looming in the background.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the California elections referred to Sonny Bono, a candidate for the United States Senate nomination, incorrectly in some copies.
He is a former Mayor of Palm Springs, not the current one.


New Access Is Planned For Neglected Waterfront Sites


Bank's Moves Questioned After Company's Collapse
Faced with losses of more than $25 million, creditors of a New Jersey check-cashing company have turned their anger toward the bank where the company kept a large account, with some of them charging that it used their deposits improperly and suggesting that it may have known of problems earlier than it claims.
The bank, the United Jersey Bank of Hackensack, N.J., is listed in the bankruptcy statement of the company, the Payroll Express Corporation of Elizabeth, N.J., as the company's largest creditor, with $5.9 million owed.


An Islamic Awakening In Central Asian Lands
Islam, as an enduring means of ordering spiritual and social life, is taking over from the failed ideology of Soviet Communism throughout Central Asia.
After more than 70 years of official atheism, dispersal of nationalities and harsh suppression of Islam, the very ideas of independence and democracy in the region have taken on an Islamic coloration.


Milken's Motive? Prosecutor Says He Reacted to Rivals
Michael R. Milken's motive for masterminding a securities fraud and embezzlement scheme was his sense of desperation in the face of growing competition in 1985 to his junk bond empire at Drexel Burnham Lambert, the prosecution contended yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan.
The assertion was offered by an assistant United States attorney, Karen J. Patton, in her closing argument in the trial of Alan E. Rosenthal, a protege and close friend of Mr.
Milken's at Drexel who is charged with helping Mr.
Milken carry out the conspiracy.


S.I. Drops Gay Issues From Student Guide
Joining a small but growing band of defiant school districts in New York City, a Staten Island school board last night voted to reject sections of a first-grade curriculum that urges schools to teach children to respect and appreciate gay people.
To thunderous applause from more than 250 parents and teachers at the community school board meeting in West Brighton, the District 31 board voted 7 to 0, with one abstention, to delete a section of "Children of the Rainbow," a curriculum guide devised by the city's central Board of Education.
The section of the curriculum talks about gay and lesbian parents and includes bibliographical entries related to that topic.


Review/Fashion; Adolfo's Cozy 25th-Anniversary Party
Twice a year, in June and in January, Adolfo's loyal fans return from their places in the Hamptons or their ski lodges in New England to cheer him on.
Yesterday the ambience was even cozier than usual.
Though the shy designer made no mention of it, not even on his program, he was celebrating his 25th anniversary.
"It was like a family party," said Alice Sumergrade, who has been a client for most of that time.
"And besides, the clothes were so good."


Canadian Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


By Design; Topping Off With a Vest
The vest, a familiar piece of men's clothing, has started showing up in force in the women's departments of stores.
A vest makes sense because it can replace a summer jacket, finishing off an outfit.
It is also a good way to experiment with the coming fall fashion trend of dressing like a man.


American Financial Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A picture of a Queens bodega on Saturday with an article about supermarket closings carried an erroneous credit.
The photographer was Suzanne DeChillo.


Court Finds a Violation Of a Professor's Rights
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled yesterday that City College had violated the academic and constitutional rights of a philosophy professor who contended in published letters and articles, although not in his classes, that blacks on average are less intelligent than whites.
The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that college officials had abrogated the free-speech and due-process rights of Dr.
Michael Levin by establishing separate sections of his courses for students who were offended by his views and by forming a committee to investigate him.


In Irish Debate, a Distinctly Contrary Voice
As usual, Michael D. Higgins, a Member of Parliament, a poet and one of the most prominent and articulate figures in the country, is gripping what the Irish Establishment considers the wrong end of the stick.
After the defeat in Denmark last Tuesday of the Treaty on European Union, which promises great economic benefits to Ireland, the 51-year-old Mr.
Higgins, who is universally known here as Michael D., is still one of the few national political figures urging his compatriots to vote against the treaty in Ireland's referendum on June 18.


Bowness Dismissed by Bruins
RICK BOWNESS, the first-year coach of the Boston Bruins, was dismissed yesterday and MIKE MILBURY, the team's assistant general manager, said he was considering returning to the job he previously held.
Boston finished second in the Adams Division this season with a 36-32-12 record.
Boston then beat Buffalo and Montreal in the playoffs to reach the Stanley Cup semifinals before being swept by Pittsburgh, which went on to win its second National Hockey League title in a row.


Fernandez Seeks to End Test Ranking
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez wants to stop compiling annual rankings of New York City schools by reading levels, probably the most widely used measure for comparing the effectiveness of schools.
In a three-page memorandum that he sent last month to members of the Board of Education and that was released yesterday, Mr.
Fernandez emphasized that schools would continue to test reading with standardized multiple-choice tests.


BUSH PLAN TO SAVE FORESTS IS BLOCKED BY POOR COUNTRIES
The Bush Administration's drive for a sweeping statement of principles on conserving the world's forests at the Earth Summit was stymied today because of objections by poor countries resisting such an agreement as an intrusion on their autonomy.
An agreement on the forestry initiative, which has picked up support among industrial nations over the last 18 months, has become President Bush's highest priority.
The White House renewed its backing this week as a way of demonstrating American leadership on environmental issues and deflecting criticism of other American environmental policies.


Thousands Left Stranded By Bus Strike
About 225,000 bus riders in parts of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx that are largely unserved by the city's subways were forced to scramble for substitute transportation yesterday after drivers and mechanics went on strike at five private bus companies.
Many of the stranded travelers took to their cars or found their way to distant subway lines or to city-operated buses, which were not shut down by the strike.
While the strike created thicker traffic on highways and greater-than-usual rush-hour crushes on some subway and bus lines, city officials said that things went relatively smoothly yesterday morning and that the evening rush hour was normal.
Underground at Work
The strike also expanded a commuter underground that already exists in some Brooklyn and Queens neighborhoods.
Though some commuters hitched rides with neighbors, walked distances they would normally cover by riding the missing buses or climbed into taxi cabs, others piled into vans, which are prohibited from soliciting passengers along bus routes, and gypsy cabs.
Both the cabs and vans seemed to be out in greater numbers and servicing larger areas than usual.


Boston Fights Water Guns
High-power squirt guns have become the latest urban problem in Boston.
After the toy guns were involved in several incidents including the shooting death of a 15-year-old boy, Mayor Raymond L.  Flynn sent a letter to Boston merchants yesterday asking them to remove the squirt guns from their shelves.


Laperriere &amp; Verreault reports earnings for Year to March 31


Trenton Leaders Vow Hospital Revisions by Fall
Gov.
Jim Florio and legislative leaders said today that they had agreed to enact a new system of health-care financing by Nov. 30.
The promise came in the wake of a court ruling that New Jersey's system violates Federal law.
On May 27, Judge Alfred M. Wolin of Federal District Court ruled that the state's policy of adding a 19 percent surcharge to hospital bills of paying patients to finance care for the poor and to pay bad debts was unenforceable as it applied to self-insurance plans covering 2.4 million people.


Verit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alexander W. Faber, Accountant, 80
Alexander W. Faber, a certified public accountant in Manhattan for the last 50 years, died on Sunday at New York University Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived on the Upper East Side.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Clairvest Group reports earnings for Year to March 31


Mary Ann Pulaski, 75, Children's Psychologist
Dr.
Mary Ann Spencer Pulaski, a retired children's psychologist, lecturer and author, died on Saturday at Glen Cove Hospital on Long Island.
She was 75 years old and lived in Port Washington, L.I.
Her family said she died after a long illness.


HIGH COURT DELAYS RULING ON PROTEST
The Supreme Court said today that it would defer until its next term a ruling on whether Federal judges had authority under a Reconstruction-era civil rights law to order protesters to stop blocking access to abortion clinics.
The case was one of the most closely watched of the current term and was scheduled for decision before the term ended in the next few weeks.
It will now be scheduled for a new argument after the next term begins in October.


Q&amp;A
Seeing Through
Q.
Why is glass transparent? Or anything, for that matter?
A.
The short answer is that light behaves like a wave of electromagnetic energy, and any material that can transmit the wave is transparent, said Dr.
Alan J. Friedman, director of the New York Hall of Science in Queens.


Classical Music in Review
Flute Fest
Weill Recital Hall
Robert Stallman, a flutist who is heard regularly in chamber music concerts, presented a mini-festival of mostly contemporary flute music on Saturday evening and Sunday afternoon.
He was joined in this endeavor by five younger colleagues -- Helen Campo, Donna Elaine, Amy Hersh, Debrorah Pellkofer and Joseph Trent -- as well as two keyboard players, David Buechner and Phillip Bush.
The Sunday program, which seemed the more adventurous of the two, included the world premieres of six works, and as is typical in programs weighted toward new music these days, a stylistic ecumenism reigned.
Several of the new works made a strong appeal.


Sports-Tech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kelley Hired to Coach Miami
After a four-month nationwide search, DAVE MAGGARD, the Miami athletic director, hired BRAD KELLEY, the assistant baseball coach, to replace retiring RON FRASER.
Maggard said Kelley was the only candidate to be offered the job.


The Beginning of a Long Night


CHRONICLE
Perhaps British-American tensions over theatrical matters will be eased by a performance on Sunday evening at Symphony Space in New York.
NEAL FOSTER, a 26-year-old English actor and producer, will interview GLENN CLOSE and RICHARD DREYFUSS, the stars of "Death and the Maiden," before an audience to raise money for an Anglo-American actors' exchange program that he said he planned to establish between the Liaisons Theater Company in London and a company to be named here.
Mr.
Foster, the founder of Liaisons, has had such success interviewing celebrities in London for his pet projects that he decided to try his luck here.
"I took a risk and flew to New York in March simply to stand on the sidewalk and stop them," he said by telephone from London yesterday.
"I stood by the stage door, where there were autograph hunters who told me I was wasting my time.


Cher's Shows Rescheduled
Cher's five-night engagement at the Paramount in Manhattan, originally scheduled for May 27-31, has been rescheduled for Oct. 27, 28, 30, 31 and Nov. 1.
Ticket holders can present their original tickets and use them for these corresponding dates: May 27 will be valid on Oct. 27; May 28 on Oct. 28; May 29 on Oct. 30; May 30 on Oct. 31 and May 31 on Nov. 1.
People desiring a refund may return their tickets to the place of purchase until July 7.
Information: (212) 465-6741.


Goran Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Acquired Mark Carper, pitcher, from the Baltimore Orioles to complete the Feb. 29 Alan Mills trade.
Assigned Carper to Albany of the Eastern League.
National League
NEW YORK METS -- Placed Rodney McCray, outfielder, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Activated Dave Gallagher, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Mark Dewey, pitcher, to Tidewater of the International League.
Signed Todd Beckerman, Travis Shaffer, Gregory Stark, Allen McDill, Tom Pinson, Jeffrey Williams, Brent Haywood, Tyrell Sherman, and Robert Stang, pitchers; Donald Keister, outfielder; Jose Flores, shortstop; and Chad Epperson and Heriberto Morales, catchers, to minor-league contracts.
Assigned Beckerman, Shaffer, Stark, and Keister, to Pittsfield of the New York-Penn League; McDill, Pinson, Williams, and Flores, to Kingsport of the Appalachian League; and Epperson, Morales, Haywood, Sherman, and Stang, to the Gulf Coast League.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Placed Greg Harris, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 1.
Activated Larry Andersen, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Group 1 Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Haiti's Refugees Stir Memory of an Old Shame; Remember Aristide?
To the Editor:
The plight of the Haitian refugees, and the United States Government's shifting policy on how to deal with them, has eclipsed the larger issue.
If there were a government led by Jean-Bertrand Aristide in Port-au-Prince, there would not be a stream of refugees setting sail from La Gonave.
Clearly, the embargo sponsored by the Organization of American States is not working.
The international community looks to the United States for leadership in creating a solution to this crisis.
That no leadership is forthcoming suggests that (a) our Government lacks the resolve to follow up its rhetoric on a "new world order" or (b) our Government does not really want Mr.
Aristide in power, but can't come out in support of a coup that overthrew a popularly elected president, who tried to weed generations of corruption from a government and military that we supported and supplied.


Back to Court for Ex-Broker In '74 Killing of His In-Laws
Murray R. Gold, a former New York City stockbroker who has already been tried four times in the 1974 murder of his former in-laws, is heading back to court for another round of hearings in what lawyers say has already been one of most convoluted and tortuous legal cases in Connecticut history.
The State Supreme Court, Connecticut's highest appeals panel, ordered the new hearings today to determine once again whether Mr.
Gold was mentally competent to understand the charges and participate in his defense when he was convicted in 1986 in his fourth trial.


G.M. Cost Cutter Sharpens His Ax
A revolution in the way cars are made that started in a small, nondescript office building in a suburb of this Swiss city is sweeping the General Motors Corporation.
Its code word, coined by a Spaniard, is "Picos."
Repeated like a shibboleth by executives at G.M.'s modest European headquarters, Picos is short for "program for improvement and cost optimization of suppliers." In essence, the term covers the mix of ruthless probing, consultation, orders and ultimatums that J. Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua used to slash the cost of parts for G.M.
Europe, making it hugely profitable while its Detroit-based parent piled up losses.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Cuomo Takes On a Mission To Offer Advice to Clinton
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York may have sworn off a Presidential campaign in December, but he never promised to keep quiet.
After focusing on state business for much of the winter and spring, Mr.
Cuomo in the last two weeks has started heaping advice on Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the presumptive Democratic Presidential nominee.
Given the tumultuous history between them, Mr.
Cuomo's decision to raise his profile has invited some suspicion in Little Rock, Ark., and some bemusement in Washington.


For a Broadway Set Designer, Home Is Where the Stage Is
For New York's theatergoers, the Tony Walton trail begins in a Russian village, winds through a coolly sinister beach house in Chile and a dark New York saloon, and ends, finally and triumphantly, in the middle of Broadway, both the Flo Ziegfeld and the Damon Runyon versions.
Mr. Walton is a set designer. At the moment, it might be more accurate to call him
the
set designer.
On Broadway, he is responsible for the eye-popping "Guys and Dolls," which won him a Tony Award on May 31 for set design, "The Will Rogers Follies," "Death and the Maiden" (the beach house), and Herb Gardner's "Conversations With My Father" (the bar).


Ex-Communist Slovaks Flex Their Muscles
One after another, the candidates rose to speak last week at the campaign's final rally in Bratislava, standing behind a podium wrapped in bright red cloth as they urged voters to remember that only the Party of the Democratic Left of Slovakia would defend the rights of workers.
The candidates were mostly former Communists, and while few in the audience knew it, the red fabric was a Communist flag, carefully folded to hide the hammer and sickle.


Review/Television; A Vivid Sense of Place in Very Different Places
Television does not usually worry very much about conveying a sense of place.
Most sitcoms and soap operas seem to be set in anonymous suburban pockets plucked out of Anywhere, U.S.A.
Tonight, however, two places that could hardly be more different figure vividly on the cable schedule: the TNT movie "Keep the Change" at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight is adapted from a Thomas McGuane novel and that means rolling Montana ranch country, and American Movie Classics is offering a documentary called "Street Scenes: New York on Film" at 9 P.M. and 1:30 A.M.
The prolific Mr.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  AN UNPAID CONSULTANT?
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo may have announced in December that he would not run for President, but he never promised to keep quiet.
After keeping his focus on state business throughout much of the winter and spring, Mr.
Cuomo has started heaping advice, both solicited and unsolicited, on the campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton in the last two weeks.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  READING RANKINGS CALLED 'SIMPLISTIC'
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez wants to stop compiling annual rankings of New York City schools by reading levels, probably the most widely used measure for comparing the effectiveness of competing schools.
Mr.
Fernandez said the schools should continue to test reading.
But he said the school rankings were too often used as a "one dimensional measure" of a school's success.
B3.


A Man and a Best Friend Find Time to Remember
TODAY'S a tough day for Casey Gabel.
For Jeff Gabel, too.
For years about this time in June, the pair would climb in the family car here, all alive and excited.
They would have practiced together countless hours.
Then they'd drive off for an evening of intense athletic competition.
Usually, they'd come home late, all tired and sweaty but eager to describe the night's most fantastic throw or catch.
Usually, they returned winners.
Either way, they were so happy then, sitting together in the kitchen, each with a cold drink, while Jeff, the nervous one, did all the talking.


Again? Yes, Again. On One Hit This Time.
The Mets wound up one official scorer's decision from complete humiliation.
The Expos insisted that the ruling on Anthony Young's infield hit against Ken Hill in the fifth inning was in error.
The Mets claimed it was proper.
One fact, anyway, was beyond dispute.
The Mets were bad, and their 6-0 loss to the Expos wasn't open for any interpretation other than that.


Bosnian, Desperate Over Shelling, Appeals to U.S. for an Air Attack
After 72 hours of relentless bombardment that has turned large areas of Sarajevo into smoking ruins, the President of this newly independent country appealed today to President Bush for an American bombing attack on Serbian gun positions in the hills above the city.
"We need urgent military help," said President Alija Izetbegovic.
"Force can be countered only by force." His plea came in a statement relayed by telephone to a reporter from the Presidential offices in central Sarajevo.
The building had been struck earlier in the afternoon by two of the shells that rained on the city throughout the day.


A Clue to Longevity Found at Chromosome Tip
HUMAN chromosomes, shaped like cinch-waisted sausages and sequestered in nearly every cell of the body, are famed as the place where human genes reside.
But now some scientists are finding that a few small architectural details of the chromosomes are at least as tantalizing as the 100,000 genes they harbor.
Biologists have discovered that at the very tips of the chromosomes are extraordinary structures built of six DNA letters repeated over and over, thousands of times, like monotonous molecular chants.
They are learning that these structures, called telomeres, are profoundly important at every stage of the cell's life, protecting the chromosomes against harm, organizing them into their proper position and, most provocatively, possibly serving as a sort of timekeeping mechanism that tells the cell how old it is.


Rothschild Shuffles Top Ranks
Gerald Goldsmith was named president and chief operating officer of Rothschild North America Inc. and its subsidiary Rothschild Inc. yesterday, as the investment banking and brokerage firm shuffled its top ranks.
Robert S. Pirie, who had been chief executive at Rothschild North America and chairman and chief executive of Rothschild Inc. was named co-chairman of Rothschild North America, joining Baron David de Rothschild, who is based in Paris.


Sports of The Times; Howe Strikes Himself Out Of Baseball
THROUGHOUT his various troubles and tribulations, Steve Howe often denied at first that he was responsible.
But eventually and reluctantly, he always acknowledged the truth.
When the Dodgers fined Howe one month's salary ($53,867) and put him on probation during the 1983 season, he insisted that his stay at an Arizona rehab center after the 1982 season had not helped him because he had been treated for alcohol abuse, not cocaine abuse.
"But he read the report that he had been treated for cocaine," Don Newcombe of the Dodger front office said at the time.
"He signed it."


Giants Will Consider Moving
BOB LURIE, the owner of the San Francisco Giants, who was rebuffed four times at the ballot box for a publicly financed replacement to Candlestick Park, said in a letter yesterday that he would consider moving the baseball team.
"While I have always resisted those who have made overtures to move the Giants from the Bay Area, I believe that the Giants must now consider those alternatives," Lurie wrote in the letter to Mayor FRANK JORDAN.


The Talk of Hollywood; A Movie of One Man's Riot Exploding From the Inside Out
It's the hottest day of the year in downtown Los Angeles, and morning rush-hour traffic on the freeway is gridlocked.
A bespectacled man in his late 30's, neatly dressed in a short-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair in a crew cut, has been dismissed from his job in a defense plant because the cold war has ended.
He watches a fly buzz around his car, and suddenly, inexplicably, goes haywire, abandoning the auto while drivers shout at him, curse and honk horns.
That's the start of "Falling Down," a new film, not yet completed, starring Michael Douglas, which details a seemingly normal man's daylong over-the-edge odyssey across the tense city, an odyssey that underscores the man's personal disintegration and rage.


Improving Frozen Food
The DNA Plant Technology Corporation, a biotechnology company, said today that it had been awarded a patent for proteins that improve the quality of frozen foods.
The proteins help prevent the formation of ice crystals, which can create a grainy texture in stored ice cream, ice milk and other frozen desserts, the company said.
It said the protein would also make frozen vegetables taste better when they are thawed and would extend the shelf life of frozen dough.


Retire Drivers by Way of Public Transit; Temptation-Free
To the Editor:
Whether older drivers are more or less likely to be involved in accidents than others (letters, May 23) depends on whether or not the older driver has been driving regularly.
Many older drivers who have not driven in some time retain licenses because they are good identification.
However, having a license might tempt a longtime nondriver to take the wheel when the occasion arises.


Latest Rage in All of Europe: Unstylish but Hot Champions
Their tennis games are unpoetic, and if a soft spot exists in either of their hearts, not even Paris was able to unveil it: Jim Courier and Monica Seles stalked the seven rounds of the French Open like a pair of big-game hunters.
They are not the most charismatic of champions -- Courier had to woo the spectators in the local patois on Sunday before they warmed to his having won the title in this Grand Slam event for a second year in a row, and runner-up Steffi Graf had the sympathy vote on Saturday before, during and after Seles grunted and grappled her way to a third consecutive title -- but that doesn't worry these champs.


Classical Music in Review
Composers String Quartet
Christ and St. Stephen's Church
Because of their scale and the breadth of their ambitions, AIDS benefit concerts like the two Music for Life programs presented at Carnegie Hall in recent years have had no trouble attracting attention.
But there are also smaller scale efforts that deserve a moment in the spotlight.
One is a series of chamber music concerts at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, sponsored jointly by the musicians' union (Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians) and the Actors' Fund of America.
A sizable roster of New York musicians have agreed to donate their talents to the cause, and judging from Sunday evening's installment, the series has a large following.
The performers on Sunday were the Composers String Quartet -- Matthew Raimondi and Anahid Ajemian, violinists; Ronald Carbone, violist, and Mark Schuman, cellist -- and Evelyne Crochet, a pianist.
The performance was dedicated to Karl Bargen, the quartet's violist until his death of AIDS in 1990.
A memorial spirit pervaded the program, which began with a passionate, rich-toned reading of Puccini's funereal "Crisantemi," and also included Turina's "Oracion del Torero" (a representation of a prayer uttered by a bullfighter before entering the ring).


CHRONICLE
A tempest in a telecast erupted at the Queens Theater in London on Sunday evening during a one-woman show by JOAN RIVERS.
The audience was reportedly infuriated when it learned that the show, the first of two that evening, was being taped by Showtime, the American cable network.
People complained that cameras and lights obscured their view, that jokes were repeated for videotaping, and that they were shortchanged: the curtain fell after just 33 minutes, they said.
The police said about 500 people besieged the box office demanding refunds, The Associated Press reported.
They had paid $:20 a ticket, or about $37.


Meridian Point Realty IV reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Advance Circuits Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Haiti's Refugees Stir Memory of an Old Shame; Words Without Deeds
To the Editor:
When Vice President Quayle visited Haiti last August, he commended the Haitian people for their struggle toward democracy and promised that the Bush Administration would help the Haitian democracy adjust to its difficult economic situation.
Declaring "no democratic nation ever stands alone," Mr.
Quayle urged the people of Haiti: "Trust the citizens of the United States of America to be your partner in this process." He added: "The Bush Administration, and the American people, want to assist you to achieve the historic task that lies before you." He closed his eloquent speech with these promising words of encouragement: "With many hands the load is lighter."


Observer; Accordion Man Hails Sax
When the subject is statecraft I feel nervous about disagreeing with sages like Barbara Walters and Tom Wicker, but Governor Clinton's saxophone act on the Arsenio Hall show struck me as one of the more encouraging events of the political year.
The Walters-Wicker vote of disapproval, registered during the David Brinkley show Sunday, rested on the idea that it was undignified for a potential President.
With all due respect to Barbara and Tom, I wonder if these two big-time TV talkers haven't heard that politics has entered the television age?


Ultimap Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Ziegler Talks Will Be Private
Discussions between the National Hockey League president, JOHN ZIEGLER, and the committee studying the method of replacing him are to be held on a confidential basis with no information released until later this month, a league spokesman said yesterday.
The talks were scheduled to get under way last night in New York.
"The matter of discussion between the committee and John Ziegler is a private one," said BILL WILKERSON, a spokesman for Ziegler, in a telephone interview from his office in Toronto.


General Cinema Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Classical Music in Review
"Photo-Op"
Opera La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street East Village Manhattan Thursday Through Sunday
Conrad Cummings's brief, fairly elaborate opera "Photo-Op" diligently assembles the familiar icons of American Presidential politics as experienced by television audiences.
As seen on Friday night, Secret Service men prowl the catwalks glowering through dark glasses.
Television reporters mouth commentary from within a glass broadcast booth.
Consultants to the rival candidates (Larry Adams and Margaret Bishop) are stationed at either side of the stage.
A montage of political film clips is superimposed on the image of an old flag and runs throughout the performance.
The simple music -- sometimes painfully simple -- is redolent of Philip Glass.
"Photo-Op" is more recognition than revelation.
In its smooth and agreeable way, it tells us what we already know: that politicians are empty and that political campaigns are put-up jobs.
The only interesting commentary on these facts comes at the very end, in a policy statement from the candidates unprintable in a family newspaper.


Drug Law Sanctions a Killing on AIDS
To the Editor:
"Seeking Limits to a Drug Monopoly" (Business Day, May 14) reports on Congressional efforts to curb profits under the Orphan Drug Act, which provides tax breaks and seven-year monopoly protection for producing pharmaceutical products aimed at diseases affecting few patients.
An accompanying chart shows some patients pay $3,000 a year for pentamidine, a drug that treats and prevents pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, the deadliest AIDS-related infection.
The real costs of pentamidine, however, as well as those of the Orphan Drug Act, as it stands unamended, are much higher.


Showscan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Wrong Terrible Ivan?
"Ivan!" the witness cried.
"I have no shadow of a hesitation or a doubt. It is Ivan from Treblinka, from the gas chambers -- the man that I am looking at this very moment. I saw the eyes, the murderous eyes and the face." Another survivor testified: "There is Ivan the Terrible. I dream about him every night."
On such compelling eyewitness testimony was John Demjanjuk, a retired auto worker from Cleveland, convicted in 1988 of executing tens of thousands of Jews in Poland during World War II.
Sentenced to hang by an Israeli court, he maintains they've got the wrong man -- and he could be right.


Prosecutor Addresses Doubts on Identity of 'Ivan the Terrible'
The chief prosecutor completed his arguments today in the years-long "Ivan the Terrible" case, insisting to Israel's Supreme Court that it should have no doubts that John Demjanjuk had been a "direct servant of Satan" as a guard at more than one Nazi death camp in Poland.
But one of the five Supreme Court justices suggested in a sharp exchange that the prosecution may have no case unless it could prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr.
Demjanjuk had been specifically at the Treblinka camp, where more than 850,000 Jews died.
Without such proof, he said, "there is no point in proceeding."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Mayors See Attention for Cities With Perot in Race
In this unpredictable political year, one thing seems certain: the three-cornered race that is emerging for the Presidency will give different interest groups an opportunity to exert even more leverage on the candidates.
Evidence of this came today when a group of big-city Mayors met with Ross Perot, the possible independent candidate, and then unabashedly told reporters they were using his presence in the race to wring concessions from both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the probable Democratic standard bearer.


Nelson Vending Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Romanian Leader Reluctant to Seek New Mandate
Two years after being swept into power, Romania's ruling party, led by President Ion Iliescu, is reluctant to test its popularity.
For months, Parliament has wrangled over an election date.
Now it has just days to make good on the repeated promise of elections this summer.


Ecology &amp; Environment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Earth Summit Finds The Years of Optimism Are a Fading Memory
The representatives of 178 countries gathered here for the Earth Summit confront a far more sobering task than did the intellectual and political predecessors who, in a landmark meeting, gathered in Stockholm 20 years ago last week and put the cause of the environment on the world's formal agenda for the first time.
In those palmy save-the-whales years, full of hope and idealism, the delegates to the United Nations Environment Conference in Sweden asserted confidently that "the capability of man to improve the environment increases with each passing day."


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices were higher in Tokyo this morning, as the Nikkei index of 225 issues rebounded from its lowest level since May 1.
At the end of the afternoon trading session, the Nikkei was up 189.98 points, or 1.08 percent, to 17,845.04.
On Monday, the index fell 134.98 points, to 17,655.06.


Lima Journal; Ordeal in Peru: Cuddling a Baby, Clinging to Hop
They are a special group of American visitors.
Many are couples in their late 30's and early 40's, too old to be classified most eligible by adoption agencies in the United States.
Some are single people, who are almost always passed over in the adoption competition back home.
Most came here with high hopes, having been told that if they went to Peru they would leave with a healthy baby within four to six weeks.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail
SENATE NOMINEES IN CALIFORNIA TO CAMPAIGN AS TEAM
SACRAMENTO, Calif., June 8 (AP) -- Dianne Feinstein and Representative Barbara Boxer will campaign for their Senate seats as a team to excite voters and lump together their Republican opponents -- one moderate, one conservative, a top state Democrat says.
The Democratic nominees face John Seymour, an interim Senator, and Bruce Herschensohn, respectively.


Huge Financial Scandal Shakes Indian Politics
A $1 billion banking and securities scandal, the largest in India's history, has rapidly spread through the stock markets and banking system and is now creeping onto the political landscape.
Several major banks, including the State Bank of India, the country's largest, have found themselves short by hundreds of millions of dollars after making dubious loans to stock speculators.
In addition, one of the country's biggest securities brokers is behind bars, the chairmen of several banks have been forced to resign and one committed suicide.


RTZ SELLS CONTROLLING STAKE IN A CANADIAN MINING GROUP
The RTZ Corporation, the world's largest mining group, said yesterday that it had sold its 51.5 percent holding in Rio Algom Ltd. of Toronto to Canadian investors for $215.8 million.
The stake, 22.5 million shares, has been placed with institutional investors at $13.53 a share, payable in three installments in the next two years.


SafeCard Services reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Firefighters Go on E.M.S. Calls In a Response Test in Brooklyn
Trying to reduce the time it takes emergency crews to reach New Yorkers who have had heart attacks or stopped breathing, the Dinkins administration began an experiment yesterday in which firefighters as well as Emergency Medical Service crews would respond to critical medical emergencies in Brooklyn.
The test will continue in the borough until September, officials said, when the results will be evaluated and the Mayor will decide whether to expand the dual response throughout the city.


COMPANY NEWS
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP., Armonk, N.Y., formed an alliance with Professional Systems Corp., to bring I.B.M.'s Burlington Logistics Management System to the commercial market.
LACLEDE STEEL CO., St.
Louis, will take a $9 million charge in the second quarter for pension costs.


Saberhagen Raises Specter of Surgery
Bret Saberhagen, his patience all but completely worn out, said today he may seek another opinion on the condition of his right index finger and would agree to surgery if that were the best solution.
"There may be immediate action on my part," said Saberhagen, the star right-hander for the Mets, who has not pitched since May 15.
"Enough is enough."


Data Service Adds Features
Govpx Inc., founded a year ago to broaden the availability and increase the accuracy of pricing information on Government securities, announced three marketing and product initiatives yesterday.
Govpx said it was adopting the name Prophesy for its Government securities pricing service.
As before, the service will gather price information from five of the six interdealer brokers in Treasury securities and will cover all active Treasury issues and many of the others.
It also provides the only daily volume figures available.


INSIDE
P.L.O. Official Slain in Paris
A senior security official of the Palestine Liberation Organization was shot to death in Paris.
The P.L.O. accused Israel of responsibility.
Page A9.
No Longer a Juggernaut


COMPANY NEWS: Long-Distance Recycling; Earth Summit Petitions Are Being Put to a Test
By the thousands, Americans are signing up to preserve the environment by pledging "to make the earth a secure and hospitable place for present and future generations." The pledges are to be presented to Maurice Strong, the secretary general of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro today.
The problem is, the pledges are on paper.
Lots of different kinds of paper.
Fax paper, magazine paper, color copier paper, all of which is hard to process in conventional recycling processes.


RESULTS PLUS
CYCLING  Saligari Is Surprise  Unheralded Marco Saligari of Italy won the 16th stage of the Tour of Italy yesterday at Sondrio, Italy, but Miguel Indurain of Spain retained the overall lead for a 14th consecutive day.
Saligari, a 27-year-old Italian who trails Indurain by more than 2 hours in the overall standing, won the 102.9-mile stage for his fifth career stage victory.
Saligari beat Gerard Rue of France to the finish line in Sondrio by 52 seconds. (AP) TENNIS  Cash Makes Bid  Pat Cash beat Jeff Tarango, 6-1, 6-1, yesterday in the opening round of the Queen's Club grass-court tournament in London, increasing his chances of being offered a wild card into Wimbledon.
Cash, who won Wimbledon in 1987, has slipped to 214th in the world ranking, but needed only 51 minutes to defeat Tarango, ranked 66th.
Also, Wally Masur defeated No. 16 Anders Jarryd, 7-6 (7-2), 3-6, 6-1.  (AP) Fendick Is Upset: Michelle Jaggard-Lai of Australia upset 12th-seeded Patty Fendick, 6-4, 5-7, 6-2, yesterday at the grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England.
Fendick rallied from a 5-3 deficit in the second set, but Jaggard-Lai broke the American in the first and seventh games of the final set.  (AP) FENCING  Bravin's Title and Berth  Nick Bravin won his second straight men's foil title at the United States Fencing National Championships last night in Dolton, Ill., and earned a berth on the Olympic team.
Bravin defeated the three-time Olympian Michael Marx, 5-3, 2-5, 6-4.
Marx still qualified for the team.
The third team member is Zaddick Longbach. (AP)


Treasury Issues Mixed in Price
Prices of Treasury securities were very narrowly mixed and interest rates little changed in slow trading yesterday.
According to market participants, activity will probably remain light for much of the week, because the next batch of important economic statistics is not scheduled for release until Thursday and Friday.
Nevertheless, they said, underlying market conditions remain solid.


No Neutrinos
Hope that Russian-American observations at the Baksan observatory inside a Caucasus mountain might resolve a long-standing puzzle as to the energy source of the Sun has been dashed.
A detector consisting of 30 tons of gallium has failed to record the particles that should be reaching Earth as primary byproducts of the energy-making process.
The missing particles are neutrinos, the most elusive of all nuclear particles.
They should be produced by a variety of reactions in the core of the Sun and attempts to detect some of them were begun in 1968 by Dr.
Raymond Davis Jr., then at Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton, L.I., inside a South Dakota gold mine.


Review/Music; Gospel Harmonies From 2 Eras
A gritty, bluesy voice sets out a song; it is answered and then supported by full, steadfast harmonies.
That style, from two unaccompanied vocal groups, was presented in the first half of "North Carolina Family Gospel" on Friday night, part of the Carnegie Hall Folk Festival at Weill Recital Hall.
Performers from different eras offered two approaches to harmony.
The opening group was the Gospel Christian Singers, which was founded in 1929 in Charlotte, N.C., dissolved during World War II and re-formed in 1980.
The current quintet includes two original members, the bass William Dunn and the lead singer, Cleveland Young, along with Margaret Love, Clyde Long and Nina Young, who is married to Mr.
Young.


U.S. and Russia Discuss Arms Cuts
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, met today in an effort to work out agreements on further nuclear warhead cuts and on unprecedented cooperation between Washington and Moscow in warning one another against missile attacks.
After daylong talks, though, the two sides agreed only to meet again on Tuesday.
It is still not clear whether they will be able to reach agreements that could be signed by President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin at their summit meeting on June 16 and 17 in Washington.


PRESTO IS AWARDED $2.35 MILLION IN PATENT LAWSUIT
A Federal jury in Chicago has ordered the Black &amp; Decker Corporation to pay $2.35 million to National Presto Industries for infringing Presto's Salad Shooter patent.
Presto, based in Eau Claire, Wis., filed the lawsuit in 1989, contending that Black &amp; Decker's Handy Slice 'N' Shred infringed the patent for Salad Shooter, an electric slicer and shredder, which is one of Presto's most popular products.
In March, the jury said that Black &amp; Decker infringed the patent, that Black &amp; Decker's patent was invalid and that Presto was entitled to $2.35 million.
Presto did not announce the award until Friday, after several Black &amp; Decker motions were denied.
A spokesman for Black &amp; Decker, based in Towson, Md., said the company planned to appeal the ruling.


Official Urges Bankers to Lend
Deputy Treasury Secretary John Robson told bankers today to stop blaming regulators for the so-called "credit crunch" and to "come out of their caves" and start lending money to spur economic growth.
Mr.
Robson told a meeting of the American Bankers Association here that for more than a year, the Bush Administration had been vigilant in striking down regulatory impediments to lending.


Holiday RV Superstores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bowne &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30





On My Mind; Racing With Perot
Traveling abroad for a couple of weeks, I found myself missing Ross Perot.
That startled me.
I can't think of another American politician I ever thought about when I was absorbed writing from foreign countries.
Yes, politician -- it would help to see more clearly if we thought of him that way, not as the Lone Ranger.
His own top aides point out that Rangers don't make billions by their lonesome.


Space, Time and Dissectible Frogs
YOUNGSTERS start out with the kind of simple curiosity -- "Why is the grass green?" -- that lies at the heart of science.
But, sadly, most of them outgrow it.
Science simply isn't cool, or whatever the current word is, and it is hard work.
Great teaching can keep that instinctive curiosity alive, but great teaching, like great governing or writing or cabinetmaking, is uncommon.
Here are two teaching programs, models of their kind, for the small computer.


McVie Says He Was Stunned
TOM McVIE, the former coach of the Devils, said yesterday that he was stunned at being dismissed and replaced by HERB BROOKS, but he's not letting it get to him.
In a telephone interview from his Portland, Ore., home, McVie said he had no warning that General Manager LOU LAMORIELLO's reason for visiting on June 1 was to dismiss him.


Evans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Meridian Point Realty VI reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hach Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Books of The Times; Using the Reality of Oz As the Basis for Fantasy
Was  By Geoff Ryman 371 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
"There's no place like home. There's no place like home."
Those words, spoken by Judy Garland in "The Wizard of Oz," echo throughout Geoff Ryman's impressive new novel like a haunting refrain.
But while "Was" stands, on its most basic level, as an inventive improvisation on L. Frank Baum's classic story, it is hardly a simple post-modern exercise in reimagining a famous classic.
Rather, the novel opens out magically to become a mythic meditation on the enduring power of fantasy and art and on the loss of innocence, both the innocence of childhood lost to the cruel realities of the grown-up world and the innocence of a nation lost to the cruelties of history.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.61
5.83
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.66
5.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.79
3.80
5.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.92
6.92
8.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.84
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.77
8.77
9.54
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.62
6.62
7.27
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Retire Drivers by Way of Public Transit
To the Editor:
Re your May 23 editorial and letters on elderly drivers: I, at 67, dread the isolation and dependency I will suffer when I can no longer drive.
The condition of nondrivers in this automobile-dominated world approaches imprisonment.
Is it any wonder that some of us hang onto our licenses long after our competence has dangerously eroded?
I grew up near Chicago in the 1930's with freedom to go from suburb to city or between suburban towns on streetcars, elevated trains and steam trains.
Everyone could go everywhere without a car: preadolescents, teen-agers, young adults, parents, the elderly, poor people and people with disabilities.
Getting to school, work, the doctor or shopping did not depend on owning and driving a car or the kindness of a driving friend.
Those destinations were in the middle of town, with easy access by streetcar or on foot.


Phillies Cool Off First-Place Pirates
Phillies 7, Pirates 0
PHILADELPHIA, June 7 (AP) -- Curt Schilling pitched a three-hitter for his first major league shutout and doubled in two runs in a six-run second inning as the Philadelphia Phillies routed the Pittsburgh Pirates, 7-0, tonight.
Schilling (5-3) struck out one and issued an intentional walk as the Phillies handed the Pirates their sixth consecutive road loss and ninth in the last 10 away from home.


Accord on Auto Research
The Big Three auto makers said today that they had agreed to form a consortium to share technology for controlling auto emissions.
The agreement by Chrysler, Ford and General Motors is the eighth such cooperative accord the auto makers have signed in the last few years.
Their goal is to share noncompetitive technology in order to save costs and compete more effectively with foreign auto makers.
A 1969 consent decree barring car makers from sharing research and development expired in 1987.


Worse Than Unbalanced
This week the House will vote on a series of constitutional amendments, all bad, that would require a balanced budget.
Each would tilt spending away from long-term investment, the very opposite of sane policy.
Worse yet, Byzantine tactics by opponents of the amendments might backfire and produce the worst possible result.
Yes, the economy would be better off with a balanced Federal budget.
But only if "balance" is defined to to take account of inflation, growth and -- most important -- the economy's need for public investment.
None of the proposed bills make sensible discriminations.
None deserve to pass.


Special Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Corrections
An article on Monday about the investigation into the murder of Manuel de Dios Unanue, the former editor of the newspaper El Diario-La Prensa, misstated the charges against a Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service agent about whom Mr. de Dios wrote an article.
The agent, Joseph Occhipinti, was convicted of violating civil rights by conducting illegal searches and seizures.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


NEW PRODUCTS AND LOWER PRICES FROM COMPAQ
The Compaq Computer Corporation yesterday introduced a series of Systempro file servers that it said run faster than current models.
The new Systempros will be priced at $10,999, about $5,000 less than the older models, whose prices were slashed 20 percent yesterday.
Compaq's new servers are the first phase of a two-part product entry designed to refresh the company's line as well as its battered stock price, which was unchanged yesterday at $28.75 on the Big Board.


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to April 18


Following an Industry Legend at MCI
With the death of William G. McGowan yesterday, the MCI Communications Corporation has lost the legendary chairman who inspired much of the company's feisty spirit in its David-and-Goliath battle with A.T.&amp; T., the industry leader.
But because Mr.
McGowan, since a heart transplant in 1987, handed over responsibility to other executives -- particularly Bert C. Roberts Jr., president and chief executive -- several analysts say the company's prospects have not been shaken by his passing.  [ Obituary, page A1. ]


No Jail Term for Ex-Father of the Year in Child-Abuse Case Under Plea Deal
Kodzo Dobosu, who once was cited as a "father of the year" for adopting and caring for 35 handicapped and troubled children, pleaded guilty yesterday to endangering the welfare of three children and to petty larceny, ending the prospect that the children would be required to testify against him.
As part of the agreement, Mr.
Dobosu will not be sentenced to prison.
Had he been convicted of the child-abuse charges he originally faced, he could have been sentenced to up to 7 years in prison on 11 separate counts.


Review/Dance; 2 Sides of Balanchine: The Mystical and the Merry
"Serenade" and "Slaughter on 10th Avenue," presented by the New York City Ballet on Saturday night at the New York State Theater, are George Balanchine at his most mystical and most merry.
Balanchine's first American ballet, "Serenade," was created to make use of the mostly limited performing skills of its young dancers.
It also alludes to their lives in the studio and possibly to their aspirations, both personal and professional.
Balanchine dismissed such dramatic interpretation, though the plangent Tchaikovsky score he chose cries out for such a view.
And "Serenade" was performed here as a brisk outpouring of dance and shifting patterns.
Of the three lead ballerinas, Maria Calegari best caught the undercurrent of emotion that propels the ballet along its course.
There were moments when Darci Kistler looked like her wonderfully reckless old spirit.
But the womanliness with which she now dances gave her arms and upper body a theatricality that seemed too much for the ballet, more like a drenching of perfume than a discreet dab.
Kyra Nichols let movement alone tell the story in an exalted sweep of dancing.


Tewksbury Is Under Control and an Ultimate Master of Heads-Up Ball
Bob Tewksbury is approximately 15 hours away from securing a bachelor of science degree in physical education.
One day, the St.
Louis Cardinals' right-hander may be a teacher in a classroom, but he definitely will be on baseball fields, working with Little Leaguers, he says, "teaching them how to pitch, how to throw strikes."
What a shame that just one small group will get to partake of this knowledge.
For Bob Tewksbury should be doing the teaching of that lost art of pitching on a much grander scale.


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Maxco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Margaretha Ley, Chief Designer Of Sportswear Company, Is Dead
Margaretha Ley, chief designer and co-founder of Escada AG, the German women's apparel company known for colorful, highly decorated sportswear, died last Thursday in Munich after a long illness.
Mrs.
Ley lived in Munich.
The company would not disclose her age or cause of death, but she underwent intestinal surgery in recent months.


3 Teen-Agers Are Sentenced In Strangling
Three teen-agers who plotted the murder of a schoolmate who was strangled while reciting the "Hail Mary" were sentenced today to 20 years in prison, the maximum for juvenile defendants.
But under a plea bargain, the youths -- two 14-year-olds and a 17-year-old -- could receive lesser sentences if they cooperate with prosecutors in testifying against two other defendants, James Castaldo, 18, and James Wanger, 17.


When You Go to the Circus, You Should Always Bring a Friend


Troubled Church Discloses Its Financial Records
Responding to accusations of financial and religious improprieties, officials of the Christian Science Church today provided members attending its annual meeting with the most detailed financial report in church history.
The report said that since 1986 the church had exhausted $135 million of its unrestricted reserve fund and borrowed $115 million from its pension fund to finance new ventures in radio, television and magazine publishing.


Zenith Data Introducing New Models
Zenith Data Systems is introducing an array of personal computer models with additional features today in an effort to escape the ravages of the increasingly competitive PC market.
While most of the largest PC makers like Compaq and I.B.M. have been slashing prices in an effort to beat back the assault of such clone makers as Dell Computer, Zeos and AST Research, Zenith Data has instead created a new advanced professional products line intended to entice corporate buyers with the added features.


Man Fatally Stabbed In Subway Tunnel
A 26-year-old man was fatally stabbed in a Bronx subway tunnel last night in a strange sequence of events that left the Transit Police puzzled.
The victim, his chest bleeding from a puncture wound and his hands cut, stepped from the tunnel onto a platform at East 138th Street and Third Avenue in Mott Haven about 7:15 P.M., the Transit police said.
The man sat down on a box at the end of the platform, only to get up moments later, stagger a few steps, and then tumble onto the tracks into the path of a moving Manhattan-bound No. 6 train, said a Transit Police spokesman, Albert W. O'Leary.


Patterns
Changing Windows
Even store windows have to be politically correct.
Last week, Bergdorf Goodman displayed fall clothes from the collection of Yves Saint Laurent in its Fifth Avenue windows, using mostly black mannequins.
But the store did use a few white ones, and therein lay the problem.
The white mannequins were put in a separate window, segregated, so to speak, from the others.
After a passer-by complained, the store moved a few white mannequins into the black window, and vice versa, thereby desegregating things.


Drop in Post-Soviet Arms Industry Cited
American intelligence officials today sketched a picture of a rapidly disintegrating military-industrial complex in the former Soviet Union, with many plants near bankruptcy and weapons sales expected to plunge by 60 percent to 85 percent this year.
In Congressional testimony, the officials voiced concern that the huge drop in sales, which is making it hard for many plants to pay workers, might push the plants to sell sophisticated aircraft or surface-to-air missiles to many third-world nations.


Grand Metropolitan Makes Shifts at 2 Units
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the British food, drink and retailing group with large American holdings, yesterday announced management changes at the top of two divisions.
George Bull, 55 years old, currently chairman and chief executive of International Distillers and Vintners, the company's drinks unit, becomes chairman and chief executive of the food operations, which includes Pillsbury and Green Giant.


It Doesn't Get Much Uglier Than This
There are dark days and then there are darker days.
Mark the Yankees down for perhaps their darkest day of the season after yesterday's events on and off the diamond.
One of their best pitchers was lost indefinitely and the Yankees lost to Toronto in embarrassing fashion.
Hours after pitcher Steve Howe was suspended indefinitely from major league baseball for pleading guilty to a misdemeanor cocaine charge, the bad news continued flowing for the Yankees as the Blue Jays hammered them, 16-3, at Yankee Stadium.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the parliamentary elections in Czechoslovakia misidentified the party that received about 6 percent of the vote.
It is the far-right Republican Party of Czechoslovakia, not the Moravian nationalist party, known as the Party of Republican Unity.


Langer Biomechanics reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Executive Changes
AUDIOVOX CORP., Hauppauge, L.I., a supplier of auto sound, auto security and cellular telephone products, named Edward R. Olson senior vice president for operations.
CHASE MANHATTAN BANK, New York, a unit of the Chase Manhattan Corp., named Christopher D. Rocker, senior vice president, executive for its commodity finance division.


Quotation of the Day
"Farming isn't a way of life anymore, but a big business. You're kidding yourself if you try to think otherwise. And you're probably going to go down the tube." -- ORRIS ROGERS, a farmer in Iowa.  [ A22:1 ]


DOW SUBSIDIARY TO SPEND MORE ON CANADIAN RESEARCH
Marion Merrell Dow Canada said yesterday that it would spend up to $167.8 million in the next six years to expand its research in Canada.
The money will be spent through its subsidiary Nordic Merrell Dow Research of Laval, Quebec, the pharmaceuticals company said.
Specific projects were not identified.


Batman Returns, but Brings Far Fewer T-Shirts
Yes, it seemed inevitable: Batman sells again.
The Caped Crusader is back for a second try at SMASH!
HIT! status at the box office, but Warner Brothers is peddling the movie "Batman Returns" far differently from the way it promoted "Batman" in the summer of 1989.


AFA Protective Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Edison Bros. Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Running-Mate 'Rules' Vanish in the Perot Era
If this were a conventional year, Gov.
Bill Clinton's choice of a running mate would be fairly uncomplicated.
By the old rules, a Southern Governor with little foreign policy expertise would inevitably be drawn to a member of the House or Senate from another region with respectable credentials in international affairs.
Mr.
Clinton, in other words, would look to smooth the feathers of the Washington elites, as previous "outsiders" Jimmy Carter and Michael S. Dukakis did.


Ear's Own Sounds May Underlie Its Precision
BY picking up sound and transforming it into electrochemical impulses, the ears act like microphones sending coded signals through the nervous system into the brain.
But following the discovery that ears also act as tiny sound-producing loudspeakers, scientists are encountering many surprises as they probe the mysteries of hearing.
One recent result of this rapidly developing field of research has been the invention of instruments with miniature microphones that listen for the faint sounds emitted by healthy ears.
Scientists believe these devices offer doctors a quick and reliable tool for detecting deafness, even in newborn infants, among whom deafness is otherwise hard to diagnose.


Howe Is Suspended After Entering Guilty Plea
Steve Howe, the Yankee relief pitcher who was arrested five months ago in Montana on drug charges, was suspended indefinitely from baseball today after he entered a guilty plea here to a charge of attempting to possess cocaine.
Baseball's response to Howe's plea was substantive, but the player's legal problems, which began with his arrest last Dec. 19, remained unresolved.
Federal Magistrate Bart Erickson delayed sentencing until a hearing Aug. 18, but he indicated that Howe was unlikely to receive any time in prison.


At U.S.O.C., a Nomination and a Milestone
LeRoy Walker, a 76-year-old former educator with a rich and varied background in sports administration, was nominated yesterday to become the next president of the United States Olympic Committee.
If elected -- and it's almost inconceivable that he wouldn't be -- Walker would become the first minority-group member to lead the organization since its beginning, in 1900.
Walker, who received a doctorate in health and physical education from New York University in 1957, is black.


Police Heroics in New York, Minus the Car Chases
Eighty-three New York City police officers were honored yesterday for superior police work -- but not for dramatic acts of valor like capturing armed robbers or rescuing children caught in the crossfire of drug dealers.
Instead, they had painted over the graffiti on buildings, escorted old people to places where they could shop safely and tried to get prostitutes into drug-treatment programs.


Bridge
The first Pan-American Championships, in Corpus Christi, Tex., followed a predictable course for the first two days, with all four United States teams qualifying in both the Open and Women's divisions.
They were then required by the official regulations to battle each other for two days, producing two finals in which an American team will play a non-American team.
The quarterfinal pairings in open series matches played yesterday were: United States (Seymon Deutsch) vs.
United States (Cliff Russell); United States (Andy Goodman) vs.
United States (Howard Weinstein ); Brazil I vs.
Brazil II, Canada vs.
Barbados.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
William G. McGowan, chairman of MCI Communications and leader of the court challenge that broke up A.T.&amp; T., died of a heart attack at age 64.  [ Page A1. ]  Because he handed over much responsibility for MCI after his heart transplant in 1987, Mr.
McGowan's passing is not expected to shake the company.  [ D5. ]
Entergy agreed to buy Gulf States Utilities for $2.3 billion in cash and stock in a deal that would create one of the largest electric utilities in the United States.  [ D1. ]


National Security Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Perotxysms
Ross Perot may be a sudden breath of political fresh air or a blowhard offering more bull than beef, but either way he provides an irresistible target for name puns.
An article in The New Republic last week describing him as paranoid was entitled "Perotnoia." On television last week, Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York warned likewise against "Perotanoia." Another commentator referred with Shakespearean sarcasm to the idyllic world of Pros-Perot.
Puns need not be scorned as low humor, not when they make sense at each level of meaning, as in John Leonard's gibe at economists preoccupied with anti-recession models: "Brother, can you paradigm?" But making puns on people's names invites endless, tasteless imitation and so it might be worth the effort -- all together now -- to get every conceivable Perot pun out of our systems.


U.N. COUNCIL ACTS ON BOSNIA AIRPORT
The Security Council directed Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali today to expand the 14,000-member United Nations peacekeeping force in Yugoslavia by at least 1,100 people to reopen the airport at Sarajevo to permit aid shipments.
But the move was contingent on a lasting cease-fire, something that seems far from certain.
The 15-member Security Council made the decision unanimously with no debate.


Disk Drive Is Introduced By Hewlett
The Hewlett-Packard Company today introduced the world's smallest disk drive.
The matchbook-sized device uses a 1.3-inch hard disk that houses up to 21.4 megabytes of information, or the equivalent of 14,389 typed pages.
The device, called the HP Kittyhawk Personal Storage Module, is priced at $250 in high volumes, and will be shipped in the fourth quarter.


Taped Order Loud and Clear: 'Burn It All'
A recording of what the Bosnian Government says are three senior Serbian officers in the hills above Sarajevo registers a detailed discussion of which residential districts to hit with heavy artillery.
One officer argues that the shelling should be switched to an area with fewer Serbian residents while the commanding general orders, "Burn it all!" Muslim Code Names
The Government said the recording, which has been played repeatedly on Sarajevo television, was made on May 27 when the three Serbian officers spoke to each other by radio from widely separated firing points in the mountains.
The Bosnian officers who made the recording said that monitoring the Serbs' radio frequencies was technically easy, and that the voices, particularly of the Serbian general, were well known to their opponents, many of whom served with them until recently in the Yugoslav Army.


Eaton Vance reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Japanese Troop Bill Clears Parliamentary Hurdle
After a bitter marathon of debate and delaying tactics, the upper house of Japan's Parliament passed a bill early today that would allow Japanese troops to venture overseas for the first time since World War II and participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
But the bill was so watered down by compromises, and the debate so aroused pacifist passions among some Japanese, that many fear it may turn out to be a mere symbol of Japan's continuing ambivalence about taking a more active role in the post-cold-war world.


UNITED ADDS SHOPPING SERVICE ON MOST DOMESTIC FLIGHTS
United Airlines has added a new feature to its domestic fleet: allowing passengers to order products from 13 companies by telephone.
Some items can be delivered as soon as an aircraft lands.
The service, called High Street Emporium, could double orders to Phoenix-based Skymall Inc., which supplies the catalogue, within several months, said Jan Redding, marketing director for the privately held company.


Cards and Comics That Thrive on Gore Do Harm to Children
To the Editor:
An Associated Press news item from Milwaukee reports May 15 on the sale of a locally produced comic book that graphically depicts the heinous, unspeakable crimes of the serial killer Jeffrey L. Dahmer.
This is just one more example of the commercial exploitation of our children.
Producers of these products point to the apparently depraved and morbid interest in serial killer merchandise as justification for its sale.
Their attitude is, if it can be sold and a profit can be made, then do it.


People
*
Peter Falcone, recently named a vice chairman at DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, left the agency, a spokesman said, confirming a report in this week's Adweek.
Mr.
Falcone had been the longtime president at DDB Needham New York until Andy Berlin took that position last month.


It's Players vs. Owners Over Plan B
With less than a week to go before an antitrust trial pitting the National Football League against Jets running back Freeman McNeil and seven other players is scheduled to start in Minneapolis, both sides appear to have adopted a see-you-in-court attitude.
Jim Quinn, a lawyer with the New York firm of Weil Gotshal &amp; Manges, represents McNeil and the seven other players, who through a suit originally filed in July 1990 are seeking unrestricted free agency and a total of $3 million in damages.
Quinn said he's not going to offer any more counterproposals for a settlement.


Economic Scene; Making Room In the Ark
BIOLOGICAL diversity, as everyone save a few White House curmudgeons left off the guest list for Rio agrees, is unalloyed virtue.
But that sentiment and a unanimous resolution from the United Nations General Assembly won't buy a single feather for a northern spotted owl.
Species preservation can be expensive.
And while it sometimes pays tangible dividends in enhanced tourism or commercially exploitable life forms, the "market" simply will not buy all the diversity that nature has to sell.


Trek to Misery by 12,000 Pawns in Sudan War
For the thousands of weary and bewildered Sudanese boys, the desolate refugee camp here a few miles inside the Kenyan border is the latest stopping point in a four-year, 1,000-mile barefoot odyssey of starvation and endurance across three countries.
The 12,000 boys, most of them 10 to 16 years old, are part of the wave of civil-war refugees that has swirled around the Horn of Africa, and now into Kenya, in the last several years. 'I Saw Lots of People Die'
For many of the boys, their first trek four years ago left an indelible memory as they followed the trail of bones of boys who had died of starvation, en route to Ethiopia.


Georgia Agency Bonds Priced
The Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia tentatively priced $285.7 million in tax-exempt special-obligation bonds yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
A maximum yield of 6.6 percent is offered for a long-term bond due in 2017, while an issue due in 2013 is priced to yield 6.45 percent.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were priced to yield from 5.7 percent in 1999, 6 percent in 2002, 6.4 percent in 2007 and 6.45 percent in 2010 for a 10 percent bond that was priced at a premium.


Time Inc. Names No. 2 Executive in a Reshuffling
Time Inc. named Don Logan, the president and chief executive of the Southern Progress Corporation, its president and chief operating officer yesterday.
Southern Progress, the nation's largest regional magazine and book publishing company, has been a subsidiary of Time since 1985.


Quiksilver Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.72
5.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.71
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.79
3.83
5.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.96
6.92
8.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.84
8.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.77
9.53
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.62
7.29
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Aid With Strings on It Helps Us, Not Them
To the Editor:
Re "American Exports to Poor Countries Are Rapidly Rising" (front page, May 10): You do not mention the Agency for International Development policy that requires development aid recipients to spend most of the money in the United States.
According to Nicaragua Through Our Eyes (Volume 6, No. 4, December 1991-January 1992), the newsletter of the Committee of U.S.
Citizens Living in Nicaragua, the Nicaragua Electric Company contracted for ceramic insulators with a workshop operated by disabled Nicaraguan veterans.
After 16 months of developing the manufacturing technique and a few months of production, the workshop saw its contract canceled.
The utility explained that it had received A.I.D. funds and had to buy insulators made in the United States.


Most City School Graduates Flunk Skills Tests at CUNY
The majority of city high school graduates who enroll in the City University of New York fail entrance tests of basic skills in reading, writing or mathematics, an audit released yesterday by the City Comptroller's office has found.
The survey found that in the three years ending in 1990 more than 75 percent of the more than 30,000 city high school graduates who enrolled in CUNY failed at least one of the three tests.


Trenton Crime Bill: Puzzling Package Stirs Concern Over Assault Weapons
The New Jersey Legislature is not famous for truth in packaging; what you see in a bill is not always what you get.
But an "anti-crime" measure making its way through the Legislature may set new standards for obfuscation.
It is so confusing that not even its prime sponsors seem to know what it does.
The bill's sponsors say it would deter crime by imposing new penalties for the use of firearms in drug-related offenses and for doing things like carrying firearms too close to school buildings.
They say the bill will also ban "assault weapons."


Affinity Biotech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the proposed merger of Entergy and Gulf States Utilities misstated the position of Paul Zimmering, a lawyer.
He said that before Louisiana's Public Service Commission could approve the merger, it would probably have to conclude that the deal would benefit customers of both companies; he did not say the commission would conclude that the merger would benefit the customers.


2d Big Customer Lost in a New Blow to Quotron
Quotron Systems Inc., the struggling securities quote service owned by Citicorp, was struck another staggering blow yesterday when one of its largest customers, Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., said it was abandoning the service for a much smaller competitor.
The move, which would eliminate 5,000 Quotron terminals from operation, comes one week after Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company also decided to drop the company's service of about 2,400 terminals.
Combined, the decisions by the two firms will eliminate more than 12 percent of Quotron's 60,000 terminals.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  RUSSIAN ARMS ACCORD ELUSIVE
Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Kozyrev of Russia failed to agree on how to cut the number of nuclear warheads below current treaty levels.
But they said they would keep trying in the week remaining before a summit meeting in Washington.
A1  NEW DAY IN THE BALTICS
The Baltic republics remain stunted and struggling, their fledgling political and economic institutions seeking stability.
But the months since the break with Moscow have produced a rush of possibilities -- new cars, air and ferry links and a flood of diplomats and investors.
A1  REFUGEE HAVEN AMID HARDSHIP
Nearly 300,000 Ethiopian, Somali and Sudanese refugees have sought sanctuary in northern Kenya since the beginning of 1992, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees says.
These refugees are placing an added burden on Kenya as it struggles with ethnic conflict, volatile politics and regional drought.
A1  UNDERGROUND SARAJEVO
In places underground, under the the devastation wrought by artillery, slices of life survive in Sarajevo.
A retired engineer plays cards at a makeshift table, his friends drinking plum brandy.
What is happening in such places may be all the hope there is that Sarajevo will one day live again.
A3  THE EARTH'S DIPLOMATS PUSH ON
Negotiators at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro sought to bridge differences on forest preservation and other contentious issues.
But officials warned that they might not reach agreement in time for world leaders to sign accords Friday.
A8
News analysis: Industrial nations compound U.S. isolation in Rio.
A8  JAPAN'S POSTWAR TABOO
The upper house of Japan's Parliament passed a bill that would permit troops to take part in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
But anger and shoving matches in the lower house underscored the hesitancy of Japanese to give the military any foreign policy role.
A7  P.L.O.
TALKS OF FRENCH INFORMERS
A P.L.O. official slain in Paris was there for an appointment with a senior official of the French secret service, P.L.O. officials said.
They expressed suspicion that information on his movements was leaked to his killers by members of the French secret service.
A6  News analysis: Is the man before the Israeli justices "Ivan"?
A10  Gazans, kept from jobs in Israel, denounce group punishment.
A5  National A16-21, D20  HOUSE ACTS ON AID TO JOBLESS
The House passed a bill to grant automatically renewable benefits to the long-term unemployed.
The White House threatened a veto.
A1  THE MURPHY BROWN SEQUEL
Addressing the Southern Baptist Convention, Vice President Quayle portrayed the 1992 race for the White House as a war between traditional values and a cultural elite mocking those values.
A1  PEROT'S WEAK SPOTS
While old and young, rich and poor, Northerners and Southerners jump on Ross Perot's bandwagon, women and some minority groups voice doubt about him.
A1
Clinton described Perot as merely a passing fancy.  A20
News analysis: The year of interactive campaigning.  A20
Representative Beryl Anthony lost a primary race.  A21  EX-H.U.D. OFFICIAL INDICTED
Thomas T. Demery, a former Assistant Housing Secretary, was charged with conspiracy and conflict of interest.
He is the highest-ranking official yet indicted in a special prosecutor's investigation into H.U.D.
A16  FATAL VIOLENCE AMONG THE YOUNG
Federal statistics show that gunshot wounds are the second-leading cause of death among all American children of high-school age and that this cause is increasing faster than any other among that age group.
A19  AFTER THE RIOTS
Hoping to channel the rage of the rioting into efforts to create jobs, residents of the poorest neighborhoods in Los Angeles are picketing construction sites and meeting with officials to make sure they get their share of the rebuilding work.
A16  GAIN IN SUN RESEARCH
The blazing gases of the Sun's surface continuously flow away from the solar equator toward the poles, a NASA scientist has discovered.
The finding is expected to bring better understanding not only of the Sun's behavior but also of its effects on the Earth.
D20  SAFETY REPORT CRITICIZES F.A.A.
Flight attendants are not being adequately trained to cope with emergencies like the evacuation of planes after accidents, the National Transportation Safety Board said.
D20  Ben Vereen was critically injured when hit by a vehicle.
A16  Presbyterians adopted a compromise position on abortion.
D20  A boat sailed into Boston Harbor, creating a milestone.
D20  Education Page B8  Is it the right one, baby?
Penn State makes Pepsi the only one on campus.
Often neglected, middle schools are getting renewed attention.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1 Arts/Entertainment C15-23  ARTS RULE DISPUTED
In a significant victory for artists and free-speech advocates, a Federal judge in Los Angeles ruled unconstitutional a law requiring the National Endowment for the Arts to "take into consideration general standards of decency" when making grants.
A1  Sports B9-15  NINTENDO HAS A NEW GAME
A committee of major league baseball owners unanimously approved the sale of the Seattle Mariners to a group of investors that includes the Nintendo Company less than six months after it rejected the original offer because of opposition to overseas ownership.
A1  Baseball: Commissioner survives power play.
B9  Obituaries D20-21  The Living Section C1-10  Iced tea's new popularity as a pour that refreshes.
C1  Health Page B8  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Adagio for cello, howitzers.
Making money and babies.
Poverty and honest need.
Topics: The wrong guns.
Letters A22  Anna Quindlen: Zero population talk.
A23  Ronald Reagan: Bush leads the way on budget amendment.
A23  Robert Heilbroner and Peter Bernstein: Create two budgets.
A23  Martin Mayer: Limit the debt.
A23  Laurence J. Kotlikoff: Taxes -- future shock.
A23


McGrath to Leave Congress, Reducing the Region's Clout
In a setback to New York State's influence in Congress, Representative Raymond J. McGrath, a six-term Congressman who is on the Ways and Means Committee, announced today that he would not seek re-election to a seventh term.
Mr.
McGrath said that he wanted to spend more time with his wife and three sons.
"I desperately want to become the type of father my father was to me," the 50-year-old Valley Stream Republican said.
He said the decision to step down was "agonizing" even though his seat appeared safe under a state court redistricting plan that has been adopted by the State Legislature.


Medical Schools and Hospitals Support Dinkins's Clinic Plan; Nurses Provide Care
To the Editor:
Demanding that hospitals and medical schools support the education and training of family doctors (letter, May 21) is understandable, in view of Mayor Dinkins's Communi-Care program.
However, cost effective care is already being delivered in nursing centers, by nurses educated and licensed to do so.
Numerous studies report without exception that nurses provide a quality of care equal, frequently superior, to similar care provided by physicians, and at much lower cost.
Health care delivery would benefit from removing restrictions to nursing practice that impede nurses from providing these needed basic care services.


Sailor Makes Solo Voyage Around Globe
William Pinkney sailed his 47-foot cutter, the "Commitment," into Boston harbor today, 22 months after setting out to become one of the first blacks to sail solo around the world.
More than 1,000 Boston public school students, who followed his voyage by radio and computer, cheered and waved banners from the pier as Mr.
Pinkney put in at the Charlestown Navy Yard.
Mr.
Pinkney's wife, Ina, and 100 officers from the Navy, Coast Guard and National Park Service greeted the weary, but spirited, sailor.


House Rejects Democrats' Budget Plan


A Smooth Balancing Act In a Turbulent Life
It's only 7:30, but the day is already in motion.
The padding of little feet across the family-room floor breaks the morning silence, and now, so early that most of the neighbors haven't left for work, everything seems to unfold quickly.
There are things to do.
Breakfast is done, but Cathy Marino cannot leave for her workout yet.
Not until she has given ample time to Jared, her 2-year-old son, who is about to pull off the socks and shoes that his mother has just carefully put on him.


I.A.A.F. Stands Firm On Barring Reynolds From Summer Games
The world governing body for track and field said yesterday that Butch Reynolds, the 400-meter world record holder who has been competing in the United States despite a two-year suspension for drug use, will not be eligible for the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, under any circumstances.
Further, the International Amateur Athletic Federation declared ineligible all 200 athletes who competed in the Kezar Mizuno Invitational last Saturday in San Francisco, a meet in which Reynolds won the 400 meters in 44.98 seconds to qualify for the Olympic trials, starting next week in New Orleans.


Vincent Repels Move to Cut His Powers on Labor
Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, and two club owners failed last week in an attempt to induce Commissioner Fay Vincent to relinquish a large portion of his power by giving up his role in baseball's labor relations.
Vincent angrily rebuffed the move in an owners' meeting last week, people on the management side of baseball said yesterday.


Vodafone Group Plc reports earnings for Year to March 31


Study Says Poverty Rose To 25% in New York City
A new analysis of poverty in New York City concludes that one in four of the city's residents had incomes in 1990 that fell below the Federal Government's poverty threshold, more than at any time during the previous decade.
The report, based on data from a house-to-house survey by the Bureau of the Census, provides a grim portrait of huge numbers of New Yorkers who were left out of the city's boom from the late 1970's until 1988, and who have since been at the bottom of a deep recession.


30 Arrested After Guns Are Seized
Thirty people were arrested yesterday after the police found a small arsenal of handguns and automatic weapons in the storefront office of a Brooklyn organization that pressures construction companies to hire black and Hispanic workers.
The police raided the Park Slope headquarters of the group, the United Brooklyn Coalition, after several gunmen opened fire on the street outside in what appeared to be a dispute with a rival group that organizes minority laborers, the police said.


Metropolitan Diary
Dear Diary:
Mother boards bus with three young girls ranging in age from about 8 to 11.
After they are all seated, mother turns to the oldest girl, who is looking quite sad.
"Sandra, you can't always be so sad about things," mother says.
"You're always worrying about things that don't really matter."
The girl replies: "It's hot. I'm tired, and I probably have arthritis." There is a brief pause before she continues, "Whatever that is." -- LAWRENCE EDWARDS
. . .


60-Minute Gourmet
ANY cook who is experienced in outdoor grilling knows that there is a nettlesome problem in the technique.
You want what's on the grill to remain moist and full of flavor; yet, excessive basting and marinating leads to liquids and oils dripping onto the coals, causing flare-ups and burning.
I thought about this while preparing some grilled shrimp with herb butter recently.
The shrimp are tossed in a mustard vinaigrette with thyme, but they are brushed carefully before cooking to minimize flare-ups.
Much of the moisture and flavor in this dish comes from a separate herb butter sauce, which is easy to make and is endlessly versatile.


Court Upholds Plan to Build Audubon Medical Research Center
A plan to build New York City's first biomedical research complex was upheld yesterday by a state appeals court over the opposition of a coalition that contended it posed a health threat to the surrounding neighborhoods.
Initially, much of the opposition of the Save the Audubon Coalition had centered on the proposed destruction of the Audubon Theater and Ballroom, which many New Yorkers regard as a memorial to Malcolm X, who was assassinated there in 1965.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  COURT SEES NO THREAT IN RESEARCH COMPLEX
A plan to build New York City's first biomedical research complex was upheld yesterday by a state appeals court over the opposition of a coalition that contended it posed a health threat to surrounding neighborhoods.
Initially, much of the opposition of the Save the Audubon Coalition had centered on the proposed destruction of Audubon Theater and Ballroom, which many New Yorkers regard as a memorial to Malcolm X, who was assassinated there.
But the project, the Audubon Research Park, was changed to preserve the historically significant portions of the theater.
B2.
A WATER FIGHT TURNS VIOLENT
A man who was inadvertently squirted Monday night with a high-powered water gun, the latest trend in toy weaponry, angrily pulled a real gun and sprayed the corner with bullets, wounding two young men, the police said.
B3.
ONE IN FOUR ARE POOR


Sister Loretto Bernard Beagan, 89, St. Vincent's Hospital Head, Dies
Sister Loretto Bernard Beagan, one of the country's leading Catholic health-care administrators and head of St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan from 1939 to 1960, died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center of Richmond on Staten Island.
She was 89 years old and had lived at the center since the 1960's.
A former Mother General of the Sisters of Charity of New York, Sister Loretto Bernard also served as administrator of the Staten Island institution in 1966-67.
Both St.
Vincent's in Manhattan, founded by the Sisters of Charity in 1849, and St.
Vincent's Richmond are part of the Sisters of Charity Health Care System, which operates them for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.


Book Notes
Writers Protest
Forget Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf and his multi-million-dollar book advance and forget Barbara Taylor Bradford and her multi-million-dollar book contract and Stephen King and his multi-million-dollar book contract.
The average writer in America earns less than $9,000 a year for writing, representatives of several writers organizations say, and is ignored and abused by publishers.
To draw attention to what they described as the plight of B-list authors -- and even, sometimes, A-list authors who have less star quality -- several groups representing writers declared yesterday "Writers Rights Day" and staged a two-hour protest at Grand Central Terminal, where they signed a Declaration of Writers' Economic Rights and urged writers to band together to defend themselves.
"You read in the papers about the multi-million-dollar book deals that a handful of writers are fortunate enough to get," Erica Jong, the president of the Authors Guild, told about 200 people at the former Incoming Train Room at the station.
"You don't read about the canceled contracts, the writers sued to pay advances back with interest, the writers who worked 4 years or 7 years or 10 years only to have it orphaned when some fancy new Japanese or German conglomerate bought the publishing house and fired the editors who were the authors' only contact."
The protest brought together several writers' groups that had steadfastly disagreed on how best to help authors.
Among the groups participating here and in similar events around the country were the Authors Guild, the National Writers Union, the Published Authors Network, the Romance Writers of America and the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America.
"Ten years ago, you couldn't have gotten all these groups together," said Susan Cheever, the author.
"But the economic situation has become so bad that writers have no other choice but to work together for better working conditions."
Protest organizers compared their efforts to the organizing of the Screen Writers Guild in the 1940's, saying they hoped that one day publishers, among other things, would contribute to health insurance and pension funds for authors, the way movie studios must now do for screen writers.
The National Writers Union addressed one of the chief complaints of its 3,200 members -- the difficulty in getting health insurance -- by becoming an affiliate of the United Auto Workers last year.
The groups also want to establish minimum standards for writers' contracts, including higher and more timely payments, making publishers assume or share the cost of libel insurance and giving writers a fair amount of time to return advances on canceled projects.
"We have a lot of work to do among writers, building their consciousness and convincing them that together we have power that we don't have individually," said Barbara Raskin, the novelist.
"Many writers are afraid of alienating publishers and won't stand up for themselves."
Several of the writers who participated in yesterday's protest said they wondered, "Why Grand Central Terminal?" Then they learned that while the station cost $2,000, space in other buildings they considered more appropriate to their cause, like the New York Public Library, would have cost at least five times as much.
"We thought it was unusual," said Jonathan Tasini, the president of the National Writers Union.
"But mostly it was cheap. You see writers are frequently driven by economic imperative." New Paperback Chief
Clare Ferraro has been editor in chief of Ballantine for about three weeks, and she said she has already learned one very important thing about the business of mass-market paperbacks: it's not good enough these days to buy a best seller, shrink it, put on a paper cover and send it off into bookstores for a guaranteed paperback success.
"The days of sending out a book and just assuming it will stick are over," said Ms.
Ferraro, who was been senior vice president and associate publisher of Ballantine/Del Rey,/ Fawcett/Ivy before being named to replace Robert Wyatt as the head of Ballantine.
"It's always been true that you have to know the market you're trying to reach," she said.
"But now more than ever, if you don't communicate through packaging and promotion what you are selling and if you don't find out whether what you're selling is what the public wants to read, then you are in big trouble."
The authors she inherited at Ballantine are an impressive lot, including Michael Crichton, Norman Mailer, Martha Grimes, John Irving, Marilyn French and John Hassler.
She also inherited a bit of an awkward situation, with her predecessor resigning abruptly one day, saying he was unhappy at the publishing house.
All those authors and the editors and publicity people and office staff members now have to be reassured that Ballantine is secure and that Mr.
Wyatt's displeasures will not undermine business.
Although she has been at Ballantine since 1979, she has always worked on the business side, not the editorial side.
Still, she said, making such a transition within a familiar house is easier than making such a leap to someplace new.
"At least," she said, "I know who to ask when I don't know where to go." Royal Expose
Imagine you are an American publisher who has recently paid more than $4 million to an author to write an expose of the British royal family that is to be published around 1995 and suddenly several hot new British books are elbowing each other to reveal intimate details about the Princess of Wales.
"Our book looks even better to me," said Laurence J. Kirshbaum, president of Warner Books, which signed Kitty Kelley to the royal project.
"As a former editor said to me, 'Everything's been done before; the secret is how well you do it this time around.' Besides, we figure that we have Kitty Kelley and, frankly, she's the star of this book, not Princess Di. Her name goes on top, not the royal family." . . .
Oh, the places Dr.
Seuss continues to go!
With graduations at hand, Dr.
Seuss's "Oh, the Places You'll Go" (Random House, $12.95) has hit the No. 1 spot on the New York Times hard-cover best-seller list for the third year in a row.
All told, it has been on the list for 112 weeks and has sold more than 1.5 million copies . . .
Rutledge Hill Press has a most unusual distinction on the Times lists for June 21: Its "Life's Little Instruction Book" is No. 1 in the Advice, How to and Miscellaneous category in both hard cover and paperback.
It appears to be the only time in memory that the same book hit the top spot simultaneously in hard and soft . . .
Alex Kotlowitz, a writer for The Wall Street Journal, received the 1992 Helen B. Bernstein Award yesterday for his book "There Are No Children Here: The Story of Two Boys Growing Up in the Other America" (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday).
The $15,000 prize is awarded annually by the New York Public Library for a book "resulting from journalism, which seeks to make an impact on public consciousness, events and policy."


Lionel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


U.S. at the Earth Summit: Isolated and Challenged
As the Earth Summit enters its final phase, Europe and Japan are showing increasing independence from the United States on environmental issues, worsening American isolation and creating a diplomatic challenge for Washington.
President Bush strained relations with industrialized countries and the third world when he rejected detailed targets in a treaty to curb global warming and refused to join a pact to preserve plant and animal life.


Harlem Dance Troupe Expanding Quarters
Dance Theater of Harlem has begun a $6 million expansion and renovation of its school and headquarters at 466 West 152d Street in Harlem.
Designed by the Manhattan architectural firm Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates, the extension is to add more than 16,000 square feet, more than doubling the existing space.
The completed structure is to be renamed the Dance Theater of Harlem-Everett Center for the Performing Arts.
The new building will contain additional studio space, a physical therapy room, a classroom, and administrative offices for the company's marketing and development offices, now at City Center.
Classes and company activities will move to an unspecified location during the expansion, which is to be completed by summer 1993.


Making Money by Making Babies
The State of New York may be eager to attract new business, but there's one kind of inflow it would do well to avoid.
According to state health officials, New York is fast becoming "the surrogate-parenting capital of the nation."
New York accounts for some 40 percent of the several thousand surrogate parenting contracts signed so far in the nation, and the number is rising.
It's a dubious distinction.


Campus Journal; An Anarchist, a Threat to Bush and the Spotlight
A computer message that threatened the life of President Bush has brought the Secret Service onto the tranquil Williams College campus here.
Under investigation for sending the message via the school's computer system is Brian Coan, an honors student and self-proclaimed anarchist who is also a track star at this small liberal arts college.


Forest City Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Daly Sees Double, Coaching Nets and Olympic Team
Chuck Daly, already known as a natty dresser, is attempting to wear two high-profile hats at the same time.
Daley, who will be the coach of the United States Olympic basketball team in Barcelona, Spain, this summer, has also been hired to coach the young and talented and sometimes rebellious New Jersey Nets.
At a news conference today, he spoke about his attempted hat trick.


Water Gunplay Provokes Shooting of 2
A man who was inadvertently squirted Monday night with a high-powered water gun, the latest trend in toy weaponry, angrily pulled a real gun and sprayed the corner with bullets, wounding two young men, the police said.
One of the victims, Richard Cooke, 16 years old, and several friends had been horsing around with water guns on the northwest corner of Eighth Avenue and 153d Street in Harlem about 11:30 P.M., when Mr.
Cooke took aim at one of them and missed, a witness said.


Judge Overrules Decency Statute For Arts Grants
A Federal judge in Los Angeles yesterday rejected a law requiring the National Endowment for the Arts to "take into consideration general standards of decency" when making grants.
The judge, A. Wallace Tashima, ruling in a lawsuit brought by four solo performance artists, said the law violated the First Amendment because it was too vague and broadly worded.


Topics of The Times; An American in Paris
Jim Courier, the men's champion in the French Open tennis tournament for the second year in a row, came up a winner twice Sunday at Roland Garros stadium in Paris.
In accepting his trophy, the American surprised one and all by thanking them for their support in French.
The crowd, naturellement, was charmed.
"Je parle francais comme une vache espagnole," Courier quipped.
I speak French like a Spanish cow.
"Pas du tout," we answered in thought.
You spoke fluently and your accent was good.


Overflowing Sewers Shut Beaches in Connecticut


Franchise Rule Is Eased For Cable TV Concerns
In a decision that could increase competition for local cable television companies, a Federal appeals court ruled today that companies that supply television programming to individual buildings do not necessarily need to be franchised by local governments.
The ruling could make it easier for small companies to distribute multiple channels of television throughout housing developments, apartment complexes or trailer parks.


JOINT VENTURE FOR MARTIN MARIETTA AND VITESSE
The Martin Marietta Astronautics Group and the Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation of Camarillo, Calif., have formed a joint venture to design integrated circuits, primarily for aerospace applications.
Their design center will be at Martin Marietta's VLSI laboratory in Littleton, Calif.
VLSI stands for very large-scale integrated circuits, the most complex type of circuit.
Since 1988, the Astronautics Group has been a major customer of Vitesse, the world's largest supplier of gallium arsenide devices, which are among the fastest and most reliable semiconductors in use today.
Under terms of the agreement, the Littleton lab will be the sole military and aerospace design center for Vitesse's products in the United States.


Continental Sues American Over New Strategy on Fares
Continental Airlines has added a new dimension to the industry's fare wars by filing a Federal antitrust suit accusing American Airlines of "predatory pricing" by cutting fares with the intention of eliminating its competitors.
The suit, filed on Monday in Federal District Court in Galveston, Tex., asserts that under American's new fare structure, which took effect last month, American will be unable to make a profit until one or more of its competitors is driven from the market.


REPLIGEN AND CENTOCOR SETTLE SUIT OVER AIDS PRODUCTS
The Repligen Corporation and Centocor Inc. said they had settled a lawsuit brought by Repligen in April over the right to develop products to treat AIDS.
Under the agreement, Centocor will not compete with Repligen in the development of therapeutics, vaccines or diagnostics for the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS.
Centocor will continue to develop its F105 antibody for AIDS but will share any profit from the project with Repligen.
The dispute involves a 1987 agreement in which Repligen bought the rights to develop products for AIDS from Centocor for 1.225 million shares of its stock, which was trading at $11 to $12 a share at the time, the companies said.
Under that agreement, Centocor was to refrain from developing AIDS-related products until 1996, Repligen said.
David Stone, an analyst at Cowen &amp; Company, said the settlement benefited both companies.


CHRONICLE
It was a Broadway cattle call with a Seventh Avenue twist.
All the singers, dancers and specialty acts lining the walls and corridors of the Supper Club in the Edison Hotel yesterday had more in common than stage-struck dreams: they all work in the fashion industry.
MARY McFADDEN did an Indian love dance.
RANDOLPH DUKE sang, then discovered that he and CAROLINA HERRERA could do a mean tango together.
ARNOLD SCAASI and BOB MACKIE posed and shuffled amiably with the chorus line.


Bridge
A dramatic turnabout in one match and a strange post-match procedure in another marked the quarterfinal stage of the Pan-American Team Championships in Corpus Christi, Tex., Monday.
In the Open Series the favored team led by Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., appeared to be cruising to victory.
But disaster struck: In the last seven deals they lost 50 imps, and wound up losing by 15 to Cliff Russell of Miami and his team.


A Blueprint For Colleges On Dealing With Rape
After a series of campus rapes and two expensive lawsuits by women raped off campus, the University of Southern California has released a study by a panel of outside experts criticizing the school's handling of rape cases and recommending policy changes.
The panel's blunt critique came last week in a 79-page report based largely on confidential interviews with rape victims, their parents, faculty members and administrators.
The panel found, for example, that the university's processing of rape charges was too slow and a deterrent to reporting.
"In a recent case involving an attempted rape, the disciplinary process took more than two months, during which time the victim and accused remained living in the same residence hall," the report states.
The panel's six members, who have no formal connection with the university, said they hoped the report would become a model for the prevention and handling of sexual assault on campuses around the nation.
"I feel this is the blueprint that other schools will follow," said Gail Abarbanel, chairwoman of the panel and director of the Rape Treatment Center at Santa Monica Hospital Medical Center.
"If they implement all of it, they'll have the strongest program in the country."
James M. Dennis, the university's vice president for student affairs, said the administration was committed to adopting most of the suggestions by the end of the year.
In two recent lawsuits, rape victims -- a student and a university employee -- said the university shared responsibility for their assaults off campus because, they said, it had not taken adequate action to prevent dangerous conditions or warn of them.
The administration countered that circumstances outside the campus were beyond its control.
The university's insurer settled the student's case for $1.5 million; in the other, the university is appealing a $1.8 million judgment awarded the university employee.
Guide for Other Colleges
Other schools, worried that they may be liable in rape cases, will probably study how the University of Southern California has handled such cases, said Sheldon E. Steinbach, general counsel for the American Council on Education, an association of 1,700 schools and colleges.
"They may try to use it as exculpatory evidence that they've done everything they should have done," he said.
"What you have there are runaway juries looking for deep pockets," Mr.
Steinbach said, adding that similar judgments against institutions of all kinds are increasingly common.
"With an urban campus, it is impossible to protect students and employees without turning it into a police state."
The committee report suggests improvements in security, but notes that date rape and other rapes by acquaintances are more common than the attacks that resulted in the suits.
The best preventive measures the university can take, the report suggests, is to encourage victims to report rapes and to take quick and decisive action against the rapists.
The report emphasizes the need for a well-defined, well-publicized rape policy, and an equally clear and well-known protocol for handling rape cases.
"It lets victims know what their rights and options are, and makes them more likely to come forward," said Ms.
Abarbanel.
The report by the panel cites cases in which the absence of a stated policy or procedure resulted in confusion, delays and ill treatment of victims.
In one case, a university official told the victim of a nighttime rape that she would have to wait until the next day to receive counseling when, in fact, counselors were on call after hours.
Mr.
Dennis offered only mild objection to the wide range of criticism in the report.
"Where they are harsh, it may not feel very good," he said.
"But we asked them to be harsh, and we're very pleased with the result.
Ms.
Abarbanel declined to compare the university with others in rape response.
But she praised the administration's willingness to subject itself to intense scrutiny by a group of outsiders.


Maldonado Creates Nightmares for Leary With 2 Crucial Shots
Candy Maldonado ripped one ball that only the center-field cameraman could have caught.
He crushed another ball that only a trick photographer could have caught.
The two hits at Yankee Stadium -- one that bounced so far away from home and the other that bounced so crazily in the left-field corner -- enabled Maldonado to deliver both runs last night as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Yankees, 2-1.


Wine Talk
MANY years ago, the restaurant critic of The New York Times discovered a restaurant hidden away in the Catskills in Ulster County.
Craig Claiborne liked the Depuy Canal House so much that he gave it three stars.
In a rush of understandable enthusiasm, the owners erected a huge sign on the roof of the place proclaiming their signal achievement to the world.
Visitors were divided; some, including restaurateurs with fewer stars, thought the sign was tacky.
Some said it had naive charm.
Others shrugged and said, "If you've got it, flaunt it." The point is that no one is neutral about ratings.


P.L.O. Says Slain Official Planned Covert Talks
A Palestine Liberation Organization official who was slain here on Monday was in France for an appointment with a senior official of the French secret service, P.L.O. officials said today.
The victim, Atef Bseiso, who was director of external security in the P.L.O., had been greeted on arrival in France by two agents of the French service, according to officials at the P.L.O.'s headquarters in Tunis.
One Palestinian described the visit as "an official mission" with the knowledge of French authorities.


Listen, Suburbs, the Cities Aren't Going Away
To the Editor:
Slowly, guided by Senator Bill Bradley, Anna Quindlen (in "The Old Block," column, May 17) and a few others, the United States seems to be considering a new idea about riots, the idea that the riots in Los Angeles and elsewhere that followed the verdict on the four police officers accused of beating the motorist Rodney King were not so much about black against white, or people of color against Europeans or even poor against rich, so much as they were about cities against suburbs.
Even now it is hard to see that division because the census groups cities and suburbs together into something called "urban areas." But no one in the cities is fooled.
We know that the suburbs consist of those who have left us, those who do not know us and do not want to know us, and those who hate and fear us.
They mistrust everything about us, from our insistence on getting around without automobiles to our insistence on living next to people who have less (or more) money than we do and treating them like fellow citizens.


Some People Really Take the Cake: Peculiar Habits at the Table
IT'S a tossup whether Helen Gurley Brown or a lettuce leaf casts a bigger shadow, but it's conceivable that the leaf might win -- that is, of course, before it is daintily transferred from fingers to mouth and disappears.
Fingers?
Is it possible that this guru of Cosmopolitan magazine, wife of a prominent motion picture producer and social fixture on two coasts isn't terribly happy using flatware when she's eating salad?
In a word, yes.
Mrs.
Brown dines at the best places, private and public, and is, she says, sometimes amazed that fellow diners don't notice this peculiarity of hers.
They either don't or are too well bred to register astonishment.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail
INVESTIGATION INTO FUND-RAISING DINNER IS URGED
WASHINGTON, June 9 (AP) -- The public-interest group Common Cause called today for an independent counsel to investigate contributions to a $9 million Republican fund-raising dinner headlined by President Bush.
The group said an investigation by an outside counsel was warranted because the Attorney General, William P. Barr, has ties to President Bush and the Republican Party.


Political Candidates and Call-In Shows: When the People Want to Be Heard
Seven in the morning is not the best time of day for Bill Clinton.
His eyes are puffy, his face is red and his smile has the weary air of items at a tag sale.
But 7 A.M. happens to be the time the "Today" program has offered each of the Presidential candidates an hour of national television to answer questions from viewers.
So this morning, not too long after sunrise, the likely Democratic nominee was sitting in front of the potted ferns with Bryant Gumbel, fielding questions from Glenn of New York City and Barbara of Durham, N.C., and looking very much in need of a good cup of coffee.


U.S. AND RUSSIANS FAIL TO CONCLUDE NEW ARMS ACCORD
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, failed to conclude an agreement today on how to cut the number of nuclear warheads below the levels set in the recently signed strategic arms reduction treaty.
But the two said they would keep trying in the week remaining before the next Russian-American summit meeting.


Zito, Strike the Gold Trainer, Is Accused of Hitting Writer
A freelance writer has charged Nick Zito, the trainer of last year's Kentucky Derby champion Strike the Gold, with second-degree assault, claiming Zito struck her in the face with a magazine last Saturday on Belmont Stakes day at the track.
Stephanie Diaz filed the charges on Monday at the Fifth Precinct in Elmont, L.I., not far from Belmont.
After the alleged incident, Zito saddled Strike the Gold to a dramatic victory in the Nassau County Handicap.


Baseball Moves to Lessen Beam of Superstations
Major league baseball is at play in the legislative fields of Washington, trying, critics say, to kill superstation game telecasts by the titans of the business: TBS and WGN.
Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent does not like superstations, whose signals are picked up by cable systems nationwide.


Browns Looking at Bavaro
Mark Bavaro has satisfied the Cleveland Browns he can play football again; the Browns will decide today if it is at the level they want.
Bavaro, the former Pro Bowl tight end for the Giants, was technically "waived injured" by New York last year, having failed to recover from surgery to replace a disintegrating bone in his knee.
But several months ago, he called Bill Belichick, the former Giants' defensive coordinator and now the Browns' head coach, for a tryout.
Essentially, he passed the physical.


BREWERY NEGOTIATING TO SELL ITS TRUCKING BUSINESS
The Coors Brewing Company said it was negotiating to sell its Coors Transportation Company to J. B. Hunt Inc. of Lowell, Ark., in an effort to focus on its beer business.
Discussions are expected to be completed by July 25.
No sale price was disclosed.
Coors said it planned to use J. B. Hunt for its refrigerated-trucking services, Coors said.
The Coors trucking operation employs about 225.


Earth Summit Races Clock to Resolve Differences on Forest Treaty
Earth Summit negotiators sought today to bridge their differences on forest preservation and other contentious environmental issues, but officials warned that they might not reach agreement in time for world leaders to sign them on Friday, the day they all plan to attend.
To speed up the negotiating process, summit coordinators planned to adopt streamlined parliamentary procedures on Wednesday.
Celso Lafer, the Foreign Minister of Brazil, worked behind the scenes to pressure the various delegations to compromise.


A Struggling Tradition; Cardinal Hayes Changes With Bronx
The view from the rear of Cardinal Hayes High School stretches across a tangle of railroad tracks, then toward the towering grayness of housing projects in the South Bronx.
And in a whisper-quiet classroom, Lamene Davis talks of how his life outside is tugging him in one direction, his education in another.
"From my building I'd say I'm the only kid who still goes to school," said Mr.
Davis, a thin and earnest 17-year-old who wants to be a lawyer or psychologist.
"So it keeps me on the right track."


Underground in Sarajevo, the Ethnic Groups Share the Terror and the Hope
Above ground, Sarajevo is almost a ghost city, with a few crouching figures running in short bursts between buildings, dodging shells and snipers.
Below ground, at thousands of places like No.2 Vase Pelagica Street in the city's old Muslim quarter, the city has gathered anew, and what is happening there is about all the hope there is that Sarajevo will one day live again.


Tennis League Proud Its Roots Show
In hospitality-and health-conscious Atlanta, where sneakers and tennis racquets function like extensions of the daily vitamin tablet, everybody wants into what may be the least exclusive club on the planet.
With its 71,000 members after 22 years of breakneck growth, the Atlanta Lawn Tennis Association is unquestionably the largest grass-roots tennis league in the world.
It dwarfs United States Tennis Association regional membership rolls nationwide, outranking, among others, the Chicago-based Western Tennis Association (56,449 members in four states) and southern California's 30,007 members in Los Angeles, San Diego and the environs.
No other city's grass-roots tennis program comes close to ALTA's numbers.


Executive Changes
B.M.J.
FINANCIAL CORP., Bordentown, N.J., a bank holding company, appointed John H. Walther president and chief executive.
CERAMICS PROCESS SYSTEMS CORP., Milford, Mass., a maker of ceramic products, named Robert A. Charpie president and chief executive.


Post-Soviet Baltic Republics: Still Stunted and Struggling
Some nine months after gaining independence from Moscow, the Baltic republics of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia remain stunted and struggling, their fledgling political and economic institutions still seeking stability.
But in this city, founded in 1201, as in the nearby capitals of Tallinn and Vilnius, the months since the break with Moscow have produced a sometimes bewildering rush of change and new possibilities.


Corrections
An article on Friday about insider-trading charges against Edward R. Downe Jr. and other executives misstated Mr.
Downe's past role at Argosy magazine.
He was an employee, not an owner.


Follow the Road, Enjoy the Beauty
About 40 miles east of Seattle, as 18-wheelers loaded with huge logs barrelled along in the opposite direction, the 29 cyclists participating in the Coast to Coast Bicycle Classic got their first glimpse of the Cascade range. (There are a total of 33 riders in the group. Four are scheduled to join the others in Spokane.)
"I can't get over how beautiful it is," said Kelly Brown of Stamford, Conn., who just quit her job at Citibank to join this 48-day cycling adventure.
"Look -- a waterfall!" Indeed, the first two days -- at day's end, the riders will have covered 139 miles -- have included a remarkable panorama of jagged, snow-capped peaks, steep mountain switchbacks, long, thrilling descents, and stretches of the Skykomish River.


Listen, Suburbs, the Cities Aren't Going Away; The Ones Left Behind
To the Editor:
There is at least one area where the problems of South-Central Los Angeles and other ghettos can be traced back to the 1960's.
Affirmative action programs for blacks came out of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and after 1972 produced greater income inequality among both minorities and women.
The "talented tenth," a concept celebrated by W. E. B. Du Bois, have prospered as a result of affirmative action.
Colin Powell, Jesse Jackson, Gov.
Douglas Wilder and most of those testifying at the Senate hearings before the appointment of Associate Justice Clarence Thomas all demonstrate the effectiveness of affirmative action programs for superior African-Americans.


Doubt Gnaws at Israeli High Court: Is This Man 'Ivan'?
Although Israel rose from the ashes of the Holocaust and evokes its memories with deep intensity, this country has for the most part steered clear of hunting war criminals.
Aside from a few Jews convicted in the early years of the state for having been Nazi collaborators, there have been only two exceptions.


A Nassau Pay-Cut Order Sets Off a Tempest
It seems like such a simple idea.
With the county government facing an ever-worsening fiscal crisis, and the opposition party complaining about bloated patronage payroll, why not take the lead, share the pain, and cut the salaries of ranking county employees?


Basin Exploration Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vicorp Restaurants Inc.  reports earnings for 12wks to May 10


U.S. Strikes Back at Its Critics
The Bush Administation, defending itself against rising criticism at the Earth Summit, suggested today that Japan, Germany and other countries opposing United States policies were distorting Washington's environmental positions for political and diplomatic gain.
The Administration's response was made at a White House briefing called to describe President Bush's positions before his departure for Rio de Janeiro later this week.
The White House imposed ground rules under which reporters were not permitted to identify the briefing officer.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 5
May 29
June 7
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.1
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.1
2.8
Gasoline stocks
217.9
214.4
215.6
Distillate stocks
95.7
93.3
108.3
Crude imports, daily
6.4
5.4
7.1
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.9
1.7
Crude stocks
347.1
344.5
353.2
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.9
90.0
88.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Empty Cans Go In; Coins and Coupons Come Out
A Colorado company is offering grocery shoppers a way to save the environment and 50 cents on a box of cereal at the same time.
Enviromint America Inc. has developed a sophisticated computerized can crusher to go in front of grocery stores, dispensing pennies to shoppers that feed it aluminum beverage cans.
Another company, the Environmental Products Corporation of Fairfax, Va., already has 4,000 recycling machines posted at grocery stores around the country -- primarily in states with laws requiring deposits on beverage containers.


Quayle Attacks a 'Cultural Elite,' Saying It Mocks Nation's Values
Vice President Dan Quayle today presented the sequel to his attack on the "Murphy Brown" television show, portraying the 1992 campaign as a war between traditional values and a cultural elite that mocks families, religion and patriotism.
"I wear their scorn as a badge of honor," Mr.
Quayle said in a speech to the Southern Baptist Convention in Indianapolis that reflected his role as the ideological point man for President Bush, who feels compelled by political pragmatism to try to strike a bipartisan tone. 'We Have Two Cultures'
Mr.
Quayle's speech, in which he criticized abortion, homosexual parents and sex education in elementary schools, also reflected the increasing urgency that the White House has assigned to shoring up its sagging conservative base in the face of the unexpectedly strong challenge from Ross Perot, the undeclared independent candidate.


Reebok's Ads Get Grand Effie
The New York chapter of the American Marketing Association presented its Grand Effie award, for the most effective advertising of the last year, to the Reebok Blacktop basketball shoes campaign created by Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston for Reebok International Ltd.
The campaign featured the comedian Sinbad presenting the product, in humorous fashion, as the only footwear that meets the durability and performance demands of serious outdoor basketball players.
During the first four months the Blacktop brand was on the market, Reebok received 1.8 million orders, exceeding its manufacturing capacity of 1.3 million.


NHD Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


AT WORK WITH: Anna Deavere Smith; The 29 Voices of One Woman In Search of Crown Heights
FROM the darkness where the words first well up and the stage lighting dawns, the imagination of Anna Deavere Smith glints and stabs in search of truths that human beings routinely try to hide by the crowdful.
Ms.
Smith, an actress, writer, theater teacher and iconoclast, is stunning audiences at the Joseph Papp Public Theater these nights with the audacity of her performance as 29 characters -- female and male, white and black -- cut from the mortal cloth of last summer's frightening confrontation in the streets of Crown Heights between blacks and Hasidic Jews.


Science Accessories Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


COMPANY NEWS
NOXSO CORP., Library, Pa., an air pollution control company, announced that W. R. Grace &amp; Co., had increased its ownership to 17.9 percent.
SLOVENSKA STATNA SPORITELNA, a Slovak savings bank, ordered a $55 million computer infrastructure from NCR Corp., Dayton, Ohio.
SUN MICROSYSTEMS INC., Mountain View, Calif., said its Computer Corp. subsidiary had opened its Japan Technology Center in Tokyo.
UNION CARBIDE CORP., Danbury, Conn., said its new industrial gases spinoff would be called Praxair Inc.


Treasury Issues Retreat in Price
Participants in the credit markets meandered through another quiet session yesterday, and prices of most outstanding Treasury securities drifted lower.
Traders did say that demand for short-term notes and bills remained quite strong, especially for two-year and three-year notes.
A big commercial bank was rumored to be a large buyer of two-year notes.


Personal Health
PHIL G. was lucky to have survived his auto accident.
He recovered nicely from his various physical injuries, but was unprepared for aphasia, the speech and writing difficulties that persisted after the swelling of his brain subsided.
As a single young man and a journalist, Phil depended both socially and vocationally on his way with words.
Now he found himself continually at a loss for words.
His speech was slow and deliberate, often marked by an inability to think of or say the right words.
When listening to others he had difficulty keeping up with the speaker, and when trying to take notes he often could not remember how to write certain words.


Shoney's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 10


RECEIVER AGREES TO SELL GUARANTEE SECURITY LIFE
The state-appointed receiver for the Guarantee Security Life Insurance Company has signed an agreement to sell the failed company to a national insurance association for $400 million, association officials said.
The agreement, signed by the receiver and the National Organization of Life and Health Guaranty Associations last week, is to be reviewed by the Florida Insurance Department on Friday.
"We have no big problem with it," said a department spokeswoman, Jill Chamberlin.
Jack Blaine, the president of the organization, which is based in Herndon, Va., said it intended to form a company to run Guarantee Security Life.
Florida seized the Jacksonville company in August after finding that it had only $230 million in assets, mostly junk bonds, to pay benefits due.
The Insurance Department appointed Michael Heekin, a former associate dean at Florida State University's law school, to act as deputy receiver.


2 Bolivian Executives Vie in New Arena: Politics
They are known here simply as Max and Goni and, apart from drug kingpins, they are possibly the two richest men in Bolivia, owning two of the most successful and technologically advanced companies in this isolated Andean country.
They also happen to be the two leading presidential candidates for Bolivia's 1993 elections, and barring some startling development, either Max Fernandez or Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada is almost certain to be Bolivia's next head of state.


Old Athletes, Like Connors, Are No Longer Fading Away
JIMMY CONNORS'S comeback is not limited to the tennis court.
He is also enjoying a resurgence as a product spokesman.
Like many aging athletes, Mr.
Connors had seen his advertising endorsements fade along with his skills.
But since last summer, when the ebullient 39-year-old unexpectedly advanced to the semifinals of the United States Open, he has re-emerged to pitch products like Pepsi-Cola and Nuprin pain reliever.


Startel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Edward F. Fagan, 80, Ex-Detective Inspector
Edward F. Fagan, a retired detective inspector from New York City, whose final command included the Police Department's crime laboratory, the bomb squad and the daily lineup, died on June 1 at the Bon Secours in Maria Manor nursing home in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 80 years old and had been a St.
Petersburg resident since his retirement in 1956.
He died after a brief illness, said a niece in New York, Linda Finnerty.


SALT LAKE CITY REFINERY TO BE CLEANED UP, NOT SOLD
The Amoco Oil Company said it had decided not to sell its Salt Lake City refinery and instead planned to invest $50 million in the next two years to help the plant meet environmental regulations.
After reviewing outside bids for the 42,000-barrel-a-day refinery, Amoco found that buyer interest did not match its expectations, the company's president, William Lowrie, said.
The refinery is "profitable and projected to bring in positive cash flow for Amoco over the near term," Mr.
Lowrie said.
He said the company would continue to evaluate its options over the longer term.


Health Chief Is Confirmed After Long Delay


CML Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Topics of The Times; Controlling the Wrong Guns
To fire a Super Soaker water gun, you fill the tank half full of water, pump a slide along the barrel to add compressed air, then pull the trigger.
The continuous stream may reach 50 feet.
The bulbous tank and the gun's sinister profile combine elements of "Star Wars" and street gang weaponry in a harmless toy.
Or maybe not so harmless, say some city officials.
As warmer weather heats up urban streets, confrontations that begin with the water guns may escalate to more serious violence.
When Super Soakers splashed a bystander in New York on Monday, he pulled out a real gun and shot the water-gun wielder and another man, inflicting serious wounds.
In Boston last month, a water gun battle turned into real gunplay that killed a 15-year-old boy.
Mayor Raymond Flynn wrote to store owners asking them to pull the water guns from their shelves.


Dutch Promotion For Gay Travelers
Four travel marketers will jointly sponsor one of the most extensive efforts to aim tourism advertising at gay and lesbian consumers.
The campaign, to run from mid-June through the end of July in publications in 10 large markets nationwide, is co-sponsored by the Netherlands Board of Tourism, the Amsterdam Tourist Board, the Martinair Holland airline and Eurodollar Rent-A-Car.


Simulated Poverty, Honest Need
Medicaid is a welfare program.
To qualify, thousands of elderly Americans have juggled assets so they can declare themselves poor.
In New York, that means reducing assets to a home, a car and, at most, $4,850 in cash.
With the help of creative lawyers many older adults have shifted funds to spouses, children, even friends, then checked into nursing homes under Medicaid.
This legal sleight-of-hand is costly to the public and demeaning to the elderly.
Now several states, in partnership with private insurers, have begun experiments that could save dollars and face.


Flight-Attendant Training on Safety Is Faulted
Airlines are not adequately training flight attendants to handle emergencies like the urgent evacuation of airplanes after accidents, the National Transportation Safety Board said today.
A study of dozens of accidents found several examples in which flight attendents made mistakes that added to the dangers faced by passengers, and "the safety board believes that this was related to training," the report said.


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Eating Well
WOULD Elizabeth David have been horrified to see recipes she inspired in a health and nutrition column called Eating Well?
Probably.
It's unlikely that Mrs.
David, who died last month at the age of 78, ever counted a calorie or a gram of fat in her life.
She would have found the whole idea distasteful.
It's unlikely that this Englishwoman, who is credited with changing the way the English thought about food after World War II, ever had to count calories.


Volatile Center of Insider Case
The volatile and highly colorful New York public-relations man accused of insider trading last week was often unpredictable: Though a financial success and a recognized charmer in high society, he was also known to frighten his employees, shouting or kicking furniture in his office when something went wrong.
Now, Steven A. Greenberg has perhaps provoked an equally strong emotional tizzy among those accused with him.


Review/Television; 'Unjustly Neglected' Opera Isn't Entirely Either
"The Girl of the Golden West" or, if you prefer Italian, "La Fanciulla del West" is the kind of opera that is invariably labeled "unjustly neglected." Tonight at 8 on Channels 13 and 49, "Great Performances" tries to correct the situation with a presentation officially titled "The Girl of the Golden West From the Metropolitan Opera." The performance, starring Barbara Daniels as Minnie, Placido Domingo as Dick Johnson and Sherrill Milnes as Jack Rance, was taped on April 8.
Puccini once described "The Girl of the Golden West" as "the best of my operas." American audiences have been reluctant to agree, and for good reason.
The spectacle of tough gold-rush miners and outlaws, circa 1850, soaring into Italian lyricism can be jarring.
And characters like the alcoholic Indian named Billy Jackrabbit and his squaw, Wowkle, who actually say "ugh," can understandably induce squirming.


Introductions Are Made


The Pop Life; He's Hot, And Not Just to Fans Of Country
Billy Ray Cyrus is every musical progressive's worst dream.
Mr.
Cyrus, a singer, has bounded up the charts, hitting the No. 1 spot in Billboard playing that recidivistic form, country.
Worse, he's a hunk, and huge numbers of women are buying his album, "Some Gave All" (Mercury).
Last week it sold 122,893 copies, beating out the closest competition, Kris Kross's "Totally Krossed Out" (Columbia) by 19,494 copies.
In Tucson, Ariz., at the Zips record chain, more copies of "Some Gave All" were sold in one week than Michael Jackson's "Dangerous" (Epic) or Bruce Springsteen's two albums "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town" (Columbia) combined have sold so far.
Most impressively, the record has separated itself from the other two big country hits on the charts, Garth Brooks's "Ropin' the Wind" (Liberty) and Wynonna Judd's "Wynonna" (MCA), by reaping both country and pop airplay for the album's first single, "Achy Breaky Heart."


Stranded Bus Commuters Hunt for Makeshift Transit
Ali Mohammed was irritated.
Mr.
Mohammed had to get to work at a service station in South Ozone Park.
But the bus he would normally catch for the second leg of his subway-and-bus trip from Rego Park was not coming yesterday, the second day of a strike against five private bus companies serving parts of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx.


Gaza Arabs: Kept Off Jobs and Angered
Standing behind rolls of barbed wire today at the army checkpoint separating the Gaza Strip from Israel, Nasser Ali was good and angry.
He had been there for hours, waiting in vain for his Israeli employer to show up with back pay he was owed.
What he really wanted was to get back to his laborer's job on an Israeli construction site.
But with overcrowded Gaza and its 750,000 residents essentially sealed off for yet another day, there was nothing to do by the barbed wire but stand among dozens of other Palestinians in similar predicaments.


Corrections
A chart on May 26 previewing the primaries in Kentucky and Arkansas misstated results for 1988.
George Bush won the Kentucky Republican primary with 59 percent; Al Gore won the Democratic primary with 46 percent.
In Arkansas, Mr.
Bush won with 47 percent and Mr.
Gore with 37 percent.


Real Estate; Atlanta No. 1 In Industrial Construction
WITH several large projects either under way or about to begin, industrial development remains one of the few segments of this city's commercial construction market with any significant activity.
Atlanta led the country with seven million square feet of new industrial construction in 1991, according to Jonathan Barry, a partner with Atlanta-based Corporate Property Investors.
In contrast, construction of industrial space in the six New England states totaled 329,000 square feet last year.


Slide on Road Ends for Pirates
Pirates 5, Phillies 3
PHILADELPHIA, June 9 (AP) -- Andy Van Slyke drove in three runs with a single and double as the Pittsburgh Pirates snapped a road losing streak at six games with a 5-3 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies tonight.
Doug Drabek (5-4) allowed seven hits, struck out five and walked two, both intentional, in six innings.


A Belgian Brewery Keeps Lambic Alive
AT the Cantillon brewery here, visitors may find their glasses of kriek, framboise, lambic and gueuze are either half-empty or half-full.
Along with the striking tastes of cherry- and raspberry-flavored beers, optimists will savor knowing that for 20 years, Cantillon's master brewer, Jean-Pierre Van Roy, has maintained a commitment to traditional Belgian brewing methods, while around him mass production techniques have all but delivered them a death blow.


Vance Urges U.S. to Strengthen U.N. Role
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations special envoy for Yugoslavia, appealed to the Bush Administration today to strengthen its involvement in international peacekeeping operations.
"The time has come to institutionalize U.N. peacekeeping and the United States' relationship to it," Mr.
Vance said.


Bid for Central Park Band Shell
An unidentified New York group has offered a new Manhattan home for the Central Park band shell, Parks Commissioner Betsy F. Gotbaum said yesterday, joining a roster of would-be rescuers for what was once known as the Temple of Music.
Yesterday was an eventful one for the 69-year-old Naumburg Bandshell, which the Parks and Recreation Department wants to remove from Central Park.
The most ardent defenders of the neo-classical structure went to court and sued New York City to prevent any dismantling and to force the Parks Department to preserve the structure where it is.


Calvin Morgan, 49, Designer of Furniture
Calvin Morgan, a stage, furniture and interior designer, died on Saturday at Cardinal Cook Hospice in New York.
He was 49 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, said David Ostwald, a friend.


Suddenly, Opera Is Everywhere in Paris
Operatically speaking, everyone in Paris was at the premiere of a new production of Berg's "Wozzeck" on Wednesday night.
Conducted by Daniel Barenboim, it was the event of the Paris opera season, unless you count the Welsh National Opera production of Debussy's "Pelleas et Melisande" in April, conducted by Pierre Boulez.
Both of these operas were done not at the shining new Bastille Opera nor at the ramshackle but still grand old opera house, the Palais Garnier.
They took place at the Theatre du Chatelet.
The Chatelet's lively operatic policy, stressing scrupulously prepared productions and venturesome repertory, compared with the erratic course at the Bastille, highlights the competitiveness defines Paris opera today.


SEMICONDUCTOR ORDERS RISE SLIGHTLY, INDUSTRY REPORTS
The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in San Jose, Calif., reported a book-to-bill ratio of 1.10 for the three-month period ending in May, down from a revised figure of 1.12 in April, but up from 1.07 in March.
The ratio compares orders with shipments and is considered a leading indicator of the industry's performance.
A ratio of 1.10 indicates that for every $100 worth of product shipped, $110 was ordered.
A ratio above 1.0 indicates that demand has continued to increase.
At $1.61 billion, three-month orders for May were up 0.6 percent from $1.60 billion for the three-month period that ended in April, and 17.5 percent higher than the comparable figure a year earlier, which was $1.37 billion.
Three-month average shipments for May totaled $1.46 billion, up 2.1 percent from April's figure of $1.43 billion.
At $1.38 billion, actual United States market shipments for May were essentially flat compared with April.


MERCURY VILLAGER MINI-VAN STICKER: $16,504 OR $21,798
The Ford Motor Company said its Mercury Villager mini-van, to go on sale next month as a 1993 model, would be priced at $16,504 for the GS version and at $21,798 for the LS version.
The front-drive Villager is the first mini-van to be sold by Ford's Lincoln-Mercury division, and the first front-drive van from Ford to compete with the Chrysler Corporation's popular Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager.
The Villager is the result of a $1 billion project started in 1988 with the Nissan Motor Company, which will have an almost identical version called the Quest.
The vans, which have Nissan engineering and drive trains, went into production in April at Ford's plant in Avon Lake, Ohio.


Tierco Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bank Money Market and C.D. Rates Drop
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit were off slightly for the week ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
Robert J. Hutchinson, managing director of consumer marketing for Chemical Bank, noted that for the last six to eight weeks, yields have been bouncing along at about the same level, with economists and analysts all saying different things about the economy.


No Smoke, No Mirrors, No Deficit?; Bush Leads the Way
Here I go again. . . .
Ten years ago, in a speech on the Capitol steps, I urged Congress to adopt a balanced-budget amendment.
I reminded Congress of a warning by Thomas Jefferson: "The public debt is the greatest of dangers to be feared." Since then, Congress has refused to work with the President and pass the amendment and has shown little restraint in spending.


GenCorp reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Information Booths Tell Visitors What and Where


Baseball Will Allow Sale of Seattle Team To Japanese Group
In an abrupt turnaround from baseball's much-debated policy against selling significant portions of clubs to non-North American interests, a committee of major league owners yesterday unanimously recommended the sale of the Seattle Mariners to a group whose majority investor is a Japanese company.
The approval of the sale by the American and National leagues, considered a virtual formality, is expected today.


Emily Lodge Clark, 86; Was Senator's Widow
Emily Sears Lodge Clark, the widow of Henry Cabot Lodge, the Senator and 1960 Republican Vice-Presidential nominee, died on Saturday at her home in Beverly, Mass.
She was 86 years old.
She died of lung cancer, said her son Henry Sears Lodge.


More Teen-Agers Being Slain by Guns
Gunshot wounds are the second-leading cause of death among all high-school-age children in the United States, and they are increasing faster than any other cause in that age group among both whites and blacks, according to Federal statistics published today.
The statistics on gunshot homicides were part of a battery of more than 70 studies and editorials published today by the 10 scientific journals of the American Medical Association.
Deaths and injuries from gunshots have become a public health crisis, said the journals' editors, along with Surgeon General Antonia Novello and her predecessor, Dr.
C.
Everett Koop.
Dr.
Koop and Dr.
George Lundberg, editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association, announced the findings at a news conference here today.


No More Dental School
Loyola University in Chicago is closing its dental school, in part because Americans are not getting cavities the way they once did.
"The very positive advances made in dentistry over the past decades that have markedly reduced the prevalence and extent of dental cavities have unfortunately had an adverse effect on dental education," Loyola's president, Raymond Baumhart, said.
"Fewer dentists are required to care for the population."
He said state-supported universities with less expensive tuitions were taking an increasingly smaller pool of dental students away from private universities like Loyola.
There are 55 dental schools in the United States, 35 of them public, Loyola said.
They received 8,852 applications in 1981, but by 1990 that number had fallen to 5,123.


Accounts
*
GE Capital Corp., Stamford, Conn., to McCann-Erickson New York, for its account, estimated at $2 million to $3 million, previously at Marquardt &amp; Roche, Stamford.
In a review, McCann bested Marquardt; Della Femina, McNamee, New York, and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York. *
Stroh Brewery Co., Detroit, to Ross Roy Inc., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., as agency of record for data base direct-marketing communications, initially for the Old Milwaukee and Old Milwaukee Light brands.
Billings were not disclosed.


Iced Tea's New Popularity as a Pour That Refreshes
THE day may be close at hand when busboys in Boston and New York will patrol restaurants pouring iced tea instead of water, as they do in Atlanta, New Orleans and Charleston.
"These days at lunch every other table is drinking iced tea," said Julian Niccolini, the manager of the Four Seasons in New York.
This particularly Southern thirst-quencher is becoming a year-round phenomenon nationwide.
On any given day, nearly 127 million Americans, nearly half the population, drink tea, according to the Tea Council, a trade group.
And the iced variety accounts for about 80 percent of all the tea consumed in this country, up from 70 percent in 1980.
In 1960, less than half the tea consumed was iced.


Negotiations Stall Again In Bus Strike
On the second day of congested highways and crowded subways caused by a strike against five private bus companies, negotiators yesterday failed once again to agree on a new contract, insuring continued travel headaches for 225,000 commuters in Queens and Brooklyn.
Although negotiators reported some progress in more than seven hours of talks, the two sides remained separated over the level of contributions by the companies to the workers' pension plans and health benefits.
Talks were adjourned until 4 P.M.  today to give both sides time to consider new proposals.


JG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


WEST POINT ACQUISITION FILES REORGANIZATION
The West Point Acquisition Corporation, parent company of West Point-Pepperell, filed a reorganization plan in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan.
The "prepackaged" plan covers the parent company as well as the subsidiaries West Point Subsidiary Corporation and West Point Tender Corporation.
West Point-Pepperell, whose bed and bath linens are marketed under the Utica and Martex labels, is 95 percent owned by West Point Acquisition but is not included in the reorganization plan.
A company statement said it would continue normal operations.
Approval from West Point's stockholders and bondholders exceeded bankruptcy law requirements for confirmation of the proposed plan, the company said in a statement.


Police Officer Shot In Fresh Meadows
A New York City police officer was shot in the lower back by a teen-ager in Fresh Meadows, Queens, late last night, the authorities said.
The officer, John Farley, of the 107th precinct, was shot at 209th Street and 86th Avenue at about 10:45 P.M, as he and three other officers participated in an were making an arrest in an unrelated robbery of a livery cab driver, the police said.
Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman, said the officer, whose injuries were not believed to be serious, was being transported to North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.


Books of The Times; Women, Viewed Collectively and Individually
The War Against Women By Marilyn French  223 pages.
Summit Books. $20.
Looking for the Light  The Hidden Life and Art of Marion Post Wolcott  By Paul Hendrickson  Illustrated. 297 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $35.


CHRONICLE
JOAN LUNDEN plans to appeal a Westchester judge's ruling that she pay her estranged husband, MICHAEL KRAUSS, $18,000 a month pending resolution of their divorce battle.
"She just left my office, and we will file an appeal this week to the Appellate Division and move to stay the order pending the appeal," said her lawyer, STANFORD LOTWIN.
"She has always paid, and will continue to pay, the fixed expenses of the home in Rye, $9,000 to $10,000 a month, so we were greatly surprised by the extent of this award." Mr.
Krauss continues to live in the house.
The couple, who have been married for almost 14 years, announced plans to divorce in January.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


P.S.A.L. Title to Tottenville
Alex Westlake pitched a three-hitter yesterday at Shea Stadium as Tottenville High School defeated Susan E. Wagner, 4-0, and earned the Public Schools Athletic League baseball championship as well as the bragging rights on Staten Island.
In the first P.S.A.L. baseball final involving two Staten Island teams, Tottenville scored all four runs in the game after two were out in the top of the fourth inning.
Consecutive walks to Vinny Gaudiuso and Mike Baggs were followed by a run-scoring single to center by Paul Marco off the losing pitcher, Gary Shouldis.
Three more runs scored before the inning ended.


Officials Investigate Shooting in Newark
A 17-year-old who had been driving a car reported stolen from a Newark police officer's mother was shot and critically wounded early yesterday, and the authorities were investigating whether the police participated in the shooting and then tried to cover it up, law-enforcement officials said last night.
The youth, who was not identified because of his age, was unarmed at the time of the shooting, The Associated Press reported.
He was shot once in the right abdomen and listed in critical but stable condition last night at University Hospital, the police said.


2 PGA Regulars Have Big Day in Qualifying for the U.S. Open
Golfers kept stopping by the table where Jim McGovern was sipping a beverage to comment that he shouldn't have made them look so bad today at the Century Country Club.
McGovern drank it all in.
All he had done was shoot two five-under-par 66's to finish four shots ahead of the field in the 36-hole sectional qualifying for the United States Open next week.


St. Helier Journal; On Queen's Special Island, Lese-Majeste No Less
The last time a good-sized crowd gathered in downtown St.
Helier was on May 9, 1945, when people turned out in force to welcome British troops who were ending five years of German occupation of Jersey and the other Channel Islands off the Normandy coast.
One recent morning, it was again the cause of freedom that mobilized around 1,000 of the island's 86,000 inhabitants to demonstrate outside the local parliament.
But there was a twist: in 1945, they cheered British troops; on May 13, they booed the Queen's representative.


HRE Properties reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


John J. Martin, 57, National Spokesman On Insurance Issues
John J. Martin, a senior vice president at the Aetna Life and Casualty Company and a national spokesman for the insurance industry, died on Sunday at his home in Suffield, Conn.
He was 57 years old.
He died after a 13-month battle with brain cancer, said Elizabeth Krupnick, a spokeswoman for Aetna.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to contract terms with Kenny Felder, outfielder.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Signed Chad Roper, shortstop; Keith Linebarger, Trevor Cobb, Kevin LeGault and Luis Alvarado, pitchers; Anthony Byrd, outfielder; Jeffrey Crick, Hiram Cruz and Thomas Horinsewich, infielders.


Blacks Push for Jobs Rebuilding After Riot
Hoping to channel the rage from the rioting into efforts to create jobs, residents of the city's poorest neighborhoods are picketing construction sites and meeting with officials to make sure they get their share of the rebuilding work.
Black groups and contractors say they believe that insurance companies and building owners will not give enough jobs to the areas hit hardest by the unrest, and so these groups are stepping up their protests at sites employing workers from other areas.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Is Saved Once Again
BASEBALL has shown uncommon statesmanship in permitting a Japanese millionaire to invest a considerable amount of his money but apparently none of his expertise in the ailing Seattle franchise.
The influx of $75 million from Hiroshi Yamauchi of the Nintendo corporation will help keep the Mariners in the Pacific Northwest, and without any foreign influence.
What a deal.
Commissioner Fay Vincent and the owners are not in unanimity on all matters.
A few impetuous home-grown owners have apparently failed to move some of Vincent's power over to Richard Ravitch, who was brought in to handle the owners' most important business, which is labor negotiations.
But Vincent and all the owners seem to agree: Japanese money is O.K. but Japanese presence is not O.K.


Huffman Koos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Corrections
An art review in Weekend on May 29 about Part I of "Gifts and Acquisitions in Context" at the Whitney Museum of American Art misidentified an artist in the show.
She is Lorna Simpson, not Mona Simpson.


Committee Completes Ziegler Talks
A special committee discussing the fate of JOHN ZIEGLER, the president of the N.H.L., concluded two days of meetings with Ziegler yesterday in New York.
Does the five-man group, which includes powerful executives of five teams, have a recommendation to make to the full Board of Governors at its meeting on June 21 in Montreal?
"Yes," said ED SNIDER, the owner of the Philadelphia Flyers, who is the chairman of the special committee.
And would Snider care to make that recommendation public?
"No," Snider said.
"The only thing I can tell you is that everything is going very nicely," Snider said.
"Other than that, it is confidential. We will make official announcements in the future and it will be apparent at that time."


Cabot Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Market Place; Explosive Stock Run-Up, but Why?
The New York Stock Exchange halted trading yesterday in the Amdura Corporation's stock, interrupting at least temporarily a mystifying eight-day rally during which Amdura's shares more than quadrupled in price.
A spokesman for the exchange said the halt was intended to give the manufacturing company time to issue a statement on whether any recent developments in its corporate life might explain the phenomenal run-up in its stock.
Douglas Pimple, an accounting manager at Amdura's office in Tulsa, Okla., who is also the company's investor relations officer, said last night that he did not expect that statement to be released until sometime today. 'There Will Be Nothing New'
The statement, according to people familiar with the exchange's discussions with the company, is expected simply to summarize and clarify the financial results included in Amdura's long-overdue 1991 annual report, quietly filed on May 20 with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
"There will be nothing new here," one executive said.


Silicon Valley Coalition Set
Alarmed by the exodus of jobs from Silicon Valley, several leading computer companies have formed a coalition to bolster the area's position as a high-tech capital.
The group, which calls itself Joint Venture: Silicon Valley, includes Apple Computer Inc., the Hewlett-Packard Company, the Intel Corporation, the Amdahl Corporation, the Cypress Semiconductor Corporation, Tandem Computers Inc., the International Business Machines Corporation, and the San Jose Chamber of Commerce.


Paramount Withdraws Its Ads After a Bad Review in Variety
Movie executives are fond of pointing to a golden rule for Washington: Don't get mad; get even.
But Hollywood studio executives are now going one step further: they're getting mad
and
getting even. And the muscle tactics seem to be working.
Paramount Pictures decided over the weekend to take the highly unusual step of halting all company advertisements from Daily Variety, the trade paper, indefinitely because of a scathing review of the film "Patriot Games." Today the editor of Daily Variety, Peter Bart, sent an equally unusual private apology to Paramount executives and the producers of the film.
Mr.
Bart, a former motion-picture executive, said the review by Joseph McBride, a staff critic and reporter, "was, to put it in a word, unprofessional." He added, "The review was influenced by political factors," apparently referring to what the newspaper perceived as the critic's anti-British stands and pro-Irish sympathies.
Of Mr.
McBride, Mr.
Bart said, "As for the reviewing question, he will not review any more Paramount films." Later in the day, a senior editor at Daily Variety, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Mr.
McBride's "situation as a critic is being reviewed."
The apology, as well as the use of the studio's leverage, underscores the delicate, if precarious, relationship between Hollywood executives, many of whom throw their weight around, and the two trade papers (the other is The Hollywood Reporter), which are vulnerable to financial pressures and heavily dependent on the studios for support.
In a telephone interview, Mr.
Bart, said he would not characterize the letter as an apology.
"An apology is really not the case," he said.
"Marty Davis and I have known each other for 25 years. I simply dropped him a friendly note. I wouldn't want to characterize it beyond that." He added, "Paramount will get the same fair treatment as any other studio."
Martin S. Davis is the chairman and chief executive of Paramount Communications Inc.
Mr.
Bart was a vice president for production at Paramount in the early 1970's.
After the review was published, Mr.
Bart told the producers of "Patriot Games" that "the political nature of the review" especially disturbed him.
In the review, Mr.
McBride said that the adventure film, based on a novel by Tom Clancy, takes "the side of the British occupying forces and their C.I.A. allies" on the role of the Irish Republican Army in Britain and Northern Ireland.
He described the Clancy novel as "a right-wing cartoon of the current British-Irish political situation," called the direction "laughable" and said even the score was "full of discordant and insulting riffs on Irish folk music."
Mr.
McBride, a respected reporter and reviewer who has covered the film industry for Daily Variety since the 1970's, is the author of the "Frank Capra: The Catastrophe of Success," newly published by Simon &amp; Schuster, oddly enough, a division of Paramount Communications.
Mr.
McBride said late today: "I have been covering this business for almost 20 years. I don't write anything that is not heartfelt and substantiated by facts. I have a reputation in the industry and elsewhere of a high degree of professionalism in all aspects of my coverage.
"I am bothered by Mr. Bart's statement to me that I should not have reviewed 'Patriot Games' because I am an Irish-American. I would find it hard to believe that members of other ethnic groups would not be allowed by Variety to review movies about their people. For example, would a Jewish reviewer not be allowed to review a movie about the Holocaust?
It is uncertain if Paramount will rescind its decision not to advertise in Daily Variety, which could cost the paper tens of thousands of dollars.
Paramount had already successfully played hardball with The Hollywood Reporter, after a series of articles in January that said, essentially, that the studio was using exploitative advertisements for the film "Juice," about a group of Harlem teen-agers.
Robert J. Dowling, the publisher and editor in chief of The Hollywood Reporter, which like Daily Variety has a daily circulation of about 23,000, said: "They just stopped advertising since February. They didn't like the tone of those articles. They did not like the fact that there was a follow-up on those articles in other newspapers." He declined to specify how much money the newspaper had lost, but he indicated that it was certainly more than $100,000.
Studio ads are a major source of income for the two trade papers.
The studios use them to promote films and often to congratulate -- and to stroke the egos of -- writers, actors and directors.
It is highly unusual for a major studio to drop its ads in the trade papers, although occasionally one or two peeved companies have punished papers by scrapping ads for several days.
Over the years, some studios have also withdrawn advertising for brief periods from daily newspapers for similar reasons.
Harry Anderson, the vice president for communications at Paramount Pictures, said, "In terms of both daily trade papers, we are not advertising in them." Mr.
Anderson acknowledged that Paramount was upset with the papers, but he said the company was "looking at what is most cost-effective."
"We are not interested in censoring critics," he added.
"However, the trades are there to assess the commercial viability of a film and give exhibitors and industry people an enlightened interpretation of what a film can do. It's not like a review for The New York Times or The Los Angeles Times or The Chicago Tribune that would be assessing the merits of the film."
Shortly after Mr.
McBride's review appeared in Daily Variety, Mr.
Bart sent him a private note, which said: "Just to be sure we understand one another, I object to a Variety review only when the political opinions of the reviewer (a) color the review emotionally, and (b) negatively critique the work done by artisans such as the composer, cinematographer, etc. I think Variety owes these artisans a more clear-headed assessment, since we are a professional publication. Please understand that these views are not subjects for intellectual discourse: they are policy."


Canal Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Schools Chief Seeks to Overhaul Science Studies
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez unveiled a plan yesterday to drastically overhaul science instruction in New York City's public schools, including adding an extra year of laboratory science to high school requirements and more than doubling the number of science periods offered to elementary school students.
Mr.
Fernandez said the plan aimed at invigorating science education for all students, not just the most talented, so that the city's public school graduates would be able to get jobs in an increasingly technical society.
In particular, Mr.
Fernandez hopes the changes will lure more black and Hispanic students into careers in science and engineering, where they make up only 4.5 percent of the professionals.
The plan, which comes at a time when the school system is struggling with overcrowded classes and a shortage of supplies, does not include any estimate of its cost.
Nor does it have a timetable.
Mr.
Fernandez said a team of school officials would now begin studying those aspects.
Mr.
Fernandez's vision will also demand radical changes in how teachers are trained and recruited; right now high schools cannot find enough licensed high school science teachers and elementary schools are hiring teachers who may have taken no college science.
But in forging ahead, Mr.
Fernandez is heeding alarms that have been sounded by experts nationwide who are concerned about how poorly American students fare in science in comparisons with those of other industrialized nations.
In Chicago, Dr.
Leon Lederman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist, started a program two years ago that pulled hundreds of elementary school teachers out of their classrooms for 16 weeks at a time and taught them how to perform beguiling lab experiments.
"Teachers can't teach science because they're terrified of it," Mr.
Lederman, an alumnus of New York's James Monroe High School, said in an interview.
"Science is put off to the seventh and eighth period and then they pray for a fire drill."
Leland T. Jones, the press secretary for Mayor David N. Dinkins, said the Mayor, as a onetime math major, applauded efforts to bolster math and science education.
But, he added, "we need to find good and great ways to pay for them."
Mr.
Fernandez is basing his plan on a report issued yesterday by a task force headed by Dr.
George Campbell Jr., president of the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering.
The report criticized many of the past efforts to draw students to science, which had focused attention on only the most gifted students.
"Earlier efforts were too often based on the premise that science ability was innate, reserved for the intellectually elite," the report said.
"We know now that all students can and must achieve the level of scientific literacy required for life in the 21st century."
The report urged that all high school students be required to take three years of science instead of two, and that those three should be laboratory-based courses like chemistry and physics rather than the more amorphous courses like general science that are now accepted for graduation.
Such a requirement would place far greater demands on New York students than their counterparts nationally.
Fewer than half of American students study chemistry and only 20 percent study physics, the report said.
Some educators believe that raising the requirements will push more students to drop out, while others believe that students respond well to tougher challenges.
But H. Carl McCall, the president of the seven-member Board of Education that will eventually have to vote on the plan, said he was "prepared to take the risk" of toughening requirements as long as schools "make sure the kids are prepared to meet them."
In elementary school, the report said, at least one period per day, or 45 minutes, should be devoted to science, with the stress on solving problems and on visible or palpable demonstrations and not just on textbook information.
The average American student, the report said, is given 19 minutes per day of science in kindergarten through the third grade and, by the sixth grade, the amount rises to only 38 minutes.
Raising Requirements
Increasing science instruction in elementary school requires a staff comfortable with doing so, the report said, but it noted that many teachers had taken just one science course in college, and often that was a teaching methods course.
"As a result," the report said, "far too many people graduate as teachers with the false impression that science is simply a compendium of facts to be memorized."
The report urged the chancellor to talk with officials at the City University of New York -- which trains 80 percent of the city's teachers -- about raising the requirement for an elementary school teacher's license to a minimum of two semesters of laboratory science and one science teaching methods course.
To turn out more licensed high school teachers, the report recommended a City University-based program to retrain teachers of other subjects as science teachers, by requiring them to take three college-level science courses.
The report was democratic; it said almost nothing about programs to help talented students who show an early passion for science.
Pointing to the success of New York City high schools in the annual Westinghouse science competition, the report seemed to take as a given that the needs of such students were filled.
However, many experts, including Dr.
Lederman, said that not enough was being done for such students, and they reject criticism that focusing on talented students constitutes elitism.


Parking Rules Test Gorgeous Mosaic
Mayor David N. Dinkins's vision of New York as a "gorgeous mosaic" may be a noble ideal, but even he is finding that when it comes to the humdrum of running a city, it may be impossible to please all the people all the time.
In recent days, Muslim leaders have mounted a lobbying campaign to persuade the City Council to approve a bill that would include two of their three-day feasts on the list of holidays when alternate-side-of-the-street parking rules are suspended.
At present, the city suspends the rules for 22 Jewish and Christian holidays.


Medical Schools and Hospitals Support Dinkins's Clinic Plan
To the Editor:
"Emergency Room Alternative: Family Doctors," Bertrand M. Bell's May 21 letter supporting Mayor David N. Dinkins's plan for an expanded system of community-based primary care clinics in New York City identifies such clinics as the only way out of the misuse of emergency facilities as private doctors' offices.
Dr.
Bell errs, however, in casting New York City's medical schools and affiliated hospitals as an obstacle to the Mayor's plan.
These institutions strongly support expansion of community-based clinics.
Unfortunately, the last such facility to be established by the city opened in 1985.


Triborough Bridge Issue Is Priced
A $487.2 million tax-exempt bond issue by the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority in New York was tentatively priced yesterday with a maximum yield of about 6.444 percent for a 6 percent bond due in 2015.
Underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. said the financing had been insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company and the Ambac Indemnity Corporation.


Northwest Teleproductions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aetna's Reinsurer Unit Sale Had Been Studied Since '87
When the Aetna Life and Casualty Company said in April that it was discussing a sale of its reinsurance unit to Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the move was widely perceived as a necessary step by the insurer to shore up its balance sheet and guard against problems in its real estate portfolio.
But company officials and some analysts noted yesterday that the timing was largely coincidental.
The genesis of the deal goes back to 1987, when Aetna decided to explore the sale of its reinsurance unit for two reasons, said Edward B. Jobe, president and chief executive officer of the American Re-Insurance Company, who will continue to run the company after the sale to Kohlberg, Kravis, which will rename the company the American Re Corporation.


50 Concerns Will Join on Social Issues
A group of more than 50 businesses is set to introduce a new "trade organization for social responsibility" in Washington today.
The group, which will be called Businesses for Social Responsibility, intends to support stricter environmental and safety regulations as well as investment in a wide variety of health, education and welfare programs.
"This alliance will advocate a different vision of business than the Chamber of Commerce," said Michael Levett, the new organization's executive director.
He said the group's members believed that the current policies advocated by business lobbies in Washington and by Government bodies such as Vice President Dan Quayle's Council on Competitiveness actually undermined the long-term profitability of business and the nation's ability to compete internationally.


Dr. David Denker, 77, Historian And Medical School Head, Dies
Dr.
David D. Denker, a historian and past president of New York Medical College, died on June 7 at the Princeton Medical Center, in Princeton, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Jamesburg, N.J.
Dr. Denker died of cancer, said his wife, Jane Gurley Denker.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Sharply Increases Effort to Discredit Perot
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas stepped up his attacks on Ross Perot yesterday, portraying the likely independent Presidential candidate as a passing fancy for voters who knew little about what he could accomplish.
Mr.
Clinton, the probable Democratic nominee, said Mr.
Perot's only record in government was "largely lobbying the Congress and the White House for various things over the last 20 years." He said he planned to contrast Mr.
Perot's talk of change with a plan for action on several fronts.


Columbia Is Under Inquiry Over Records
Federal officials have begun a criminal investigation to determine whether Columbia University misled the Government about the destruction of 150 cartons of records needed for an audit of university spending.
If sufficient evidence of wrongdoing is found, Columbia could be charged with trying to defraud the Government.


Public &amp; Private; Zero Population Talk
With each day that passes the Earth Summit begins to seem more and more like the planet versus the President of the United States.
The President touts an initiative on forest protection and the developing nations say we're playing bully boys.
The rest of the world agrees on a biodiversity treaty and the President says it's too expensive.
And so far George Bush has saved his greatest passion for that most critical of environmental issues: Who in blazes leaked a memo designed to embarrass the head of the Environmental Protection Agency?


Greenstone Roberts Advertising Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mets-Yanks Swap: Burke for Guetterman
Two struggling relief pitchers changed boroughs and leagues yesterday when the Yankees and the Mets made the second trade in their history involving major leaguers by exchanging left-hander Lee Guetterman for right-hander Tim Burke.
Neither reliever has pitched in a manner that made him very marketable this season.
Guetterman was 1-1 with a 9.53 earned run average in 15 games for the Yankees and Burke was 1-2 with a 5.74 e.r.a. in 15 games for the Mets.
Both are 33 years old and both are trying to salvage careers.


Review/Television; Music Pries Open Doors To a Far, Forgotten Past
Tonight's edition of "48 Hours" offers glimpses into the mysteries of memory.
The first and most affecting segment, at 10 on CBS, was filmed at Beth Abraham Hospital, near Bronx Park, where music is used to reach patients whose minds have otherwise turned off.
Dr.
Oliver Sacks, the psychiatrist whose work was celebrated in the movie "Awakenings," calls the stimulating effects of music magical, and the examples shown here support his diagnosis.


Matco Ravary reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Central Jersey Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Districts Are Adopted For Congress
Despite the strenuous objections of Hispanic lawmakers, the State Legislature tonight approved a once-in-a-decade Congressional redistricting plan that forever changes the political geography of New York State.
The plan, passed by the Assembly tonight after being passed by the Senate on Monday night, also won approval this morning from the state court that commissioned it, giving it the endorsement of two of the five entities with a say in the state's convoluted redistricting process.


Competitors Reluctantly Match Delta's Fare Cuts
The new discounts in business fares to Europe announced by Delta Air Lines on Monday were grudgingly matched by other carriers yesterday.
One reluctant competitor grumbled, "Thanks Delta, we really needed that."


Exercise and Nursing
After childbirth, a growing number of mothers are turning to physical exercise to get back in shape and help them relax.
But many find that their nursing babies seem less than enthusiastic about those post-exercise meals.
No, Mom, it is not the sweat you worked up that distresses your baby.
Rather, according to a study published in the current issue of the journal Pediatrics, it is the raised concentration of lactic acid, a muscle waste product that "sours" normally sweet breast milk.
The study, conducted by researchers at Indiana University's Adult Fitness Program, examined milk samples of 26 nursing women who exercised during pregnancy and after delivery.
The samples, collected before exercise and at various minute intervals after exercise, showed that levels of lactic acid rose after exercise and remained high for at least 90 minutes.
The authors suggested that mothers either nurse their babies first or express milk before exercising to feed the baby later.


Honors
*
Charlotte Beers, chairwoman and chief executive at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York, was named to receive the American Advertising Federation's Silver Medal Award by the Advertising Women of New York.
It will be presented at a July 29 luncheon in New York. *
D.
Wayne Calloway, chairman and chief executive of Pepsico, was named to receive the Cannes Lion 1992 "Advertiser of the Year" at the Cannes International Advertising Film Festival, which starts on June 22.


Adagio for Cello and Howitzers
There are many people in the West quick to lament the dismemberment of blameless little Bosnia -- but just as quick to shun meaningful involvement in the complexity of Balkan politics.
Let them listen to the cellist.
In a haunting report from the rubble of Sarajevo, John Burns of The Times told of Vedran Smailovic, who at 4 P.M. every day brings his chair and cello to the middle of a deserted street and, with Serbian shells crashing down, plays in memory of innocent victims.
Would that Western leaders, most notably President Bush, heard his song or shared his courage.


INSIDE
Insider Trading on Tape
To try to protect himself from insider-trading charges, a colorful public-relations man taped conversations with two others involved.
Page D1.
Ex-H.U.D.
Aide Indicted
Thomas T. Demery became the highest-ranking official yet charged in the H.U.D. scandal.
Page A16.


Educators Focus on the Forgotten Years: the Middle Grades
The nation's middle schools have long been treated as middle children often are, overlooked while attention is directed to the needs of their older counterparts, the high schools, and their younger ones, the elementary grades.
But change has finally come to West Baltimore Middle School.
The school, backed by $610,000 in private foundation money the last three years, is at the head of a national movement to improve middle schools.
From New York to Indiana to California, teaching and counseling strategies and drug, alcohol and sex education are being overhauled in the hope of accomplishing what most middle schools fail to do: guide early adolescents through a difficult phase of growth.


COOPER COMPANIES SUING SHAREHOLDERS ON PROXY FIGHT
In an attempt to end a proxy battle, the Cooper Companies, a New York maker of contact lenses, filed a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan charging that a group of dissident shareholders had broken securities laws and violated their fiduciary duties.
The company wants the court to prohibit the shareholders, led by Frederick Adler, from soliciting proxies.
Cooper said Mr.
Adler had misused confidential information gained while he had been a partner in the company's law firm, Fulbright &amp; Jaworski.
The proxy fight began when Mr.
Adler filed a slate to compete with Cooper's board.
In a lawsuit filed last month, he said that some current board members "fear that any new board will cooperate with the S.E.C. and the U.S. Attorney's Office" in investigations of insider trading allegations.


Call for Harmony at Princeton
At Princeton's 245th graduation ceremony today, the university president, Harold Shapiro, urged members of the graduating class to work for racial harmony, calling on them to embark on "voyages of discovery in a pluralistic society."
He told the students that their challenge was to balance a need for "strong, stable, distinct identities" in their family, religion and racial and ethnic heritage with an "equally pressing need to reach out beyond these boundaries to connect with, learn from, and build a stronger society with one another."


Mastercard Picks 3 Agency Finalists
Mastercard International said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $60 million United States account to three finalists: Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis and the incumbent shop, Lintas New York


Japan Acts to Let Army Join U.N. Peace Missions
The upper house of Parliament passed a bill today that would permit Japanese troops to take part in United Nations peacekeeping missions for the first time.
But a series of shoving matches in the lower house as it took up the bitterly divisive issue underscored this nation's hesitancy about giving its military any role as a foreign policy tool.
The resistance of the opposition Socialist and Communist parties is largely symbolic, since the governing Liberal Democratic Party enjoys a healthy majority in the more powerful lower house.
The party's leaders said they intend to try to hold the final vote on the issue later this week.


A Jam Session for Bird, and for Life


For the Yankees, the Night Was a Blur


NEW SOFTWARE SYSTEM FOR UNIX COMPUTER NETWORKS
The Unisys Corporation released a new version of a software program intended to give personal computer users more power within a Unix computer network system.
A spokesman for Unisys, based in Blue Bell, Pa., said the modified Unix-based Open-OLTP software "empowers desktop and personal computer users to an extent that was not available previously." The enhanced software lets desktop computer users more easily update corporate data bases or share information with co-workers, said a company spokesman, Brian Daly.


Networks Cutting Back On Foreign Coverage
Even with war raging in Yugoslavia, the network evening newscasts have covered less foreign news in 1992 than in any of the three previous years.
But network-news executives dispute any connection between the drop-off and the financial cutbacks that have forced the closings of some foreign bureaus in recent years.
Instead, they point to other factors for the reduced foreign coverage, and the less attention devoted to the fighting in Yugoslavia than what would probably have been given in previous years.


COMPANY NEWS: Super-Duper Computer; It May Be Faster Than Anyone Wants
A small Silicon Valley company yesterday upped the ante in the race to build the world's fastest supercomputer.
The Ncube Corporation of Foster City, Calif., said it planned to make a machine by 1994 capable of crunching 6.5 trillion numbers a second.
But the company conceded that there was one small problem it had yet to solve: finding a buyer for such a machine, which would have 65,000 processors and cost $200 million to build.


Semtech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Value City Department Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


New Officer For Utility In Seattle
Seattle City Light, the nation's seventh-largest municipal utility, said yesterday that it had named Roberta Palm Bradley as its superintendent with responsibilities for daily operations.
Mrs.
Bradley, who is 45 years old, has managed electric and gas utility operations since 1988 for the Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Silverado division, which has annual revenues of $200 million and serves 300,000 residents in the San Francisco Bay area.


Court Allows a Lawsuit To Proceed on Artworks
In the latest round of a case involving the art collection of the late movie producer Hal B. Wallis, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled yesterday that the New York art dealers Wildenstein &amp; Company may proceed in its $11 million lawsuit against the foundation that administers the Wallis art holdings.
Wildenstein contends that it has the right to sell or refuse the sale of Wallis's collection, which included paintings by Monet, Degas, Cassatt and Vuillard.
These works were acquired by Mr.
Wallis from 1958 to 1971.


Oppenheimer Capital L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Super Valu Is Buying Wetterau for $1.1 Billion
Super Valu Inc. agreed yesterday to acquire Wetterau Inc. in a deal valued at $1.1 billion.
The move will make Super Valu the nation's largest food wholesaler.
The acquisition will extend Super Valu's reach from its strong base in the Midwest into the Southeast and New England.


Josephine Hartford Bryce, 88, Philanthropist and Sportswoman
Josephine Hartford Bryce, a philanthropist, sportswoman and musician, died on Monday at her home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
She was 88 years old.
She had been bedridden and in declining health for six months, but the exact cause of her death was unclear, said her son-in-law, Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat.


Corrections
A dance review on Monday about the American Ballet Theater's premiere of "The Other," by Agnes de Mille, on Friday at the Metropolitan Opera House, misidentified the vocalist.
He is Paul Rowe, not Peter Rowe.


Kangaroo's Pouch Inspires Care for Premature Babies
ORDINARILY, Jacqueline Garcia would experience her parents' love through the thick plastic walls of an incubator.
Born 14 weeks premature, she would be touched through small holes in the plastic or lifted out wrapped in thick blankets for a lightning-quick visit.
But in a radical new approach, tiny Jacqueline is awash in human contact: she spends hours each day in bed with one of her parents, lying skin to skin, chest to chest.
At these times, the parent becomes her incubator.


Penn State Got the Exclusive $14 Million, 10-Year Deal With Pepsi! Uh-huh!
For less than a dollar -- the price of a can of Pepsi -- nearly 70,000 students at 21 of Penn State University's campuses will soon be able to get a quick lesson in economics, social policy, ethics and marketing.
Oh, and English, too.
Uh-huh!


It's Johnson To Rescue For Mets
Howard Johnson stretched into the air, crashed into the artificial turf, rolled over and stood upright in center field.
The baseball was in his glove; his left arm was in the air.
It was a night in which nothing was beyond Johnson's reach.


Quotation of the Day
"The commercialism I find disgusting, and it seems dangerous in the direction it's going." -- PROF.
JOSEPH C. FLAY of Penn State, attacking a $14 million plan to make Pepsi-Cola the university's official drink.  [ B8:4. ]
"There is some concern about commercializing the enterprise, but at the same time there is a desire to find funding where it can legitimately be found." -- PROF.
ROBERT SECOR, defending the deal.  [ B8:2. ]


Sun Shower


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about the sale of Aetna Life and Casualty's reinsurance subsidiary included one reason erroneously among those that Aetna's chairman, Ronald E. Compton, gave for the sale.
He did not cite a need to raise money.


Medical Schools and Hospitals Support Dinkins's Clinic Plan; Residencies in Queens
To the Editor:
We wholeheartedly agree with Bertrand M. Bell (letter, May 21), but point out that since 1978 there have been family practice residencies at two voluntary hospitals in Queens: Jamaica and the Catholic Medical Center (Mary Immaculate Hospital).
Each has 12 or more residents.
Those in middle- and upper-class areas whose physicians refer them to the emergency room on holidays might consider changing to family practice doctors, who supply personal service seven days a week.


China Must Go Forward at Its Own Pace
To the Editor:
As a China scholar who got into the field with a certain love for the society I was studying, I am saddened by "China's Rights Abuses Reflect a Bitter History," Robert Bernstein's May 19 letter railing against China's "gross" abuses.
"Put the Squeeze on Beijing" by Holly Burkhalter (Op-Ed, May 25) goes so far as to suggest an executive branch human rights policy of manipulating internal Chinese affairs by means of selective economic sanctions.
Why China in particular?
What a preposterous and hypocritical abuse of United States power it would be to re-enact the intrusiveness of the age of imperialism to impose our ideas and ideals on a country with a historic memory of an earlier international assault on its integrity.


HOUSE DEMOCRATS BACK A REVAMPING OF JOBLESS BENEFIT
Challenging President Bush on a politically sensitive issue, the Democratic-controlled House voted overwhelmingly tonight to make sweeping changes in the unemployment insurance system to grant automatically renewable benefits to the long-term jobless.
Mr.
Bush would have preferred another simple extension of unemployment benefits for 13 or more weeks.
But the measure that was passed went far beyond that, putting him in the awkward position of potentially vetoing a bill that would help more than two million unemployed workers in an election year.


Big Board May Loosen Listing Rule
The New York Stock Exchange indicated yesterday that it might establish a rule that would make it possible for companies listed on the exchange to issue super-voting stock, but only with approval of a majority of the shareholders whose interests might be damaged by the action.
The Big Board issued what it called a "concept for a proposal" on the issue commonly known as "one share-one vote," and asked for comments by July 31.
Richard Grasso, the exchange's president, said that even after it got those comments, the exchange was likely to move slowly.
Any rule it eventually proposed would require the approval of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Limits Voting Control
Super-voting shares are used by many companies, including a substantial number of media companies, to assure that voting control remains within a small group -- often the founding family -- even after a large part of the equity of the company has been sold to public shareholders.
The shares sold to the public often have lesser voting rights, or in some cases no right to vote at all.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; SOME GAPS EMERGE IN PEROT'S APPEAL
While old and young, rich and poor, Northerners and Southerners are jumping on Ross Perot's bandwagon in near equal numbers, some minority groups and women are voicing doubts about his Presidential quest.
Although they support him in substantial numbers, voters who are black, Hispanic, Jewish or female stand out in a variety of state and national polls as being less comfortable with the Texas businessman than others.


A Warming Trend Gets an Angler Fired Up
In early May, Morgan Child, one of my grandsons, called to inform me that the striped bass had arrived.
"They got some at Wasque and some off Squibnocket," he said, naming two places at the opposite ends of the South Shore of the island of Martha's Vineyard, where we live.


Williams Says the Blazers Need to Be More Physical
Trailing by one game after three games of a playoff series does not scare Buck Williams.
His life has been a series unto itself, a series of obstacles that the Portland Trail Blazers' power forward has managed to overcome.
Williams is one of many pivotal figures in the Portland-Chicago Bulls National Basketball Association four-of-seven-game championship series, which resumes with Game 4 here Wednesday night.
The series will not be determined strictly by X's and O's, for it is also a test of wills, with each player and both teams reacting to the pressure in different ways.


Grievance on Howe's Ban Is Filed by Players' Union
The Players Association filed a grievance on behalf of Yankee relief pitcher Steve Howe against major league baseball yesterday, arguing that Howe's indefinite suspension by Commissioner Fay Vincent was without just cause.
The grievance is expected to be heard by the arbitrator George Nicolau and a hearing date must be set within five days.
The grievance stated that Howe's suspension was "without just cause within the meaning of the basic agreement and arbitration panels' decisions in the area of disciplinary suspensions." In essence, the players' union's contention is that Vincent acted prematurely.


Food Notes
As One Dad Cooked It
For a Father's Day gift that's better-tasting than a necktie and healthier than barbecue sauce, there's My Dad's Cereal: granola with a story.
The deliciously crunchy, earthy cereal has been made for years by Robert Berenson.
Now his son, Ron, the manager of the Old Creamery grocery in Cummington, in western Massachusetts, is marketing it.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Natural Wonders Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


A Warning To Europe On Tariffs
Establishing an uncommon link between fine European foods imported for American tables and feed shipped to Europe for consumption by livestock, the Bush Administration threatened this afternoon to impose prohibitive tariffs on European vermouth, brandy, rose wine, snails, Roquefort cheese and other items.
The new tariffs would be in retaliation for increasing European soybean subsidies that shut out American exports.


M. F. Bornstein, 73, Community Organizer
Margaret Frankel Bornstein, a longtime leader in Jewish organizations, died on Monday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
She was 73 years old and lived in Fair Lawn, N.J.
She died after a long illness, her family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The House voted to approve changes in the unemployment insurance system that would grant automatically renewable benefits to the long-term jobless.  [ Page A1. ]
The Bush Administration threatened to impose prohibitive tariffs on imports of some European liquors and foods in retaliation for European restrictions on American soybean exports.  [ D1. ]


Dangers of Mixing Alcohol and Beta-Carotene
THE growing enthusiasm for supplements of beta-carotene, a relative of vitamin A that may help prevent cancer and heart disease, could spell serious liver trouble for heavy drinkers of alcohol.
Dr.
Charles S. Lieber, an expert on the biochemistry of alcohol ingestion, showed in studies in baboons that "amounts of beta-carotene usually considered safe" became toxic to the liver when taken in combination with alcohol.


Efficient Power From Fuel Gases
Based on the principle that almost any fuel can be burned more cleanly and efficiently if first turned into a gas, engineers are developing ways to produce electricity with fuel gas made from coal, wood chips, sugar cane leftovers -- even sewage sludge.
The process employs systems known as gasifiers, which can cook organic material into a fuel for gas turbines, the most efficient electricity generators available.
While utilities currently burn natural gas in their turbines, coal is more plentiful and may eventually be cheaper.


Former Top H.U.D. Official Is Charged With Conspiracy
A former Assistant Secretary in the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Thomas T. Demery, was indicted today on charges of conspiracy and conflict of interest.
Mr.
Demery is the the highest-ranking official to be charged so far in a two-year inquiry into influence peddling at the agency during the tenure of Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr.


New Finding on Sun's Gases May Shed Light on Ozone
The blazing gases of the Sun's surface continuously flow away from the solar equator toward the poles, a scientist for the space agency has discovered.
The scientist, Dr.
David H. Hathaway, detected the circulation pattern of solar gases by a subtle analysis of measurements made at the National Solar Observatory in Tucson, Ariz., by a special telescope and filter system that observes solar oscillations.


Officers Shoot Gunman
Two New York City police officers shot and killed a 32-year-old armed man last night in an exchange of gunfire on a Bronx street, the police said.
The officers, who were responding to a report that shots had been fired, encountered the man just before 11 P.M. at East 148th Street and Willis Avenue in Melrose, said Lieut.
Michael Bramble of the 40th Detective Squad.
The lieutenant said it had not been determined early this morning whether the man or the officers had fired first, nor was it known hos many shots were fired.
The man, who was not identified, was pronounced dead at Lincoln Hospital.


AT WORK WITH: Radu; No Disco. No Aerobics. Just Lots of Sweat.
INSIDE Radu's tiny studio, eight men and women are torturing themselves in fast-forward.
They are jumping, twisting, sprinting, skipping and squat-thrusting.
Their faces are flushed.
Their T-shirts are soaked.
Their gasping has become painfully audible.
Radu cracks a slight sadistic smile.
"Go, go, go, give me nine laps!" he yells.
"Come on, little faster, little faster. Truck it! Truck it!"


Looking for More Mouths to Feed
Most businesses try to create a satisfied customer for life.
But Gerber, the undisputed king of the $1 billion baby-food market, loses 10,000 gurgling, happy consumers a day.
Why?
They grow up and defiantly reject a diet of rice cereal and strained peaches.
So, in an ambitious plan to more than double its pool of potential customers, the Gerber Products Company will soon market a new line of vegetables, snacks and stews that it hopes will appeal to the more sophisticated palates of 2- and 3-year-olds.


Private Group Hired to Run 9 Public Schools in Baltimore
The Baltimore City Public Schools has signed a tentative agreement with a Minneapolis education management concern to oversee the day-to-day operation of nine schools.
The pact is part of a growing trend of private management of public schools that is worrying some educators.
The tentative agreement, details of which are still being worked out, would allow the concern, Education Alternatives Inc., to manage 8 of the district's 121 elementary schools and one of the system's 11 middle schools.
All of the schools are in inner-city neighborhoods.
A contract is expected to be signed this summer, said Dr.
David A. Bennett, the company's president.


How to Bridge the Black-Korean Gap; Envy Isn't the Reason
To the Editor:
The article by a Chinese-American on race relations and the Los Angeles riots (Op-Ed, May 28) further propagates a myth propounded by the news media in this country: that blacks are resentful of Korean-Americans because of envy.
Blacks resent Korean-Americans because the latter are unfortunately extremely racist toward blacks and treat them like dirt.


How to Bridge the Black-Korean Gap; Trying to Be White
To the Editor:
In "Victims of Both Races" (Op-Ed, May 28), Judy Ching-Chia Wong writes that "society will never fully accept Asians as whites." I believe that is the root of our problem.
Asian-Americans, including Asian-Indians, equate success with being white, rather than with being people of color.
How can we start a dialogue with African-Americans when we are so hung up on trying to be white, which we are not?
Asian-American businesses treat their black customers with suspicion and indict them based on race even before a crime is committed.
How can any productive customer-supplier relationship flourish with no basic trust?
Why should African-Americans take this injustice from other people of color as well?


Look Anywhere, and See Design
GEORGE M. BEYLERIAN is one of those people who are unflaggingly enthusiastic about
things.
He gets excited about coffeepots and flatware, can rhapsodize about chairs and brings to the world of design a passion so genuine as almost to arouse suspicion.
Mr.
Beylerian, the vice president and creative director of the Steelcase Design Partnership, proposed an exhibition for the Vecta Company, a subsidiary of the Steelcase office-furniture company, based on Vecta's motto, "Industrial Elegance."
"Our inspiration was the 1934 Museum of Modern Art show 'Machine Art,' " said Victoria Milne, the show's curatorial coordinator.
"Now the world is sick of over-designed things. Most of the things in the show were not 'designed'; they are anonymous."


Earthmovers' Keeper; Designated Worm Tender Is State Champ
Consider the lowly worm. Taz Guishard did, and now he's a state champion.
Thirteen-year-old Taz, a seventh grader at Dr.
Alfred M. Franko Middle School here, is the appointed worm keeper for the after-school ecology club, Kids for the Earth.


A Corporate-Tax Approach To Curbing Executives' Pay
Of all the recent proposals on ways to rein in executive pay, the one included in the recently passed House unemployment bill was perhaps taken less seriously by business than just about any other.
Yet, for all its problems, its progress in the House underscores that the solution it proposes makes some economic and political sense.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
SOMETHING about the parent-child relationship brings out extreme emotions.
While parents talk about and glorify their feelings of love and protectiveness, their normal and often predictable moments of rage toward their children are seldom brought into the open.
It is as if acknowledging the intensity of their anger is an admission of inadequacy or failure.
But the ability of a child to bring out anger in parents can be a sign of normal development.
A toddler who is experimenting with greater independence will reject her parents occasionally, ignoring their pleas that she not spill the apple juice on the rug.
A teen-ager will leave his room a mess or decide to shave half his head as a way of declaring that he is no longer under a parent's control.
In both cases, the anger children engender in their parents is a confirmation that they have been successful, even though the price of that success may be high.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Sticky Sills
Q.
The windowsills under my
house plants are sticky, and so are the windows and some of the leaves.
Is this bad, and what does it mean? -- Melissa B. Colton, Harrisburg, Pa.
A.
It's certainly not good.
Sticky droppings that stain windowsills, windowpanes and sometimes the floor around house plants are a sign that insects are afoot.
What you're seeing is the honeydew of insects -- aphids, scale insects or both.
It's not uncommon to see this residue before you see the creatures that excrete it.
Aphids come in assorted colors, most commonly pale green and black, and tend to gather on new leaves or new stems.
Scale insects tend to be more solitary, appearing as whitish or brownish lumps along stems and leaf tops or bottoms, often along the veins.
Although these insects can be removed by hand, you might prefer applying a solution of soap and water once a week, which will wash away the residue as well as the bugs.
Soaps have long been an ally in the battle against bugs; whale-oil soap was a favorite of fruit growers in the 19th century.
A sudsy mix of any liquid soap may suffice, but insecticidal soaps, made for this purpose, are more reliable.
They are available at garden centers.
Some plants, however, are sensitive to soaps, so read the label first.
Floppy Crops
Q.
I love beans and other floppy crops, but have no patience with tying them onto poles.
Is there something better? -- Armand Schulte, Washington.
A.
Quite a few interesting structures are useful for supporting crops like tomatoes, squash, melons, beans and peas.
One of the simplest, if not among the most handsome, is a wire cage that goes around the plant.
A two- or three-foot wide cage four- to five-feet high will suffice for many plants.
A better looking support that is almost as easy to use as the wire cage is a tepee-style structure of three or four poles, about six- to nine-feet tall, tied together at the top.
Twine or wire placed horizontally around the poles often add plant support.
This system can be used for a row of plants by adding a thin pole across the top of the tepees.
Another support is an A-frame made of wood lattice, heavy twine or wire.
Decorative and practical supports for edible plants are discussed in "Trellising," a new book by Rhonda Massingham Hart (Storey Communications, $21.95 hard-cover, $10.95 paper; (800) 827-8673).
Dying Daffodils
Q.
I like daffodils but dislike the long period needed for their foliage to ripen.
Do any species mature faster, and if not, how long do I have to wait before cutting the leaves off? -- Se
lene Sheriff, Bethesda, Md.
A.
You're wise to be concerned; a hasty removal of daffodil foliage may prevent the formation of the bud for next year's flower.
"I don't know of any kinds of daffodils whose leaves mature faster than others," said Mary Lou Gripshover, executive director of the American Daffodil Society.
She did, however, suggest planting earlier-blooming varieties like Prologue or Court Martial.
"Most catalogues state approximately when the bulbs will flower," she said.
"But as for coping with the leaves, it's not a good idea to tie, braid or put a rubber band around ripening foliage since that decreases the leaf surface that's exposed to sunlight."
She said that you can remove all the leaves six weeks after the flowers have finished.
This interval was established after research was done in England by the Royal Horticultural Society.
In the study, leaves in several control beds were cut at various intervals, while in other beds the leaves were allowed to die by themselves.
"The experiment showed that the six-week time frame was sufficient for the leaves to ripen and the following year's flower buds to form," Ms.
Gripshover said.
If you enjoy these glorious spring bloomers, you might also enjoy belonging to the Daffodil Society.
Annual dues are $20.
For information, write the American Daffodil Society, c/o Mary Lou Gripshover, 1686 Grey Fox Trails, Milford, Ohio 45150.


Brighton-by-the-Sea Housing Proposal Endures a Stormy Hearing
Amid renewed pressure on developers to scale back their proposal once again, nearly 300 people crammed into a hearing room before the New York City Planning Commission yesterday to praise and decry plans to replace the historic Brighton baths with a large-scale housing development.
The rancorous daylong hearing at City Hall was the last public forum before the commission casts a crucial vote next month in the longstanding debate over the project -- one of the most contentious issues to come before the commission since it assumed expanded powers under the new City Charter.


Clarke Sets Return To Scene of the Cups
BOB CLARKE, who owned the city of Philadelphia during the Flyers' Stanley Cup years of the mid-70's, returned home today as a part-owner and senior vice president of the team.
Clarke spent 21 years with the Flyers, 15 as a player and 6 as general manager before he was fired in 1990.
He spent the past two seasons as general manager of the Minnesota North Stars.


Files Detail Aid to Bush By Nixon White House
In the early 1970's, even as President Richard M. Nixon became enveloped in the Watergate scandal, he helped elevate George Bush, then a former Texas Congressman, to national political prominence.
Now, as the June 17 break-in at the Watergate approaches its 20th anniversary, a review of thousands of files -- many made public in the last few years -- offers interesting new historical details of Mr.
Bush's connections to the Nixon Presidency before and after it was overtaken by Watergate.


Welfare Experiment Showing Signs of Success
A welfare experiment started four years ago in New York State is having significant success in providing welfare mothers with the work incentives needed to wean themselves gradually from dependency, a long-awaited study of the program has found.
The Child Assistance Program, which was started in seven upstate counties in 1988, encourages welfare mothers to work by allowing them to keep a large proportion of their welfare grants even though they are working.
Because it dangles a financial carrot and does not wield the punitive stick being used in other states, the program typifies the Cuomo administration's approach to welfare reform.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Skinny Puppy
The Ritz
With his face smeared with dirt or oil, his clothing tattered, some sort of gore dripping from his arms and a headset microphone catching his every growl and cackle, Skinny Puppy's singer, Ogre, staggered around the Ritz's stage on Tuesday night.
To one side was a kind of carousel with assorted detritus hanging from it, including severed heads; to the other, a rack that held a kind of harness.
When Ogre put his head in it, the video screen behind him showed his face being jolted, as if by electroshock or acceleration.
He was a post-apocalyptic pawn of technology.
The jolts could also have come from the music, made by Cevin Key on drums, Dwayne Goettel on keyboards and David Ogilvie at the mixing console, manipulating tapes and effects.
Skinny Puppy has dedicated itself to making the most brutal, grating, discordant noise that can be construed as rock.


A Year After Mt. Pinatubo, Tens of Thousands Remain Homeless


Every Canadian Can Get Quality Health Care; But at What Cost?
To the Editor:
Congratulations!
I just read your May 26 editorial on the Canadian health care system.
It is refreshing (and almost surprising) to read the case for the United States system against the Canadian system, after many years reading your news and comments about the cost of United States health care while you downplayed the top-notch quality of care provided by United States physicians and hospitals.
I have been in family practice for 41 years.
Before I moved to Washington, I was a delegate to the California Medical Association from Marin County.
I have heard officials of the Canadian Medical Association tell the real story about their system.
Whenever anyone outside the medical profession lauds another country's health care system, the problem of its cost is usually omitted.


JUDGE'S CONVERSION TO BRING KAYPRO LIQUIDATION
A judge said he would convert the troubled Kaypro Corporation from bankruptcy status, which affords the personal computer maker protection from its creditors, to bankruptcy status, which calls for the company to liquidate its assets.
Federal Bankruptcy Judge James Myers said last week that he would convert Kaypro from Chapter 11 bankruptcy to Chapter 7, which requires liquidation.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Iron Maiden
The Ritz
Iron Maiden moved up to the arena circuit years ago.
It showed when the band played a rare club show on Monday night at the Ritz, and its lead singer, Bruce Dickinson, was taken aback by a typical 1990's audience response: slam-dancing and fans climbing atop others' shoulders.
Mr.
Dickinson bad-mouthed the dancers, telling the audience to let climbers fall to the floor.
Later he apologized, saying he was only worried that the dancers might hurt other concertgoers.
It might seem a strange solicitude for someone who sang, as Mr.
Dickinson did, about war, genocide of American Indians, Satanism, death by hanging and death by torture, not to mention, in the title song of Iron Maiden's new album, "Fear of the Dark" (Epic).
But Iron Maiden, like the speed-metal bands it inspired, has a deep ambivalence about mayhem and death; it is simultaneously titillated and appalled, shouting out worst fears to savor the thrill and exorcise the terror.
The fans -- Mr.
Dickinson called them "my friends" -- are allied with the band against a cruel world.


Accounts
*
Aurrera, Mexico City, to Bozell Mexico, Mexico City, for the supermarket chain's advertising and corporate image accounts, previously handled by Publicidad Fener, Mexico City.
Bozell Mexico bested four other Mexico City-based shops in a review.
Billings were not disclosed.


Completion Of Homes Off
The completion of new homes plunged 8.5 percent in April, the Commerce Department said today, adding to signs of spreading weakness in the housing industry.
The sharp fall in the number of homes finished and ready for sale or occupancy followed revised increases of 2.2 percent in March and 5.2 percent in February and a rise of 2.2 percent in January, when housing was a key sector helping to pull the economy out of recession.


Error, Error, Error, Error, Error, Error
The night's score was 8-2, and it easily could have been worse.
The season's record is 29-29, and that, average and unsatisfying as it is, doesn't fully reflect the mediocrity of the Mets.
Concluding what has been a thoroughly unimpressive and terribly flawed road trip, the Mets lost to the Expos tonight in what has to qualify as their most odious effort of 1992.


Essay; Illness at Windsor
In "The Madness of George III," a new play at the Royal National Theater, a monarch suffering mental illness is maltreated by his doctors but manages to recover.
"The publicity the King's case drew," writes the social historian Roy Porter in the program, ". . . promoted greater public concern for the humane treatment of the mentally ill in the nineteenth century."
How does today's world react to the revelations by Andrew Morton, printed in apparently well-sourced detail in The Sunday Times, that Princess Diana, wife of Prince Charles, heir to the throne of Britain, suffers from bulimia -- an eating disorder characterized by secret binge eating and self-induced vomiting -- and repeatedly tried to kill herself?


4 of the Varied Faces In the Global Crowd At the Rio Gathering
Drawing 35,000 participants from all corners of the globe, the Earth Summit has attracted more than diplomats and international lawyers.
The varied faces in the crowd include a poet from Guatemala, an environmental minister from Botswana, a community organizer from Kentucky, and a high-school student from Belgium.
Here are their stories:


M. F. Bornstein, 73, Community Organizer
Margaret Frankel Bornstein, a longtime leader in Jewish organizations, died on Monday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
She was 73 years old and lived in Fair Lawn, N.J.
She died after a long illness, her family said.


Habib Remembered As a Blunt Diplomat Who Defied Cliches
Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State, entered a ringing defense of the American diplomatic corps today at a memorial service for his colleague, Philip C. Habib.
Mr.
Habib, who played a leading role in framing and carrying out American policy in the Middle East and Asia during a 30-year Government career, died last month at the age of 72 while on vacation in France.


Bengal Leaves Camp
Linebacker ALFRED WILLIAMS will miss most of the Cincinnati Bengals' two-week mini-camp because of a condition that causes an irregular heartbeat.
The Cincinnati Enquirer reported yesterday that Williams has a congenital condition known as Wolfe-Parkinson-White syndrome.


Power Agency's Revenue Bonds
The Northern California Power Agency is tentatively offering $197.1 million in Hydroelectric Project No. 1 revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.44 percent for an issue due in 2023 through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the tax-exempt refunding issue also had shorter maturities, with yields ranging from 3 percent in 1993, 5.1 percent in 1997, 5.9 percent in 2002, and 6.3 percent in 2007 and 2007.
Another long-term issue maturing in 2012 was priced to yield 6.42 percent.


John J. Martin, 57, Insurance Executive
John J. Martin, a senior vice president at the Aetna Life and Casualty Company and a national spokesman for the insurance industry, died on Sunday at his home in Suffield, Conn.
He was 57 years old.
He died after a 13-month battle with brain cancer, said Elizabeth Krupnick, a spokeswoman for Aetna.


Beating Swords Into Plowshares


If the House Picks the President
What if none of the candidates for President win in November?
In a three-way standoff, the House would decide.
But first it needs rules to govern its voting.
It is time to start preparing -- well before the election.
The House has elected two Presidents, in 1801 and 1825.
Both decisions were highly contentious, and a new one would surely be so.
Students of politics identify sound ways to reduce the prospect of a damaging deadlock.
Yet House Speaker Thomas Foley shows no interest.
He is said to fear that merely to open the question helps Ross Perot.
That's no excuse.


BRITISH ENGINEERING MERGER MOVES FORWARD
The TI Group P.L.C., the British engineering company, claimed victory yesterday in its hostile bid of $:500 million, or $920 million, for the Dowty Group P.L.C., a rival engineering and aerospace company.
"This is a merger for growth that creates the second-largest engineering company in the U.K. and one of the biggest in Europe," TI's chairman, Christopher Lewinton, said.
TI said that it had received 55.4 percent of Dowty's total share capital in acceptances from stockholders when the bid closed but that more would be coming.
Dowty is the second British engineering company to fall victim to a hostile takeover within a year.
The Hawker Siddeley Group P.L.C. earlier fell victim to BTR P.L.C., the industrial conglomerate.


BRUNO'S LEAVES AMERICAN FARE VENTURE WITH KMART
Bruno's Inc. said yesterday that its venture with the Kmart Corporation in American Fare hypermarket stores was being terminated and that Kmart would assume full ownership of the three stores.
Bruno's said the transaction will result in a charge against its after-tax earnings of about 13 cents a share, or $10.8 million, for the year ending on June 27.


Britain Says Rudolf Hess Acted Alone
British files made public today seemed to settle a 51-year-old riddle by confirming that Hitler's deputy, Rudolf Hess, kept secret from the Fuhrer the plans for his baffling solo flight to try to make peace with Britain in May 1941.
But more British papers are still being withheld.
Hess bailed out of his Messerschmitt-110 a few miles from the Duke of Hamilton's estate near Loch Lomond in Scotland on May 11, 1941.
In a meeting shortly afterward with the Duke, considered by some to have been a German sympathizer, Hess proposed a peace settlement that would leave Europe to the Germans and most of the British Empire to Britain.


Court Nominee Splits Advocates Of Civil Rights
The Congressional Black Caucus has begun a campaign to defeat a nominee for the Federal appeals court in Atlanta because he favors the death penalty.
The nomination of Edward E. Carnes to fill the seat of Judge Frank M. Johnson Jr. on the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit has divided civil rights proponents in a dispute that recalls the intensity of the one over Clarence Thomas's nomination to succeed Thurgood Marshall on the United States Supreme Court.


Reviews/Dance; The Border Between Reality and Allegory
Raising her arms at the beginning of "The Other" on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, Julie Kent poignantly expressed youthful longings.
Throughout her debut performance as the heroine in American Ballet Theater's production of Agnes de Mille's new work to Schubert songs and piano music, Ms.
Kent emphasized her character's delicacy and vulnerability.
Victor Barbee once again played her lover, and Carld Jonassaint made his debut as his rival.
When the choreography required Mr.
Jonassaint to be a dapper intruder upon the scene, he was convincingly sophisticated.
He was less effective when he had to be overtly menacing.


TEHERAN HANGS 4 FOR RIOTING IN MAY
Four people charged with arson and "pillage of state property" were executed in Mashad today after being arrested for taking part in the largest anti-Government demonstration since the 1979 revolution, the Iranian radio reported.
Squatters protesting forced evictions by city authorities in Mashad, 580 miles east of Teheran, set fire to Government buildings and burned copies of the Koran in a night of riots on May 29 that reportedly left two dead, hundreds wounded and 300 arrested.


Europe Set Back Again on the Road to Unity
With the European Community still shaken by Denmark's rejection of a treaty on closer unity last week, moves toward economic union suffered a new setback early today when Germany, Britain and France refused to increase aid to the 12-nation bloc's four poorest members.
The $66 billion aid package proposed by the community's Executive Commission was aimed at lifting living standards in Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece so that their economies would be ready to take part in creation of a single regional currency by 1999.


Gotta Have a Gimmick? These People Can Help
A licensee's search for new product tie-ins can last a lifetime, or sometimes beyond.
The makers of leather jackets, cowboy boots and beer have all persuaded Harley-Davidson Inc., the motorcycle maker, to lend its name.
But when a maker of gravestones asked to use its distinctive logo, the company decided that licensing should stop at the cemetery gate.
After the licensing industry's first annual sales decline on record, and several costly merchandising flops, apprehensive licensees have now hit on a novel idea: Why not come up with products that actually have some practical use?


Fiddling With the Sound at Avery Fisher Hall
After six months of taking measurements, interviewing musicians and experimenting with different designs and materials, the New York Philharmonic and Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts have settled on the basics of a plan to alter the stage acoustics at Avery Fisher Hall.
The acoustician on the project is Russell Johnson of Artec Consultants, and the architect is John Burgee, who worked on the hall's last renovation, in 1976.
Avery Fisher Hall's acoustics have troubled musicians and listeners ever since it opened in 1962 as Philharmonic Hall.
And although the 1976 renovation was considered an improvement, critics continued to complain of an overly bright brass sound and a weak bass.
Musicians have also consistently complained that they could not hear each other during performances.
Kurt Masur began experimenting with the stage sound -- hanging diffusion panels during rehearsals, and putting the basses on risers -- as soon as he accepted the directorship of the orchestra.


Events: Rich Crop Of Garden Tours
Talks and Tours
Parrish Art Museum, 25 Job's Lane, off Main Street, Southampton, L.I.; (516) 283-2118.
The museum, and the Horticultural Alliance of the Hamptons, are sponsoring a two-day program, which includes a symposium and tours of private gardens.
Lectures on such topics as ornamental conifers to fragrance gardens will be held from 10:15 A.M. to 7 P.M. on Saturday, along with a plant sale from 11:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Self-guided tours of local gardens take place from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. on Sunday.
Tickets for both days, $100 ($60, members); for Saturday, including symposium and sale only, $75 ($45, members).
Reservations are suggested.
Garden Visits
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard
, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
The garden is offering two day trips by bus.
The first, on July 16, will visit two private perennial gardens in Connecticut.
Fee, $85 ($77, members).
On July 21, the destination will be five day-lily gardens on Long Island.
For both, buses leave the garden at 8:30 A.M. and return at 5:30 P.M.
Fee, $72 ($65, members).
Advance registration is required, and participants are expected to bring their own lunches.
An exhibition of medicinal and economically valuable plants from the tropical rain forest, and research projects run by the garden's scientists, runs through Oct. 25 in the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Tuesday through Friday; 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
Admission: $3; $2 for students, children ages 6 to 16 and those 62 and older; no charge on Saturdays from 10 A.M. to noon.
Japanese Gardens
John P. Humes Japanese Stroll Garden, Dogwood Lane and Oyster Bay Road, Mill Neck, L.
I.
; (516) 676-4486.
A workshop on the philosophy and design of a Japanese-style garden will be held on June 8 from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The program includes a tour of the garden and a tea-ceremony demonstration.
Fee, $30 ($25, members).
Reservations required.
Garden History
Horticultural Alliance of the Hamptons, Bridgehampton Community House, Main Street, off School Road, Bridgehampton, L.I.; (516) 537-2223.
Robin Karson, a garden historian, will speak about the era of great estate gardens in America, from 1897 to 1939, at a meeting of the alliance at 7:30 P.M. tomorrow.
Admission: $5 (members, no charge).


CUOMO WON'T VETO REDISTRICTING BILL
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he planned to sign the Congressional redistricting plan approved by the State Legislature.
He then denounced the plan, saying he would urge the Justice Department to revise it by creating another district with a Hispanic majority.
After Mr.
Cuomo signs the measure, it will be sent to the Justice Department for clearance under the Voting Rights Act, the Federal law that protects the representation of minority voters.
Mr.
Cuomo's stance puts extra pressure on the Bush Administration, which has been courting Hispanic voters, to force revisions in the Congressional districting plan.
Best of 2 Worlds
Although officials at the Justice Department said today that they could not predict how they would rule on the New York plan until it got to them, they may find themselves hard pressed to ignore an argument by the Democratic Governor that the plan sent from Albany could be redrawn to increase the influence of Hispanic voters.


Samuel S. Walker, 65; Led Publishing House
Samuel S. Walker, the founder and president of the New York publishing house that brought John le Carre's first three novels to America, has died in a boating accident near his home in Stonington, Conn.
He was 65 years old.
Mr.
Walker disappeared while kayaking alone in Long Island Sound on May 29.
His body, washed ashore, was discovered several miles away by a fisherman on June 7.


Victim's Family Threatens Suit Against L.I. Girl
Joseph Buttafuoco will sue for civil damages if a teen-ager charged with shooting his wife sells her account to a Hollywood producer, Mr.
Buttafuoco's lawyer said today.
The lawyer, Marvyn Kornberg, also said he was prepared to go to court to help the Nassau County District Attorney's office increase bail for the youth, Amy Fisher, 17 years old, of Merrick, or have her $2 million bail suspended.
That action would force her to remain in jail.
The prosecutor's office said, however, that it had no plans to try to modify Miss Fisher's bail, which is the highest ever imposed on a criminal defendant in Nassau.


Executive Reveals Decision On Ziegler
A high-ranking member of the Board of Governors confirmed last night that National Hockey League President John Ziegler has been asked to leave office by Sept. 30, before the beginning of the next season.
"It's true and there has been no decision yet about a replacement," said the executive, who spoke on the condition he not be identified.
He suggested that the office of presidency might be combined with the office of chairman of the Board of Governors.


Paramount Has a Profit
Paramount Communications Inc., the motion picture and publishing company, said yesterday that it earned $28.3 million, or 23 cents a share, in the second quarter in contrast to a $55 million loss in the 1991 quarter.
Sales rose 6.9 percent, to $927.9 million from $868.1 million, in the quarter, which ended on April 30.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Balanced Budget Proposal Termed Harmful by Clinton
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said today that he would oppose a proposal for a balanced budget amendment now before Congress because it would place too many restrictions on Government spending.
"The people who say they can just raise taxes and cut spending and balance the budget are only giving you a prescription for a worse recession," Mr.
Clinton said in an interview with a Detroit television station, one of several remote radio and television interviews he conducted from the Governor's mansion here.


Pop Concerts Shake Off Last Summer's Malaise
With summer about to take center stage, the seasonal crush of pop concerts is on.
The Grateful Dead will play Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., on Sunday and Monday, and U2, Guns 'n' Roses and Metallica will follow them to the stadium in the next two months.
Bruce Springsteen, meanwhile, will kick off a six-city North American tour with 11 concerts at the Brendan Byrne Arena in the same complex starting July 23.
That such big names are even touring this season qualifies as a positive sign.
Last summer was the worst in memory for live pop performances.
Stadium tours were virtually nonexistent as many of the bigger acts in rock chose to stay home, postponing record releases and tours in the hope that the faltering economy would improve this year.


Not Just A Big Glove Made Small
"MOST women's hands are proportionately thinner, longer and less square than men's, so gloves slip around," Nancy Phillips said.
She should know.
Under the motto "Strong women building a gentle world," her company, Womanswork, makes work gloves exclusively for female hands.
"They're not just men's gloves made smaller," Ms. Phillips said.


Shooting of Newark Suspect, 17, Leads to Widening Police Inquiry
An investigation into the shooting of a 17-year-old suspected of driving a car stolen from a police officer's mother widened today.
Officials focused on nine officers who may have been at the scene or may have known of the incident but failed to report it.
Police officials are trying to determine whether one or more officers fired at the youth and whether others tried to cover up the incident, which occurred early Tuesday but did not come to the attention of department officials until hours after the shooting.


A Little Night Fun For Stephen Sondheim
Stephen Sondheim isn't known primarily as a purveyor of Broadway froth and fun.
But a giddy playfulness was the dominant mood of last night's gala benefit, "Sondheim: A Celebration at Carnegie Hall," a fund-raising event for the hall.
The event was taped for the PBS series "Great Performances" and recorded by RCA Records.
The show featured more than three dozen performers of varying luminosity, including Liza Minnelli, Bernadette Peters, Patti LuPone, Glenn Close and Madeline Kahn.
Paul Gemignani, a longtime associate of Mr.
Sondheim, conducted the American Theater Orchestra.
It was directed and choreographed by Scott Ellis and Susan Stroman, the team that put together the hit Off Broadway revue of songs by John Kander and Fred Ebb, "And the World Goes 'Round," and worked together on the New York City Opera production of "A Little Night Music."


Still Punishing Haitian Victims
Only one consistent principle seems to drive the Bush Administration's approach to Haiti: Make life harder for ordinary Haitians -- whether they are struggling to survive at home, escape by sea or keep up hope in barbed-wire refugee camps.
Has America grown so impotent or indifferent that it will not face down the thugs who hijacked Haiti's infant democracy last September?
Has the lamp of liberty so dimmed that desperate Haitians now cannot be granted the same temporary safe haven offered to Cubans, Dominicans, Liberians, Kuwaitis and other uprooted peoples?


Poll Finds Skepticism in U.S. About Earth Summit
Although Americans put a high priority on environmental issues, they are skeptical about whether President Bush will accomplish much at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro this week.
Only 9 percent of those surveyed in a CBS News poll conducted from May 27 to May 30 said they expected the meeting to produce substantial results to help solve the world's environmental problems.
Forty-seven percent expected the meeting would help a little, but 35 percent said they felt the session would have little or no effect.


Every Canadian Can Get Quality Health Care
To the Editor:
"Canada's No Medical Model" (editorial, May 26), comparing the United States and Canadian health care systems, once again misses the point.
Canada is not seeking to be a model, nor are we trying to export our health care system to the United States. (These days we are having enough difficulty exporting our goods to the United States!)
By distorting fact and citing obscure sources you discredit not only our system but also the intelligence of your readers.
Skewed numbers on demographics, aging or innovation skirt what is, for Canadians, the fundamental issue: everyone in Canada has access to quality health care.


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDRA PENNEY, the editor in chief of Self magazine, said yesterday that she can hardly keep up with the flood of faxes and letters deluging her in Rio de Janeiro, where she is attending the Earth Summit this week.
The June issue of the magazine contains a request that readers sign and return a pledge that states: "I pledge to make the Earth a secure and hospitable home for present and future generations."
Ms.
Penney promised to deliver the responses to MAURICE STRONG, the secretary general of the summit and the author of the pledge, which has been disseminated around the world by the United Nations.
So on Tuesday, she handed him 42,000 signatures, "and that's after only one week on the newsstands," she said.
"The fax machines in our office are overwhelmed. One man from Queens delivered 1,000 signatures. We've gotten responses from Japan and New Zealand. We expect to get 200,000 in all."


Every Canadian Can Get Quality Health Care; Our Problem
To the Editor:
"Canada's No Medical Model" (editorial, May 26) is not at all helpful for a solution to United States health care problems.
While the figures for Canada may be true, they do not match the data you cite for the United States.
More relevant statistics for the overall quality of medical care are live births per 1,000, maternal deaths, mortality (crude) per 1,000 of population and expected longevity.
The 1991 United Nations Demographic Yearbook reports infant mortality at 9.9 deaths per thousand for the United States, against 7.2 for Canada.
It should be noted that the United States death rate for whites was 8.5, still higher than Canada's, against 17.6 for blacks (Statistal Abstracts of the United States, 1991).
United States differences for maternal deaths, 5.9 for whites and 19.5 for blacks, are even more striking.


Board Delays a Vote On AIDS Education
Angrily discussing how specific sex and AIDS education in the public schools should be, members of the New York City Board of Education yesterday debated a new curriculum to help teach elementary-school children about AIDS, but they decided to delay a vote on adopting the document for two weeks.
The teaching guide is controversial because it allows teachers who feel confident about the maturity of their classes to tell children as early as the fourth grade about the use of condoms and as early as the fifth grade about the varieties of sex that can transmit AIDS, including anal sex.


Theater in Review
Bundy  Samuel Beckett Theater 412 West 42d Street Clinton Manhattan Through June 21 By Dan Metelitz; directed by Seth Gordon; sound by Aural Fixation; lighting by Paul Palazzo; set by Allen Moyer; costumes by Yoko Metelitz; production manager, Paul King.
Presented by MMM Inc.
WITH: Mr.
Metelitz.
Most of the violence in Dan Metelitz's "Bundy" seems to drop from the ceiling onto the stage, or to pour out of big unseen loudspeakers.
As for the real violence of Theodore Bundy's life -- his serial killings of young women and girls in various states, and his death in a Florida electric chair in 1989 -- that is largely reduced to talk, reminiscence and a steady rhythm of broadcast shrieks and cries.
Mr.
Metelitz, who stars in his one-character play under Seth Gordon's direction, wants to give the audience some insight into the tortured and confused soul of the serial killer in 75 minutes.


Zmeskal's Rise to Top Can Be Interrupted by a Fall
If it seems virtually certain Kim Zmeskal will emerge as the leading female qualifier on the United States Olympic gymnastics team through the trials starting tonight in Baltimore, bear in mind what happened to Kristi Phillips four years ago.
As the overwhelming favorite to lead the team into the Seoul Olympics, Phillips performed miserably in the trials and finished in eighth place, as second alternate.
Then, in a memorable response to a question -- "If you could change anything now, what would it be?" -- she answered, "I'd injure two people."


Cathy E. Bennett, Who Pioneered Jury-Selection Method, Dies at 41
Cathy E. Bennett, who pioneered new strategies for picking and persuading juries, died Tuesday at her home in Galveston, Tex.
She was 41 years old.
She died of breast cancer, her family said.


Briggs's Golden Dream Gets Derailed
As other boxers paced nervously in the hotel lobby, anticipating their coming bouts at the United States Olympic boxing trials here, Shannon Briggs, one of the country's best amateur fighters, sat in a hotel room with his brother and a friend, trying to concentrate on a game of Monopoly.
"I'm great at this game," Briggs said, clutching a wad of Monopoly money.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The television evangelist Pat Robertson withdrew his $6 million offer for United Press International, insuring the end of the bankrupt news service.
U.P.I. said that if additional money for operations were not found, it would close Friday.  [ D1. ]
Hearst may have taken on more than it bargained for in bringing in D. Claeys Bahrenburg 27 months ago to take over its huge magazine business.  [ D1. ]


Dinkins Meets Hispanic Leaders
Mayor David N. Dinkins held a peace parley with eight Hispanic members of the City Council yesterday, trying to convince them that his administration is responsive to the problems of Spanish-speaking city residents.
After the hour-and-a-half meeting, the participants said they still had disagreements, but that they would meet again in two weeks.


June Louin-Tapp; Professor, 62
Dr.
June Louin-Tapp, a professor at the University of Minnesota's Institute of Child Development, died last Thursday in Osnabruck, Germany, while there for a two-month stay as a visiting professor at the University of Osnabruck.
Dr.
Louin-Tapp, a resident of Minneapolis, was 62 years old.
She died suddenly after a brief illness, said Richard Weinberg, director of the institute.


Owners Take Sides as Vincent Dispute Heats Up
Major league baseball owners came to New York this week with the sale of the Seattle Mariners as their No. 1 priority.
But yesterday it became increasingly evident that the proposed sale and other issues were being overshadowed at the game's quarterly business meetings by a bitter internal dispute over an aborted attempt to diminish the powers of the commissioner.
The owners, meeting in separate league sessions, stopped short of taking anything more formal than straw votes on the Mariners in order to hear explanations of what one club official described Monday as "the putsch that failed."


Tall Ships to Sail Nationally on Public TV
The procession of tall ships scheduled as the highlight of the Fourth of July weekend activities celebrating the 500th anniversary of the journey of Columbus is to be broadcast nationally on public television, via WNET-Channel 13.
The station stepped in this week to become the official broadcaster for Operation Sail, the group organizing the weekend events, after negotiations with the national broadcast networks fell through.


Mass-Marketing to a Nation That Thinks Middle-Aged
AMERICA is becoming a nation of middle-aged consumers -- not chronologically, but psychologically -- according to a new report that asserts the shift has profound implications for consumer marketing.
In the report, Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, a New York agency with $210 million in billings from clients like Lorillard, Ralston Purina and Trans World Airlines, makes the case that the attitudes and opinions of younger and older consumers are converging.


How to Bridge the Black-Korean Gap
To the Editor:
I am pleased to read in "Bridges Between Blacks and Koreans" (editorial, May 18) about Mayor David N. Dinkins's efforts over the last year and a half to help build stronger relations between Asian-Americans and African-Americans in New York City.
Two weeks ago, I visited Los Angeles in the wake of the disturbances in that city.
In addition to listening to the concerns of Korean-Americans who suffered property loss and damage, I met with Mayor Tom Bradley and his Human Relations Commission chairman, among others.


Home Video
A Cheaper Tape
The rapid drop in price of many videocassettes from $20 to under $15 over the last year raises the possibility of further reductions.
Could there be, for instance, a $10 movie?
The answer is yes, but there is a catch.
Rank Video Services America, the largest tape duplicator in the country, is putting movies on tape using a process that could lower the cassette price to $9.95.
The problem is that the video and audio quality are not as high as on standard tapes.


Executive Changes
CAMPBELL SOUP CO., Camden, N.J., appointed Gary S. Moss vice president of marketing services for its North and South America unit and president of the company's in-house advertising division.
EGON ZEHNDER INTERNATIONAL, New York, an executive search firm, named A. Daniel Meiland chief executive and chairman of the executive committee.


OLYMPICS: Barcelona Profile; Oh to Be Gifted and Swimming for Spain
When he finally arrives in Barcelona next month for the Summer Olympics, Martin Zubero will speak to no one unless the caller happens to be the King of Spain -- an occasional dinner partner.
"Every day, it's always somebody," Zubero complained recently.
"I won't talk to anyone when I get over there. The journalists don't have my phone number and the spectators are not allowed on the pool deck or in the village."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Becker Bows Out Boris Becker made an early exit from the important pre-Wimbledon Queen's Club grass court tournament yesterday in London, losing in straight sets to Christo Van Rensburg of South Africa, 6-4, 6-3, in a second-round match.
Sixth-seeded Ivan Lendl was also eliminated in the second round, losing by 7-6 (9-7), 3-6, 6-1 to Patrick Kuhnen of Germany, ranked 98th in the world. (AP) McEnroe Holds On for Victory: John McEnroe won a marathon second-set tie breaker and defeated fellow American Jim Grabb, 6-2, 7-6 (9-7), in the second round of the Continental Grass Courts Championship in Rosmalen, the Netherlands. (AP) Catrina Wins P.S.A.L.
Title: Romanian-born Cornel Catrina of the Cardozo High School in Queens captured the Public Schools Athletic League tennis title over Kunj Majmudar, a New Dorp High School freshman, yesterday at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadow.
Severe back pain forced Majmudar to default with the score at 6-0, 5-7, 2-0.
With his victory Catrina increased his P.S.A.L.-leading career singles record to 78 victories and 2 losses in four years.
BOXING Brooklyn Fighter Wins Welterweight Stephan Johnson of Brooklyn scored a fourth-round victory over Willy Wise of Westbury, L.I., last night in the main event of an eight-match boxing card before 2,842 fans at the Paramount.
Johnson (18-4-1) moved Wise (13-1-2) into a corner with about 1 minute left in the fourth and connected with a series of unanswered combinations.
A right hook, followed by a right uppercut, stunned Wise and prompted the referee, Joe Santarpia, to stop the fight at 2:02.
In another bout, Tom Johnson continued his climb up the featherweight ranks by stopping the former International Boxing Federation bantamweight champion, Kelvin Seabrooks (29-2-1), in seven rounds.
TRACK AND FIELD 200-Meter to Lewis Carl Lewis nipped Floyd Heard at the tape to win the 200-meter dash in the Indy Games last night in Indianapolis in a final tune-up for next week's Olympic trials.
Lewis won in 20.43 seconds to 20.44 for Heard, a teammate on the Santa Monica Track Club. (AP) FENCING Lofton Keeps Title Michael Lofton won his second straight men's saber title and Peter Westbrook, a bronze medalist in 1984, won a fifth trip to the Olympics last night at the national championships in Dolton, Ill.
Westbrook, 40 years old, of New York, is the 12th American to compete in five Olympics.
He joins Lofton of New York, Steve Mormando of Dover, N.J., Robert Cottingham of Orange, N.J., and John Friedberg of New York on the saber team.
The saber is the only fencing event that the United States qualified for as a team.
Lofton, Mormando and Cottingham will compete for individual sabre honors in the Barcelona Olympics. (AP)


Brighton Beach Development Project Stirs Angry Hearing


People
*
Steve Speier, 43 years old, was named president and chief operating officer at Taylor Smith, Houston.
He was previously president at Penny &amp; Speier, Houston. *
Peter Mitchell, vice president and management supervisor at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc., New York, was promoted to senior vice president of account management.


5 Bus Lines And Unions Settle Strike
A three-day strike at five privately owned bus companies that stranded 225,000 riders in areas of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx was settled late last night, and company and union officials said normal service would resume for this morning's rush hour.
Representatives of the companies and the more than 2,000 drivers, mechanics and dispatchers who walked off the job early Monday morning said at 11:05 P.M. that they had resolved the pension and health-benefit issues that had caused earlier talks to break off and the strike to begin.


Polonia's Beauty Contest Bridges a Cultural Gap
INSIDE the Polish National Home in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, on Saturday night, seven young immigrant women flaunted their faces, figures and personalities for the title of Miss Polonia 1992, an honor that would confer $200 and the privilege of representing Greenpoint's close-knit Polish community at assorted banquets and parades.
There was Magdalena Skowronska, 18 years old, in a black sequined hint of a dress, who immigrated nine years ago and recently finished sixth in competition to be Miss Barbizon of Rego Park, Queens ("I do this all the time," she said).
There was Eliza Majewska, a 22-year-old blonde whose recent arrival date -- in March -- was sure to win her points.
In retrospect, however, the winner seemed inevitable.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Quayle, on Long Island, Puts Cuomo in the 'Elite'
Yanking off his tie and rolling up his sleeves, Vice President Dan Quayle played basketball in his tassled loafers at a suburban youth center today and took a few more shots at what he calls the "cultural elite," this time including Gov.
Mario.
M.
Cuomo of New York among the ranks of the enemy.
Mr.
Quayle came to this mostly black village, a mix of picture-perfect homes and rundown housing, to speak of family values -- "mother and father and a child," as he put it -- and lambaste an establishment that he said mocked family, religion and patriotism.
His remarks echoed the theme of his speech on Tuesday before the Southern Baptist Convention in Indianapolis.


TRANSACTIONS
FOOTBALL National Football League
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Adrian Jones, cornerback.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Named Terry Bradway national scout.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Signed Chuck Evans, running back, Chris Cochrane, quarterback, Danta Whitaker, tight end, and Irvin Smith, cornerback.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Vincent Brown, linebacker, and Sam Gash, fullback.
Arena Football Leauge
ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Signed Bingo Williams, wide receiver-defensive back.
TAMPA BAY STORM -- Signed Shawn Faulkner, wide receiver-defensive back, and John Gainey, defensive back.
Canadian Football League
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Re-signed Dan Hunter, defensive back.
TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Released Mitch Browne, Tony Clark and Steve Roest, defensive linemen; David Bell, cornerback; Dan Fitcher and Joe Sweeley, receivers; Dan Fitcher, linebacker, and Mike Ruffa, tackle.


W.P.A. Design Lives On
FIFTY years after it was designed for the Works Progress Administration, a steel Art Deco chair is now being reproduced by Sloan Designs of Linden, Va.
The chair had been used in the cafes at the National Zoo in Washington.
Sloan Designs has also created a matching table, sized for a small city terrace or suburban patio.


THE EARTH SUMMITBush and Rio; President Has an Uncomfortable New Role In Taking Hard Line at the Earth Summit
Only a year after claiming his role as leader of the new world order, President Bush leaves Thursday for Brazil and an Earth Summit where opposition to his environmental policies threatens to produce the kind of embarrassing diplomatic wrangles that marred his recent trade mission to Japan.
But White House advisers, reflecting both Mr.
Bush's ideological opposition to regulation and the realities of campaign politics, say that Mr.
Bush is determined to take full election-year advantage of his uncomfortable new role, in which he is seen by many as global environmental spoilsport.


U.N. Peacekeepers Are Attacked Near the Bosnian Capital


Sylvan Furman; Mental Health Expert, 80
Sylvan Furman, a former state official and an expert on community mental health issues, died at his home in Manhattan on Tuesday.
He was 80 years old.
Mr. Furman died of cancer, said Rebecca Meiskin, a granddaughter.


Pact Is Shaping on Environmental Aid to Third World
Negotiatiors from rich and poor countries were moving tonight toward a multibillion-dollar agreement under which the industrialized nations would help the third world pay the extra costs of making sure that their economic development does not inflict irreparable damage on the world's fragile ecological systems.
Environment and development ministers from many of the 178 countries attending the Earth Summit will try to conclude the agreement at their first ministerial-level meeting on Thursday by seeking a compromise on the exact amount of new aid and on new steps to preserve the world's dwindling forests and fight pollution of the atmosphere.


Nets' Daly Simply Can't Get Enough Of Those Arduous N.B.A. Seasons
Any day now, the long and winding National Basketball Association season will officially end, and the two marathon finalists will conclude a nine-month continuum of wakeup calls, bus rides, plane trips, dozens of hotel check-ins, three or four weekly shootouts, battles with officials, skirmishes with news media and tense negotiations with late-night room service minutes after the kitchen has closed.
What began in the cool breeze of October finishes in the stifling air of June, and this, according to Chuck Daly, the recently named coach of the New Jersey Nets, is what it feels like to play 8 exhibitions, 82 regular-season games and 20-plus more in the playoffs:


U.S. to Require Wider Export Licensing
The Commerce Department plans to publish early next week the first list of foreign missile programs to which American exports will be discouraged, Administration officials said today.
Under tighter new rules, American companies will have to obtain export licenses for any sales, even for a box of Kleenex, to missile programs in Brazil, China, India, Iran, North Korea, Pakistan and South Africa.
Licenses will also be required for sales to missile programs run by any nation or company in the Middle East.


Minnie M. Nathanson, A Philanthropist, 83
Minnie Mazer Nathanson, a philanthropist involved in the founding of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 83 years old.
She died of lymphatic cancer, said her daughter, Bobbie Abrams of Manhattan.


Calendar: Boat Trip, Auction
Designs by Kahn  Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street; (212) 708-9400.
An exhibition of drawings, sketches, models and photographs of designs by the architect Louis I. Kahn (1901 - 1974) will start Sunday and run through Aug. 18.
Among Kahn's completed designs are the Yale University Art Gallery in New Haven and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif.
Hours: Friday to Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and people 65 and older; no charge for children 15 and younger; on Thursday from 5 to 9 P.M., there is a donate-what-you-wish policy for admission.
New York, River Views  Pier 83, 42d Street at the Hudson River; (212) 935-3960.
The Municipal Art Society Fellows will sponsor a boat trip along the Brooklyn, Queens and Manhattan waterfronts from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M. on Tuesday.
Tickets, $23 ($20, members).
Reservations required.
Benefit Auction  Westbeth Gallery, 55 Bethune Street (between West and Washington Streets); (212) 529-7579.
A 1930's quilt with a Dresden-plate design, a gingerbread house and silk clothing are among the items to be auctioned on Sunday from 3 to 6 P.M. to benefit the Crystal Quilt, an educational organization for women.
There will also be a fashion show and craft demonstrations.
Admission: $5.
On Wall and Floor  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
Eloy Koldeweij, an art historian from the University of Leiden in the Netherlands, will speak about gilt leather wall hangings on Wednesday at 6:30 P.M.
Fee, $15; $10, members; $5, students.
Newlywed Styles  Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street; (212) 606-0440.
A panel discussion on decorating, furnishings and collecting for newlyweds will be held on Monday at 6:30 P.M.
An auction of jewelry, silver, porcelain, furniture and decorative objects, with an emphasis on engagement and wedding gifts and furnishing a new house, will start on Wednesday at 6 P.M.
No charge.
Crafts in Queens  Queens County Farm Museum, 73-50 Little Neck Parkway off Union Turnpike, Floral Park, Queens; (718) 347-3276.
A fair, featuring wood, leather, cloth and ceramic crafts, will be held on Sunday from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
There will be demonstrations and tours of a 1772 restored farmhouse.
No charge.
Home of Washington Irving  Hudson River Museum of Westchester, 511 Warburton Avenue at Arthur Street, Yonkers; (914) 963-4550.
A free shuttle bus will operate between the museum and Sunnyside, the 19th-century home of Washington Irving, on Saturday and Sunday from 1 to 4 P.M.
The museum's current exhibition "Visions of Washington Irving," displays fine art, decorative objects and furniture from the 1800's and memorabilia from the author.
Museum admission: $3; $1.50 for people 11 and younger or 62 and older; free to members.
Sunnyside admission: grounds, $3; house, $3.
One Architect's Work  National Institute for Architectural Education, 30 West 22d Street; (212) 924-7000.
"Casa Ugalde," a show of photographs of a house in Barcelona, Spain, designed by the Spanish architect Jose Coderch, starts Tuesday and runs through July 17.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
No charge.


Reviews/Dance; A Jolly Old Romp, as Featherbrained as Ever
"Don Quixote," dance's equivalent of operetta at its most frivolous, returned to American Ballet Theater's repertory on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
It was as featherbrained as ever.
It was also lots of fun, thanks to a cast that knew the difference between rollicking and merely raucous humor.
Ever since Marius Petipa first choreographed it in Moscow in 1869, "Don Quixote" has been a jolly mess.
The plot focuses not upon the adventures of the woebegone hero of Cervantes's classic novel, but upon a comic love affair involving Kitri, an inkeeper's daughter, and Basil, a barber.
Many choreographers have added touches of their own to the work.
This staging by Vladimir Vasiliev includes choreography by Alexander Gorsky and Kasyan Goleizovsky as well as Petipa, and music by Cesare Pugni, Riccardo Drigo and Valery Zhelobinsky has been added to Ludwig Minkus's original score.
"Don Quixote" is something of a theatrical paella.


Jersey City Escalates Graffiti War; Proposed Law Would Take Names of Spray-Paint Buyers
A decade ago, Jersey City started a war against graffiti by banning the sale of spray paint to those under 18.
The campaign has been futile, officials say.
"Graffiti is out of hand," said Councilman Joseph Rakowski.
"We're losing the war. I know a guy who just painted his awnings white and by the next morning, they were all spray-painted. We've got to do something drastic."


Stone Walls Make Good Neighbors
"I GREW up with stone walls in Ireland," said Robbie Haldane, a 35-year-old landscape designer.
He was explaining his passion for stone and the dry walls he's built, traveling wherever he's summoned, since he arrived in the United States five years ago.
Mr.
Haldane uses no mortar in his walls, working in the tradition of his grandfather William Haldane, a landscape gardener on estates in Ireland.


Amdura Cannot Explain Big Jump in Stock Price
The Amdura Corporation said yesterday that it could not explain why its share price had been zooming upward.
But its big shareholders are taking steps to get in on the bonanza.
The Tulsa, Okla., company, whose shares leaped from $1.875 on June 1 to $8 on Tuesday, when the New York Stock Exchange halted trading, reported growing losses from its Harris Waste Management Group subsidiary.
Harris makes waste-management equipment and has been suffering from a combination of recession and the effect of new environmental rules.


TEXTRON PUTS CWC CASTINGS DIVISION ON THE BLOCK
Textron Inc., which makes helicopter and automotive components, said yesterday that it wanted to sell its CWC Castings division, a maker of auto camshafts and steel castings based in Muskegon, Mich.
Textron's automotive operations focus on interior and exterior parts and trim and fastener products.
"We feel that a company closer in operations to the CWC business may be able to make the business even more profitable," said a spokesman, Raymond W. Caine Jr.
He said the company had not found a buyer yet.
Textron, which bought CWC in 1956, has operations in aerospace technology, commercial products and financial services.


Britain Says Rudolf Hess Acted Alone
British files made public today seemed to settle a 51-year-old riddle by confirming that Hitler's deputy, Rudolf Hess, kept secret from the Fuhrer the plans for his baffling solo flight to try to make peace with Britain in May 1941.
But more British papers are still being withheld.
Hess bailed out of his Messerschmitt-110 a few miles from the Duke of Hamilton's estate near Loch Lomond in Scotland on May 11, 1941.
In a meeting shortly afterward with the Duke, considered by some to have been a German sympathizer, Hess proposed a peace settlement that would leave Europe to the Germans and most of the British Empire to Britain.


Citing Space Photos, Scientists Say Forests in the Northwest Are in Danger
A team of Government scientists mapping changes in the earth's surface says the latest satellite pictures show a surprising level of damage to the richest forests of the United States.
When compared particularly with the tropical rain forests of Brazil, the evergreen forests of the Pacific Northwest, although only a tenth the size, appear to be in danger of losing their biological vitality, the scientists said.


Public Education, Privatized
Can a new network of private schools serve as a model to improve American public education?
That's the goal of the Edison Project, brainchild of Christopher Whittle, the Tennessee entrepreneur.
He hopes to build 1,000 private schools educating two million students by the year 2010.
The goal is ambitious, and Mr.
Whittle is a welcome recruit to educational reform.
His plan could provide a shot of adrenaline to lackluster schools.
But the scale of this profit-oriented project raises concerns that it might drain strength from the public schools.


NEW TOYS TO BE BASED ON POPULAR CABLE TV PROGRAM
The Nickelodeon cable television network and Mattel Inc. said yesterday that they would introduce a line of toys based on characters from "The Ren and Stimpy Show." Mattel will design, manufacture and market the items, which will range from soft toys to collectibles.
Mattel said the toys will be available for the Christmas season.
The cartoon characters Ren Hoek, a scrawny Chihuahua, and his feline sidekick, Stimpy, are among the most popular cartoons of the 1990's, along with Fox Television's "The Simpsons." Since its was first shown, "The Ren and Stimpy Show" has doubled Nickelodeon's Sunday morning ratings and become among the MTV channel's most-watched shows.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; PEROT TAKES A TURN ON 'TODAY'
Two days after Governor Bill Clinton answered questions called in by viewers on the NBC "Today" program, Ross Perot is doing the same today from 7 A.M. to 8 A.M.
Before being posed to Mr.
Perot, the questions will be screened by a panel of operators, said Lynn Appelbaum, the program's spokeswoman.
The only criteria callers must meet to ask a question on the air is that their queries must concern "either public issues or personal issues that are deemed to be of national interest," she said.


Leonard V. Haber, 80, An Industrial Designer
Leonard V. Haber, a retired architect and industrial designer, died on June 4 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.
Mr. Haber died of heart failure, said a stepson, Robert F. Murchison.


Clifford O. Anderson; Executive, 89
Clifford O. Anderson, a former president of the Kinney Shoe Corporation, died on Sunday at his home in Bay Head, N.J.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Anderson graduated from the City College of New York in 1922.
He joined Kinney in 1931 as a buyer, and became the company's general merchandising manager in 1945 and its president in 1959.


Suit on Air Fare Cuts Raises Doubts
Several airline industry experts and lawyers said yesterday that Continental Airlines would have difficulty proving its charges that American Airlines cut fares in April with the intention of driving its competitors out of business.
Continental filed an antitrust suit on Monday in Federal District Court in Galveston, Tex., charging American with "predatory pricing." The suit claimed that American would be unable to make a profit on its new fares until one or more of its competitors was driven from the market.
Intent Must Be Proven


Walker Talks to Eagles
HERSCHEL WALKER talked with the Philadelphia Eagles this week about signing, but no decisions were made.
The Eagles' president, HARRY GAMBLE, said he and Coach RICH KOTITE met for two hours Tuesday with the 30-year-old running back.


Catemaco Journal; Magic That Gives Both God and Devil Their Due
Of the many concerns in Mexico about free trade with Canada and the United States, not the least is raised by the Infernal Goat.
The Goat, a small man of 41 who is also called Jorge Jauregui, makes a modest living by curing disease, casting spells and restoring sexual potency.
He does all this -- or claims to, anyway -- in a tiny room stocked only with dried tree bark, dead snakes in jars and bottles of a magic potion that looks like vegetable oil.


YELTSIN SAYS U.S. SEEKS ARMS PACT ASSURING AN EDGE
Less than a week before a summit meeting in Washington with President Bush, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia accused the United States today of seeking an advantage over his country in negotiations over further cuts in strategic nuclear weapons.
Speaking to senior military officers at the Russian Defense Ministry, Mr.
Yeltsin said he would resist Washington's efforts to eliminate heavy, land-based, multiple-warhead missiles -- the backbone of Russia's nuclear deterrent -- while the United States was allowed to preserve an advantage in sea-based missiles.


Churning the Editors at Hearst
In bringing in D. Claeys Bahrenburg to take over its huge magazine business, the Hearst Corporation, the historically conservative and white-glove publishing company, may have taken on more than it bargained for.
In just 27 months, Mr.
Bahrenburg has replaced 18 editors and publishers at Hearst's 14 publications, including those at Redbook, Esquire and its flagship title, Harper's Bazaar.
In what seemed a sudden decision, he also shut down Connoisseur after bringing in a new editor and investing heavily to promote its new image.


New Campaigns
*
Old Milwaukee beer, as expected, introduced a campaign to replace the Swedish Bikini Team, five actresses whose appearances in advertising provoked charges of sexism.
Television commercials by Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, are centered on two ordinary guys named Jack and Andy, lifelong friends who get together for male-bonding excursions like camping trips.
The spots carry the familiar theme, "It doesn't get any better than this."


Jacqueline Smith, 59, Producer Of Unconventional Soap Operas
Jacqueline Smith, a television producer who led ABC Entertainment's daytime programming to six consecutive years of top ratings from 1978 through 1983, died on June 3 at her home.
She was 59 years old and lived in Santa Monica, Calif.
She died of cancer, her family said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Picture Is Jumbled on Which Abortion Messages Can Get on TV
This spring, television stations reaching the Ninth Congressional District in southeastern Indiana broadcast commercials for an anti-abortion candidate that included photographs of dead, late-term fetuses.
But a Buffalo station rejected a much less explicit advertisement by the National Abortion Rights Action League showing the Statue of Liberty and a billowing American flag as a narrator's voice pleads to make "abortion less necessary" by encouraging sex education and birth control.


Trade Ruling May Benefit Foreign Auto Makers
A ruling by a bilateral free-trade panel could make it easier for foreign companies in Canada, including Asian auto makers, to export to the United States without paying duties.
The decision, announced Tuesday in Washington, was welcomed here as a step toward simplifying "domestic content" rules, over which the two countries have bickered for years.


A Theater Is Fined For Mislabeling Shows
Circle in the Square has become the first theater to be fined by the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs for failing to label as previews two of its shows that had not officially opened.
The theater, which is running two plays starring Al Pacino, agreed yesterday to sign an agreement to pay a $300 penalty.
"It was an inadvertent error," said Robert A. Buckley, the managing director of Circle in the Square, on Broadway at 50th Street.


A Plant Can Fend For Itself
YOUR house plants can water themselves.
Just plant them in a four-part ceramic pot invented by Laurence C. A. Schwartz: a glazed saucer, porous inner pot, glazed outer pot and a water well in between.
Moisture seeps by osmosis from the well into the inner pot, gradually wetting the soil.
Depending on air temperature and humidity, plants can be ignored for weeks.


Britain Says Rudolf Hess Acted Alone
British files made public today seemed to settle a 51-year-old riddle by confirming that Hitler's deputy, Rudolf Hess, kept secret from the Fuhrer the plans for his baffling solo flight to try to make peace with Britain in May 1941.
But more British papers are still being withheld.
Hess bailed out of his Messerschmitt-110 a few miles from the Duke of Hamilton's estate near Loch Lomond in Scotland on May 11, 1941.
In a meeting shortly afterward with the Duke, considered by some to have been a German sympathizer, Hess proposed a peace settlement that would leave Europe to the Germans and most of the British Empire to Britain.


Libya's Press Hints at Westward Turn
The official Libyan press, which unquestioningly echoes the views of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, has criticized the Libyan leader's call for Arab unity as a "mirage" and has proposed reconcilation with the West.
At a time when Libya is under United Nations sanctions for refusing to turn over Libyans suspected of helping blow up American and French airliners, it was unclear whether the press criticism represented genuine rebellion or was part of a plan by Colonel Qaddafi to repair his ties to the West.


Theater in Review
Anna, the Gypsy Swede  Theater for the New City 155 First Avenue, between 9th and 10th Streets East Village Manhattan Through June 28 By Viveca Lindfors; music by Patricia Lee Stotter; costumes by Franne Lee; lighting and set design by Vivien Leone.
Presented by Theater for the New City, Bartenieff-Field.
WITH: Ms.
Lindfors and Joseph C. Davies.
The title character of Viveca Lindfors's play, "Anna, the Gypsy Swede," is a kind of sentimentalized Swedish-American Mother Courage.
Dressed in rustic garb and with her unkempt gray hair tied up in a black handkerchief, she clomps about the stage dragging a cart filled with possessions and tells the story of her life in a burst of emotion that lasts nearly two hours, including an intermission.
That story begins with a parable of two mice who fell into a pail of milk.
One of them screamed for help and drowned, while the other began treading.
In the morning the mouse that treaded "found she was on top of butter," recalls Anna, who naturally identifies with the survivor.


SCHOLARS SCORN BUDGET PROPOSAL
Among policymakers, economists and good-government groups, the idea of using the Constitution to balance the Federal budget is a matter of intense debate.
But among scholars of the Constitution there is something approaching a consensus: it is not a very good idea.
From conservatives like Robert H. Bork, the former judge, teacher and Justice Department official, to liberals like Laurence H. Tribe, a Harvard law professor who helped lead the effort to defeat Mr.
Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court, the general view is that a budget-balancing amendment would be an empty promise that would demean the Constitution and invite chaos into the courts.


COMPANY NEWS
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP., Maynard, Mass., acquired 800 Software, Point Richmond, Calif., a software distributor.
No terms were disclosed.
GRAHAM COS., York, Pa., acquired Pozzoli S.p.A., an Italian maker of molded plastic containers.
Terms were not disclosed.


Bridge
Two finals began yesterday in the Pan-American Team Championships in Corpus Christi, Tex.
After 16 deals of a scheduled 64 in the Open Series, a Canadian team led a United States team by 23 imps.
In the Women's final at the same point, Colombia led another United States team by 15 imps.
In Open semifinal play Tuesday, Cliff Russell, Sam Lev, David Berkowitz, Larry Cohen, Peter Weichsel and Bob Levin won by 42 against a group led by Andy Goodman.
In the other semifinal, Ed Bridson, John Gowdy, Mark Molson, David Lindop, Geoff Hampson and Boris Baran, playing for Canada, won by 36 against a strong Brazilian squad.


WANG SUES COMPUTER MAKERS IN PATENTS CASE
Wang Laboratories Inc. said yesterday that it had filed lawsuits against Mitsubishi Electronics America Inc. and NMB Technologies Inc., accusing them of violating patents for computer memory components.
The suits were filed in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., where Wang last year won $3.3 million in damages for similar complaints against two other Japanese companies, the NEC Corporation and the Toshiba Corporation.
At issue are products called single in-line memory modules, designed to offer customers an easy way to expand personal computer memory.
Wang, based in Lowell, Mass., accused the companies of making, using and selling modules that infringed two Wang patents.


Capitalist-Style Layoffs Ignite Sabotage and Strikes in China
Worried by layoffs and rising prices, many Chinese workers seem increasingly disenchanted by the capitalist-style changes taking hold in shops and factory floors around the country.
As a result, for the first time since China began liberalizing its economy more than a dozen years ago, many ordinary citizens seem to be no longer agents of change but obstacles to it.
Workers in several cities have attacked factory directors who have tried to introduce market-oriented changes, and there are growing reports of strikes and acts of sabotage.


County in Florida Prices Debt Issue
A $127.7 million debt offering by Orange County, Fla., was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
The maximum yield at pricing was about 6.43 percent for a bond due in 2017, with another long-term issue due in 2010 priced to yield about 6.37 percent.


Brewers Sign Collegian
Florida State quarterback and outfielder KENNY FELDER has decided to give up football and has signed a contract with the Milwaukee Brewers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; POLL GIVES PEROT A CLEAR LEAD
In a three-way general election matchup, Ross Perot has moved to a clear lead over both President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton in the latest Gallup Poll.
In the telephone poll of 815 registered voters nationwide, conducted June 4 to 8, Mr.
Perot was supported by 39 percent, Mr.
Bush by 31 percent, and Mr.
Clinton by 25 percent.
The poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.


Martin Goodman, 84; Began Marvel Comics
Martin Goodman, who as founder and publisher for many years of Marvel Comics invented such popular characters as Captain America and Spiderman, died on June 6 at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 84 years old.
He also lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Goodman died of natural causes, said his son, Charles.


Daly Is a Father
The wife of golfer JOHN DALY gave birth to a 6-pound baby girl yesterday at Baptist Memorial Hospital-East in Memphis, Tenn., a spokeswoman for the hospital said.
Both BETTYE FULFORD and the baby girl were resting comfortably, said DANA ROBERTS.
She said the parents have not chosen a name for the infant yet.


Tennis Center Would Destroy Flushing Meadows Environment
To the Editor:
"Tennis Center Plan Benefits Environment," Bernard Haber's May 21 letter on the proposed National Tennis Center expansion in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, made me think I was reading an excerpt from George Orwell's "1984." Calling the tennis center expansion an environmental benefit is the choicest bit of "newspeak" I have encountered in some time.
What the proposal will do is irrevocably destroy what used to be Flushing Creek and its tidal connection to Flushing Bay.
The pitch-and-putt golf course at Flushing Meadows is one of the few natural-like areas in the northern half of the park.
In addition to having mature plantings that provide vital habitat to wildlife, it preserves the tidal connection that brings fresh water from the park's lakes to Flushing Bay, making for the brackish environment ideal for many estuarine fish and wildlife.


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times on Tuesday about the tips of chromosomes included an erroneous label.
The drawing depicted a single chromosome in the process of dividing into two chromosomes -- not a pair of chromosomes.


Motorcycle Venture Set
Bayerische Motoren Werke A.G. said Tuesday that it would build a less expensive motorcycle in a joint venture with Aprilia S.p.A. of Italy and Bombardier-Rotax G.m.b.H. of Austria.
The motorcycle will be designed and sold by BMW but powered by a 650-cubic-centimeter, one-cylinder engine from Rotax.


Greed Is Good No More, at Least Not at the Movies
For several years, Hollywood welcomed movies about greed and Wall Street.
But the major failure of "The Bonfire of the Vanities" in 1990 abruptly stranded film projects about high finance and low morality, with producers and executives insisting that moviegoers were no longer captivated by Wall Street.
As a result, Hollywood abandoned plans to film "Barbarians at the Gate: The Fall of R. J. R. Nabisco," the nonfiction best seller by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar, published in 1990, about the huge deal that culminated in the $25 billion sale of R. J. R. Nabisco in 1988.
Ray Stark, the producer of films including "Funny Girl" and "The Way We Were," had refused the demands of Columbia, with which he had an arrangement, to soften the hard-edged project.
Mr.
Stark took it to Home Box Office; the television company embraced it.


If Perot Were Black
Here's a question for Ross Perot's supporters: If he were black, would you vote for him?
If your answer is, "Why, you bet your cowboy boots I would!" then answer this: Where were you when Jesse Jackson ran for President?


Sports of The Times; Mark Bavaro Asks Browns: Trust Me
WHEN the Giants won Super Bowl XXV, their tight end, Mark Bavaro, seldom practiced that season.
His knees were too battered.
If he practiced too hard and too often, he knew that his knees would hurt too much for him to play in that week's game.
"Mark tells me when he can practice," Bill Parcells, then the Giants' coach, often said that season.
"I trust him."


Wasted Opportunity Haunting the Bulls
They let another one get away.
The Chicago Bulls knew it, and they couldn't forgive themselves.
Not tonight.
The Bulls had been this way before.
Friday night, in Game 2, with a lead that felt comfortable and about four minutes to play.


6-Year-Old in New Haven Shot in the Head on a Bus
A kindergarten pupil was shot in the head today and critically injured when the school bus taking him home was caught in gunfire between two groups of youths, the police said.
The police said the bus was on Frank Street, a narrow side street in the Hill section of the city, when shots blew out its rear window and a bullet hit the pupil, 6-year-old Cesar Sandoval, in the head.


Gunfire Shatters Peace and Lives In Washington
Michelle Royster rapped her knuckles on the witness stand, the taps echoing like a drum in the quiet courtroom this morning as she imitated the sound of bullets fired at her car last year.
"There was not a long pause," Miss Royster said, calmly recalling the July night when a woman in another car was killed in the same crossfire near the Capitol.
"I don't recall a stopping, a pure silence, just that I constantly heard shots."


Theater in Review
A Fresh of Breath Air  Playhouse 125 125 West 22d Street Chelsea Manhattan Through June 21 By Dale Stein; directed by Christopher Ashley; script and lyrics by Ms.
Stein; music by Charles Goldbeck and Ms.
Stein; set by Russell Metheny; lighting by Daniel MacLean Wagner; costumes by Sharon Lynch; production supervisor, Randy Norton.
Presented by Randy Norton, in association with Eclipse Enterprise Productions.
WITH: Ms.
Stein.
The main factor that separates a stand-up comic from a comic stage actor is one of material.
In the end, the former is always telling a joke while the latter is telling a story.
Dale Stein, an energetic and able performer, wants to make the leap in her one-woman show, "A Fresh of Breath Air." She has created a disparate group of five characters and brought them together in an ill-defined cafe belonging to one, Fifi Mouloir.
There is a loose narrative in which a silent and invisible writer interviews a faded actress while the others, including a street hustler and a spaced-out would-be singer, wander in and out of the cafe.
But narrative in itself is not a story.
And characters alone, as Pirandello pointed out, do not make a play.


Morris Kline, 84, Math Professor And Critic of Math Teaching, Dies
Morris Kline, a professor of mathematics who was a longtime critic of the way mathematics was taught, died early yesterday at Maimonides Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 84 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He had been in declining health, and his death was caused by heart failure, said his wife, the former Helen Mann.


A Miniature Rose by No Other Name
WHAT do Whoopi Goldberg, Barbara Bush, Bing Crosby and Christian Dior have in common?
They all have roses named for them.
The new Whoopi hybrid is a miniature that will grow only to 16 inches in height.
Its bicolor flowers -- white petals with red edges -- grow no bigger than a quarter.


At Bat, Winfield Shows Who's Boss
Dave Winfield was bursting to say it: how he was back at Yankee Stadium and playing against the team George Steinbrenner is trying to run once again.
Winfield is older, wiser, happier -- and still stinging line drives, this season, his 20th in the majors, for the Toronto Blue Jays.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  STICKS TO HIS MISSILES
The Russian President accused the United States of seeking an advantage in talks about cuts in long-range nuclear weapons.
Speaking less than a week before a summit meeting with President Bush, Mr.
Yeltsin said he would resist Washington's effort to eliminate the backbone of Russia's deterrent while keeping its sea-based missiles.
A1
U.S. aides say Yeltsin comments are typical arms-talks posturing.
A8  CHINA'S ANTI-CAPITALIST BACKLASH
Many Chinese workers seems disenchanted by capitalist-style changes in shops and factories.
Worried by layoffs and rising prices, they now seem to be obstacles to change instead of agents of it.
A1  BUSH IN RIO: NO DAY AT THE BEACH
News Analysis: President Bush leaves for the Earth Summit in Brazil today, facing opposition to his environmental policies that threatens to produces embarrassing diplomatic wrangles.
A1  PROGRESS ON GREEN CASH
Negotiators from rich and poor countries made progress toward a multibillion-dollar agreement on the environment.
Talks are continuing on the plan, under industrial nations would help poor ones pay the extra cost of insuring that their economic development does not inflict irreparable environmental damage.
A12
A few of the thousands of voices at the Earth Summit.  A12  NEW WORRIES ABOUT FORESTS
Giving new ammunition to those seeking to curb logging in the Pacific Northwest, a team of Government scientists said satellite photos show that the Northwest forests might already be more damaged than the Amazon rain forest.
A13
Americans are skeptical of results from the Earth Summit.
A13  EUROPEAN UNION SET BACK AGAIN
Britain, France and Germany refused to increase aid to the European Community's poorest members.
The decision was a new blow to the hopes for European union, which were jolted last week by Denmark's rejection of a treaty on closer ties.
A11  UNRAVELING HESS-HITLER RIDDLE
Files made public by Britain seemed to confirm that Hitler was not informed of his deputy's plans for his solo flight and effort to make peace with Britain in 1941.
A3  LIBYAN PRESS BITES QADDAFI
Libya's official press, which echoes the views of Colonel Qaddafi, has termed his call for Arab unity a "mirage" and has proposed reconciliation with the West.
It is unclear whether the criticism represents a rebellion or has been orchestrated as part of a plan to improve relations with the West.
A3  NEW PRIME MINISTER FOR THAILAND
In an effort to stem a political crisis that erupted in violence, a respected Thai businessman and former interim Prime Minister was named Prime Minister again.A5  A U.N. convoy is attacked on the outskirts of Sarajevo.
A6  Iran executes four people after anti-Government demonstrations.
A10  Catemaco Journal: Mexico's unofficial capital of sorcerers.
A4  National A14-20, B9-10  MANY FIRES BUT FEW LEADS
Few people who burned buildings during the recent Los Angeles riots will ever be brought to justice, officials said, because of the sheer number of fires and the lack of clues and cooperation from witnesses.
A14  FIGHTING A COURT NOMINEE
The Congressional Black Caucus began a campaign to defeat the nomination of a death-penalty advocate for a Federal court seat.
A14  PRIVATIZING PUBLIC SCHOOLS
In the latest evidence of a growing trend in education, the Baltimore City Public Schools signed a tentative agreement with a private management concern to oversee the day-to-day operation of nine inner-city schools.
A14  THE RULES OF ABORTION ADS
When it comes to getting an advertisement about abortion on television, it's not so much the message as the messenger.
If one is a candidate for Federal office, he can do what he wants, but if one is a special-interest group, the rules are vague.
A18
The Bush campaign welcomed a new Clinton strategy.  A18
Dan Quayle renews his attack on a "cultural elite." A18
Bill Clinton came out against a balanced-budget amendment.
A18  A 'NO' TO BUDGET AMENDMENT
In an unusual consensus, scholars of the Constitution, liberal and conservative, agree that the proposed balanced-budget amendment is an invitation to trouble.
A19
The House debated a balanced-budget amendment.  A19  RENEWED ATTACK ON SMOKING
Urging immediate action by the Federal Government, the American Heart Association said secondhand cigarette smoke was an environmental toxin that should be banned from work and public places.
A20  THE BUSH-NIXON TIE
A review of documents in the National Archives as the 20th anniversary of the Watergate break-in nears sheds new light on the financial benefits that George Bush and other Congressional candidates received from the Nixon Administration.
B9  DEATH IN THE CITY
The District of Columbia easily leads the nation's urban centers in gun homicides, but city leaders say they cannot do much more to curb the violence unless the Federal Government enacts and enforces broader restrictions on guns.
B10  RETHINKING AN EXTRADITION
A Federal appeals court ordered the reopening of a case involving the extradition of an accused Nazi war criminal only after the Justice Department failed to reply to two letters inquiring about its handling of the case.
B10  Metropolitan Digest, B1 BENCHMARK LABOR PACT
Hospitals and nursing homes in New York City reached a tentative contract agreement yesterday that virtually guarantees 65,000 health-care workers their jobs within the industry.
A1  BRINGING BALKAN WAR TO U.S.
For many immigrants to the United States, strife in the Balkans -- which has caused an estimated 16,000 deaths so far -- is more than just a war that most Americans can't quite follow.
Monitored by short-wave radio, it is their daily obsession, a conflict tearing up not only their relatives' lives back home but their lives here as well.
A1  CUOMO ON REDISTRICTING
Gov.
Cuomo said today that he planned to sign the State Legislature's Congressional redistricting plan approved by the State Legislature but then said he would urge the Justice Department to revise it.
A1  NEWARK SHOOTING REVIEWED
An investigation into the shooting early Tuesday of a 17-year-old suspected of driving a car stolen from a police officer's mother widened today.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Still punishing Haitians.
If House picks the President.
Public education, privatized.
Letters A22  William Safire: Illness at Windsor.
A23  Anthony Lewis: Chinese promises.
A23  Kathleen Quinn: If Perot were black.
A23  David A. Bennett: Rescue schools, turn a profit.
A23


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON AGREES TO APPEARANCE (NONMUSICAL) ON MTV
In an age when Presidential candidates turn to Phil Donahue, Arsenio Hall and Larry King to communicate with Americans, it was only a matter of time before the cable network known for music videos would get into the act.


Reweaving Magic: Holes Disappear
SEYMOUR SCHNALL has spent close to a lifetime dealing with the consequences of moth holes, snags and burns.
Mr.
Schnall, who owns the Superior Weaving and Mending Company, is a reweaver.
And every week, he and his staff make holes and tears disappear on all types of garments.
"You reweave thread by thread to repair the damage," said Mr.
Schnall, who started at Superior as a messenger and several years later, in 1931, bought the company.


Rioting in Los Angeles Destroyed Arson Leads
Blackened husks of buildings, the most visible scars of the nation's worst urban violence in this century, line street after street in Los Angeles.
And more than a month after the fires began, it has become apparent that few of the people who burned those buildings will be brought to justice.
Largely because of the sheer number of fires -- about 750 in the city and more than 1,000 around Los Angeles County -- most physical evidence about their origin was destroyed.
Deprived of these clues and facing a crushing workload, arson investigators say they stand little chance of solving the crimes on their own.


Executive Is Sentenced In Arms-Sale Scheme
A former top executive of a military contractor was sentenced to 15 years in prison today for masterminding a huge weapons and money-laundering scheme and illegally shipping arms to South Africa.
James Guerin, 62 years old, pleaded guilty in December to an eight-count Federal indictment, which included charges that he created $1.14 billion in phony weapons contracts for his company, the International Signal and Control Corporation.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  TIED TO THE WAR BACK HOME
For the more than one million Americans of Yugoslav descent, the strife in the Balkans is more than just a war that most Americans can't quite follow.
Monitored by short-wave radio, it is their daily obsession, a conflict tearing up not only their relatives' lives back home but also their lives in the United States.
A1.
ANOTHER TWIST ON REDISTRICTING
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he planned to sign the Congressional redistricting plan approved by the State Legislature.
He then denounced the plan, saying he would urge the Justice Department to revise it by creating another district with a Hispanic majority.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  HOSPITAL CONTRACT OFFERS JOB SECURITY
Hospitals and nursing homes in New York City reached a benchmark agreement yesterday that virtually guarantees 65,000 health-care workers their jobs within the industry.
The tentative contract also gives workers a raise of about 12 percent over three years, lets them retire three years earlier with full benefits and reduces their medical costs.
A1.
INSPECTION FINDS JAIL CELLS UNSAFE
Some 300 teen-age and adult prisoners -- one of four inmates in the maximum-security sections of a city jail on Rikers Island -- have been confined in unsafe or unsanitary cells, the Board of Correction asserted in a report yesterday.
B3.
SUIT TO CLOSE SHELTERS
Steven Tolle says he was beaten and robbed three times, including twice in one day, during the three weeks he stayed at a city shelter in an armory in Brooklyn.
Now he and other shelter residents will testify in a suit that seeks to shut such shelters as unsafe.
B2.
TRYING TO MEND FENCES
Mayor David N. Dinkins held a peace conference with eight Hispanic members of the City Council yesterday, trying to convince them that his administration responds to the problems of Spanish-speaking city dwellers.
B8.
HEARING ON BRIGHTON BATHS
Amid renewed pressure on developers to scale back their proposal again, 300 people crammed into a hearing room before the City Planning Commission yesterday to praise and criticize plans to replace the historic Brighton baths with a large-scale housing development.
B3.
REGION  POLICE OFFICERS UNDER REVIEW
An investigation into the shooting early Tuesday of a 17-year-old suspected of driving a car stolen from a police officer's mother widened yesterday to focus on nine officers who may have been at the scene but failed to report it.
A1.
KINDERGARTNER SHOT ON BUS
A kindergarten pupil was shot in the head and critically wounded in New Haven when the school bus taking him home was caught in gunfire between two groups of youths.
B6.
SUIT THREATENED BY HUSBAND
Joseph Buttafuoco will sue for civil damages should the Long Island teen-ager charged with shooting his wife sell her story to a Hollywood producer, his lawyer said.
B5.
AU PAIR WITNESS QUESTIONED
Testifying at the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair yesterday, a mechanic fought suggestions that he was involved in the fire that killed 3-month-old Kristie Fischer.
But he was forced to admit inconsistencies in his account.
B6.
Greenpoint Journal B3  Chronicle B10


Every Canadian Can Get Quality Health Care; They Put Us to Shame
To the Editor:
Canada's national health insurance system may not be a medical model as you state (editorial, May 26), but it is so superior to what we have here that it is embarrassing.
The United States has the highest infant-mortality rate of any Western nation, and that alone should shame the richest nation in the world.
It also has one of the highest proportions of Caesarean-section births in the Western world.
I suggest there is also far too much unnecessary surgery in the United States; one might almost call it for-profit surgery.


Joyce Macwatty Black, 65, Longtime Volunteer
Joyce Macwatty Black, called "the ultimate volunteer" for her nearly 40 years as an officer of more than 75 charitable organizations and government panels, died on Tuesday at her summer home in Nantucket, Mass.
She was 65 years old, and her primary residence was in Manhattan.
She died of metastasized breast cancer, her family said.


Review/Theater; With Such Furniture, The Shopping Is Over
Old debts are paid in "The Price," the Arthur Miller play given a scrupulous revival by John Tillinger at the Roundabout Theater Company.
In this perceptive study of possessiveness and rivalry within family relationships, an estate is settled, legacies are established and antipathetic brothers try to find a common ground.
But behind everything is an aura of disunion.
"The Price" is a play of recognizable human dimensions and a definite change of pace for the playwright.
It is also an irresolute work, despite the series of revelations that come just before the conclusion.
In the play, the author created one of his most colorful and comic characters, Gregory Solomon, the octogenarian furniture dealer who is as judicious as his biblical name suggests, yet is wily to the core.
He has come to buy the Franz family inheritance.
That estate is jointly held by two brothers, one a policeman (Hector Elizondo), the other a surgeon (Joe Spano).
With his crackling humor, Solomon (Eli Wallach in a flamboyant mode) runs away with the first act, then all but disappears, to be replaced by a fraternal colloquy about success and failure and family loyalty.


INSIDE
Inaction in 'Ivan' Case
The Justice Department was asked twice about its handling of an accused Nazi executioner before a Federal court reopened the case.
Page B10.
Bus Strike Settled
A strike at five private bus compa- nies that stranded 225,000 riders in areas of Queens, Brooklyn and the Bronx ended late last night.
Page B1 Blazers Even Series
Portland trailed until the final four minutes before pulling out a 93-88 victory over Chicago that tied their N.B.A.
Finals series at 2-2.
Page B11.


Chief Executive at Saatchi To Step Down Next Year
Robert Louis-Dreyfus, the chief executive who guided Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. through turbulent financial times, will step down in mid-1993, the advertising company's chairman, Maurice Saatchi, said yesterday at the annual meeting in London.
Mr.
Louis-Dreyfus's departure, and the identity of his successor -- Charles Scott, Saatchi's chief operating officer -- were not unexpected.
Since Mr.
Louis-Dreyfus, 45 years old, joined Saatchi in January 1990, his tenure had usually been described as "medium term."


Hawks to Name Sutter
The Chicago Blackhawks have scheduled a news conference for this afternoon at which they were expected to name associate coach DARRYL SUTTER head coach, replacing MIKE KEENAN behind the bench.
"We'll announce a coach. It'll either be Mike or Darryl," said team spokesman JIM DeMARIA.


Money Market Funds Show Continuing Declines in Yield
Yields offered on money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down in the latest week.
Analysts said that tax-exempt money fund yields, down for the fifth time in six weeks, were showing the effects of a shortage in new municipal issues that seemed to be accelerating.


CHRONICLE
JOHN MARKS TEMPLETON, the creator of the largest award in the field of religion, the Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion, is about to receive an honor, himself: the 1992 NORMAN VINCENT PEALE Award for Positive Thinking.
The award is given by the Institutes of Religion and Health, a counseling and training organization that Dr.
Peale founded 55 years ago to link faith and psychotherapy.
It is to be presented to the philanthropist and financier at a luncheon today at the Union League Club in Manhattan by Dr.
Peale, who celebrated his 94th birthday last month.
The other winners of the award are the Rev.
JOSEPH MARTIN, the founder of Ashley at Oakington, an alcohol- and drug-addiction treatment center in Havre de Grace, Md., and TIFFANY TALLEY, a counselor at the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp for children with cancer and blood-related diseases, in Ashford, Conn.


Treasury Prices Go Lower Again
Prices of Treasury securities moved lower and interest rates inched higher again yesterday, but the movement carried little weight because trading volume remained extremely light.
The pace of business should quicken today, because the Government is expected to release fresh economic statistics, including retail sales and producer price data for May.


Familiar Squat for Fisk
It wasn't easy for CARLTON FISK.
He said his return Tuesday night in Chicago made him so nervous that it left him short of breath.


Countrywide Credit's Net Soars in Quarter
Countrywide Credit Industries, the nation's largest independent mortgage banker, said today that its earnings rose sharply in its fiscal first quarter as it made a record number of loans.
The company reported earnings of $29 million, or 81 cents a share, in its first quarter ended May, compared with $9.1 million, or 36 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
"Countrywide's record production for the first quarter of $6.5 billion and a servicing portfolio that topped $33 billion is an achievement that results from our steadfast commitment to being a low-cost and efficient producer and servicer of mortgage loans," said David Loeb, Countrywide chairman.


NORTHERN TELECOM'S VIDEO TELECONFERENCING SYSTEM
Northern Telecom yesterday introduced a video teleconferencing system designed to work with computers that are compatible with Apple Macintosh and I.B.M. machines.
The Visit Video system will cost $2,900 to $3,500 and will require a special high-speed telephone connection.
The system transmits a black and white image to the computer screen of another user.
It also allows two people to work on the same computer document while connected over telephone lines.
The system does not provide full-motion video, but instead transmits 8 to 15 frames a second.
Earlier this year, Compression Labs Inc. and A.T.&amp; T introduced a similar system that works with a personal computer or with a special video telephone.


Telmex Stock Drops
Shares of Telefonos de Mexico fell sharply today after rumors that the company's union might sell its stake in the Mexican telephone company.
Union officials denied the rumors.
Shares in the company, also known as Telmex, lost $2.375 a share today to close at $51.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
A union official said the union now owns about 2.9 percent of Telmex's shares.


House Debates Deficits and Proposed Balanced Budget Amendment
For 10 hours today, the House of Representatives debated a constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget, as its author declared that the change would "give us a constitutional reason to find the courage to make the tough choices necessary to balance the budget."
The House will vote on the amendment Thursday.
Representative Charles W. Stenholm, the Texas Democrat who has forced the issue to the floor despite the House leadership's opposition, steadfastly predicted passage.
He said he had the 290 votes needed to obtain the two-thirds majority required to amend the Constitution if all members vote.


JWP TO ACQUIRE HAMILTON GROUP FOR $30.3 MILLION
JWP Inc., the diversified information services company, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Hamilton Group Ltd., a Canadian computer sales and leasing company, in a stock exchange valued at $30.3 million.
Under the agreement, JWP will swap 0.856 common share for each share of Hamilton, which has 2.6 million shares outstanding.
Yorkvale Ltd., which owns 41 percent of of Hamilton, will tender its shares.


Ex-Protege Of Milken Convicted
Alan E. Rosenthal, a former protege of Michael R. Milken at Drexel Burnham Lambert and a target of his government testimony last week, was convicted yesterday of giving a kickback to a favored client of Mr.
Milken.
But the jury in Federal court in Manhattan acquitted the 53-year-old defendant of four other charges, including conspiring with Mr.
Milken in a tax-fraud and embezzlement scheme involving Mr.
Milken's junk bond department at Drexel.


Growing
AN iris likes to sit on the ground the way a duck sits on water: half in, half out.
"That's what the old-timers say," Cousin Bobby said.
"Irises like sun on their rhizomes, so set them so they show through the soil."


Full Season Of Concerts At the Reade
The 27th Great Performers series at Lincoln Center is to include the first full season of concerts at the new Walter Reade Theater, as well as several commissioned works and premieres.
Also new to the program is a series devoted to a cappella choruses.
The season begins on Oct. 11, with performances by the flutist James Galway at Avery Fisher Hall and the Choir of Westminster Abbey at Alice Tully Hall.
Among the new works on the program are Roger Reynolds's "Visions," which is to be given its world premiere by the Arditti Quartet; the New York premiere of a piano quintet by Hans Werner Henze, to be performed by Peter Serkin and the Guarneri Quartet, and Libby Larsen's "Schoenberg, Schenker and Schillinger," also a New York premiere, to be presented by the Cleveland Quartet.
The Kronos Quartet, in its sixth annual series, will also offer several premieres, and Jean-Pierre Rampal is to give the New York premiere of Krzysztof Penderecki's Flute Concerto.
The Shostakovich Quartets
The new series at the Walter Reade Theater is to include 15 performances on Monday evenings, including a five-concert traversal of the Shostakovich quartets by the Manhattan String Quartet.
The a cappella series is to include performances by the King's Singers and Chanticleer.
The American Symphony Orchestra will present three concerts in its first Lincoln Center series.
And the Orchestra of St.
Luke's is to play five concerts, three of them conducted by Roger Norrington.


U.S. Unconcerned on Rebuff By Yeltsin on Nuclear Talks
Bush Administration officials said today that they viewed President Boris N. Yeltsin's public rebuff of American demands in arms control negotiations as part of the public posturing that is common in such talks.
They did not seem particularly worried about it -- for now.
Indeed, as Mr.
Yeltsin was challenging demands for the elimination of his country's land-based, multiple-warhead missiles in an address to senior officers at the Russian Defense Ministry, his Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, was continuing negotiations by telephone with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.


A Former Thai Premier, No Ally of Military, Regains His Old Post
A respected Thai businessman and former diplomat who was the nation's interim Prime Minister until March was named to the post again today in an effort to stem a political crisis that erupted last month in violence in the streets of Bangkok.
Anand Panyarachun, who was Thailand's 18th Prime Minister and will now be its 20th, said in accepting the appointment that he would head a caretaker Government for four months.
New elections are expected in the fall.


Arson-Trial Witness Fights Implications by the Defense
On the witness stand at the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair today, a 26-year-old mechanic fought suggestions from the defense that he was involved in the fire that killed 3-month-old Kristie Fischer.
The witness, John P. Gallagher 3d, who is the boyfriend of the infant's half sister, has been portrayed by the defense as a possible arsonist.
When he first testified last Friday he denied any connection with the fatal fire, and the police have said they never considered him a suspect.
Mr.
Gallagher was the first person who is known to have arrived at the scene of the fire on Dec. 2.


Yanks Let Blue Jays Do All the Bombing
It can't get much worse on the road for the Yankees, who left Yankee Stadium last night for a long, long trip.
At home, it's supposed to be better.
But they will remember that five times in the second inning, with two out and two strikes on the batter, the Toronto Blue Jays generated hits, scored 6 runs and produced a 10-3 victory.


War in the Balkans Creates a Bitter U.S. Front
With a cigarette dangling from his lips, Vladimir Radojicic, a 34-year-old photographer, projected an unflappable cool during a late-night gathering of Yugoslav immigrants in Manhattan.
But when the evening's video began, a taped tour of downtown Belgrade, the tears rolled quietly down his face.
Mr.
Radojicic, son of a Croatian mother and a Serbian father, is caught quite personally between the warring ethnic factions in his native land.
Drafted by both the Serbian and the Croatian armies last fall, he fled instead to the United States.
Here, the tensions causing the Balkans to implode have revived Old World rivalries among the more than one million Americans of Balkan descent.


Improvement Seen for Case
Michael H. Walsh, chairman and chief executive of Tenneco Inc., said yesterday that enough substantive changes had been made at the company's farm and construction equipment manufacturer, the Case Corporation, that investors "will be pleased" by second-quarter results.
Mr.
Walsh declined to predict when Case, Tenneco's largest subsidiary, would report a profit.
Case has long been an albatross for Tenneco, losing money in 6 of the last 11 years.
In 1991 it lost more than $1 billion on revenue of $4.4 billion.


Quotation of the Day
"Most of us are in shock. One second, our country is like a big family, noisy, fighting at the dinner table. The next second, our brothers and sisters and cousins are under the table, scratching each other's eyes out." -- DUSICA TOMANOVIC, a designer from Belgrade, now living in the United States.  [ B4:5. ]


A Family Hopes for Recovery, and Justice
Seventeen-year-old Howard Caesar was known to the police as one of the "doughnut men," young people who steal cars for joyriding and then draw black circles in the street as they spin the cars around and around to entertain their friends.
The shooting of Mr.
Caesar, who the police said was driving a car stolen from a police officer's mother, has focused attention once again on the aimless life of many young residents of neighborhoods like the one along 16th Avenue.
Brother Talks to Victim
"This area is drug-infested and there aren't many activities for young people like Howard," said Omar Stark, 26, the shooting victim's brother.


Con Ed Union Votes To Authorize Strike
The union representing 13,000 Consolidated Edison employees said yesterday that its members had voted overwhelmingly to authorize a strike if negotiations for a new contract broke down.
The vote, held on Tuesday, was 3,165 to 973.
The union, Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers Union of America, said the turnout was the highest in its history, as was the margin for authorizing a strike.


Preserving Adirondacks Great Camps
IN 1869, a young clergyman, the Rev.
William H. H. Murray, wrote a book entitled "Adventures in the Wilderness; or Camp-Life in the Adirondacks." "The wilderness," he observed, "provides that perfect relaxation which all jaded minds require."
And so, laden with stuffed birds, Sherry decanters, cotton mattresses, potato scoopers, pudding molds, cuspidors, champagne flutes and a retinue of servants that often outnumbered their employers three to one, J. P. Morgan and other captains of industry loaded up their private railroad cars and took to the woods.


Every Canadian Can Get Quality Health Care; Eye and Dental Figures
To the Editor:
"Canada's No Medical Model" (editorial, May 26) fails to note an important difference in computing the costs of health care in Canada compared with the United States.
Expenditures for eye care and dental care are included in the United States.
In Canada they are not.


A Report Faults Conditions In Many Rikers Island Cells
Some 300 teen-age and adult prisoners -- one of four inmates in the maximum-security sections of a city jail on Rikers Island -- have been confined in unsafe or unsanitary cells, the New York City Board of Correction said in a report released yesterday.
The report stems from an inspection two weeks ago that found inmates housed in cells without lights, with electrical wiring dangling from ceilings and walls or with broken toilets and sinks that frequently overflowed, the board, a prison-oversight agency, said.


Books of The Times; Dignity Survives Amid Grimness of an Inner City
Lost in the City  Stories  By Edward P. Jones  Photographs by Amos Chan. 250 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.
A photograph accompanies each of the 14 stories in Edward P. Jones's powerful fiction debut, "Lost in the City," about the lives and souls of black people living in Washington.
Most of these pictures depict bleakly gray cityscapes, and in doing so they seem to reflect, at least in retrospect, the frustration and despair experienced by so many of Mr.
Jones's characters.
For instance, in "The Night Rhonda Ferguson Was Killed," an angry high-school girl named Cassandra stakes her freedom to rebel on the knowledge that her best friend is about to sign a recording contract and lift Cassandra to fame with her.
At the end of a day in which Cassandra burns several bridges of friendship behind her, she learns that her friend has been shot to death by a lover.


COMPANY NEWS: Some Pain, Much Gain; Tired of That Old Tatoo? Now, Just Zap It Away
People who had the name of a loved one, a snake or an anchor painfully embroidered on their bodies now have a pricey new way to have the tattoo removed.
The Candela Laser Corporation has received approval from the Food and Drug Administration for a laser that it said could remove blue and black tattoos without leaving the scarring or pigment alteration common in older laser models.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tracy Chapman  Beacon Theater
While Tracy Chapman was singing her hit "Fast Car" at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night, a loud pop went off in the sound system.
Against the song's hushed arrangement, Ms.
Chapman's low, even vocal and the somber lyrics about a woman trying to escape her drab existence, the sound was louder than a gunshot; Ms.
Chapman barely flinched and continued singing, but the disruption was enough to shatter temporarily the delicate mood she was attempting to construct.
Hers was not a performance designed for spontaneity or margin of error.
Everything was studied and precise, as humorless and severe as Ms.
Chapman's recent records.
The show had no pace, because Ms.
Chapman moves at only one speed: deliberate.
In a nearly two-hour set, the tempos of the individual songs seldom varied from the ponderous adult-rock ballad Ms.
Chapman has been reworking since her 1988 debut album.
The same themes were touched on again and again: the poverty of society and the poverty of spirit it inflicts on the individual.
Relationships always come to dead ends; lovers find themselves behind walls, unable to communicate.
Throughout the show, Ms.
Chapman rarely modulated her voice to express specific emotions.
In "Mountains of Things," from her debut album, she let a little anger seep through; pain and frustration colored her words in "The Love That You Had," from her third and most recent album "Matters of the Heart" (Elektra).


Tokyo Stocks Higher
Japanese stocks were moving higher late this afternoon in trading driven by futures-linked programs.
Most investors were staying on the sidelines ahead of Friday's futures settlement and the Bank of Japan's quarterly economic survey, brokers said.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks was up 130.47 points, or 0.74 percent, to 17,873.34.
The Nikkei lost 102.17 points on Wednesday.


Market Place; A Diesel Maker's Comeback Route
THE Cummins Engine Company has smashed into just about every barrier to profits imaginable in recent years: a fierce attack on its dominant position in the diesel engine market by Japanese manufacturers; unwanted takeover overtures; sharp declines in its markets; quality problems with its products and, finally, unexpected competition from the formerly lethargic Detroit Diesel Corporation.
Nevertheless, Cummins has gone a long way during the last year toward convincing Wall Street that it is back on track.
The company returned to profitability for the first time in nearly two years during the first quarter of 1992.
And that helped it sell 2.3 million shares at $57 a share in April as part of a drive to reduce debt.


Kindergartner Shot On School Bus Ride
A 6-year-old boy on the way home from school was shot in the head and critically wounded in New Haven when the school bus he was riding was caught in the gunfire between two groups of youths.


Reynolds Runs 400 Meters in Fast 44.67 Off the Beaten Track
Butch Reynolds, caught in the middle of a battle between track and field's world governing body and a Federal court, ran a fast 400 meters tonight.
Although he was competing against three outclassed opponents who were not concerned about potential international sanctions, several runners trying to qualify for next week's United States Olympic trials refused to run against Reynolds.
They competed in a separate 400 and wondered why he was even here.
At age 28, Harry Lee (Butch) Reynolds Jr. is the world- record holder at 400 meters (43.29 seconds in 1988).
Here, in the Holmdel Invitational track and field meet at Holmdel High School, he ran smoothly and won by 40 meters in 44.67 seconds.


Private Hospitals in New York Reach Accord on Job Security
Hospitals and nursing homes in New York City reached a benchmark agreement yesterday that virtually guarantees 65,000 health-care workers their jobs within the industry.
The tentative contract includes a wage package that keeps pace with inflation, giving the workers a raise of about 12 percent over three years, letting them retire three years earlier with full benefits and reducing their medical costs.
A housekeeper's salary would rise to an average of $23,640 a year from $21,426; a pharmacist would get a raise to $52,454 from $47,541.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans; CLINTON STRATEGY LIFTS BUSH CAMP
Gov.
Bill Clinton's decision to close ranks and campaign jointly with the Democratic leadership in Congress was "a great political break" for President Bush, a senior adviser to the Bush campaign said today.
Charles Black, the adviser, told reporters that Mr.
Clinton, of Arkansas, set the stage for a simple Republican message this fall: "If you like Congress, you'll love Bill Clinton." He was responding to Mr.
Clinton's announcement this week that he would join with Democratic leaders in Congress to produce a legislative agenda that could be passed in the early days of a Clinton Administration.


5 Men Sue Over Shelters for Homeless
Steven Tolle said yesterday that he had been beaten and robbed three times, including twice in one day, in the three weeks he stayed at the city shelter in the Atlantic Avenue Armory in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Tolle, a graduate of New York University with a degree in fine arts, pledged that he would never again enter the shelter for homeless men.
But he, along with four other homeless men, is suing the city, and they say they are willing go to court to testify about life-threatening conditions at the armory at the corner of Bedford Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant and at the Fort Washington armory in upper Manhattan.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
A WINDOW air-conditioner should last at least 10 years if properly maintained.
Proper maintenance means servicing it at least once a year, either at the start of the warm-weather season or after the end.
In an especially hot, humid summer, midseason servicing is also recommended.
Before you begin, be sure the air-conditioner is unplugged.
Then vacuum the front grille and controls or wipe them with a cloth and an all-purpose household spray cleaner.


Robertson Withdraws U.P.I. Bid
The television evangelist Pat Robertson withdrew his $6 million offer for United Press International today, insuring the end of the venerable but bankrupt news service as a worldwide presence and raising the possibility of a shutdown as soon as Friday.
In a statement issued early this evening, the news agency said, "If additional funds for U.P.I.'s operations are not found, U.P.I. will terminate operations on Friday, June 12, at midnight." Pieter Van Bennekom, the company's president, told employees to prepare for an orderly shutdown.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Friday with an article about insider-trading charges against Fred R. Sullivan and others characterized Mr.
Sullivan's involvement incorrectly.
The Securities and Exchange Commission said $85,000 had been made by others in trading based on information provided by Mr.
Sullivan, a former chief executive of Kidde Inc.
He is not accused of having traded on that information.


Zito Tells His Side to Police
Nick Zito, the trainer of last year's Kentucky Derby winner Strike the Gold, was questioned at his barn at Belmont Park yesterday by a police detective investigating the complaint by a freelance writer that he had struck her in the face with a magazine.
Zito, who has denied the allegation, has hired a criminal lawyer, Frank Yannelli of Mineola, L.I.
The lawyer said that he would discuss the case today with the trainer and they most likely would decide to file a rebuttal statement with the police tomorrow.
Sgt.
Dennis Barry of the Fifth Precinct in Elmont, L.I., said "the investigation is still going on."


Stephen Sondheim Is Saluted


U.S. Delay Led to Review in 'Ivan' Case
A Federal appeals court in Ohio ordered the reopening of a case involving the extradition of John Demjanjuk, the retired Cleveland auto worker who has been sentenced to hang in Israel as a Nazi war criminal, after the Justice Department failed to reply to two letters inquiring about its handling of the case.
Justice Department officials said today that they had not been stalling or ignoring the court's requests for information but were formulating their reply when the judges reopened the extradition case.
"We fully intended to respond to the court's letter," said Paul McNulty, a spokesman for the department.


Blazers Roar Back To Stun Bulls
The Portland Trail Blazers were willing to do almost anything tonight, except lose.
Coming back in dramatic and inspirational fashion, Portland tied the National Basketball Association championship series, 2-2, by defeating the Chicago Bulls, 93-88 at Memorial Coliseum.
Game 5 will be played here Friday night.


Abroad at Home; Chinese Promises
When President Bush last week extended trade preferences to China for another year, he once more refused to attach any human rights conditions.
To do so, his spokesman said, would only "isolate China"; the Bush policy of "constructive engagement" gave us more influence.
The question is what the policy actually accomplishes.
And that is to be measured not by abstract phrases but by what it concretely does for the victims of tyranny in China.
Here is the story of one of those victims, Liu Gang.


'Sweet Revenge' For a Campaign
A publisher and two fragrance companies hope the sweet smell of success will emanate from an unusual joint marketing program.
Villard Books and La Palma International Inc., both based in New York, and Givaudan-Roure, based in Teaneck, N.J., formed an unconventional collaboration to help sell "Sweet Revenge," a novel by Sugar Rautbord about the intrigues and glamour of the fragrance industry.


Corrections
The Personal Computers column in Science Times on June 2 about educational software misstated the telephone numbers of two companies.
Broderbund Software is at (415) 382-4400.
The Voyager Company is at (310) 451-1383.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
3.57
5.67
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.66
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.80
3.79
5.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.97
6.96
8.21
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.87
8.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.83
8.80
9.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.61
7.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Courage to Bend in Rio
Is President Bush an environmental pariah doing his best to scuttle important treaties at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro?
Or is he the only world leader with the courage to stand firm against a flood tide of environmental extremism?
The answer is, a little of both.
On specific issues, like global warming, biodiversity and forest preservation, the Bush Administration has taken reasonable, even principled, positions.
But in its overall approach to this conference the White House has shown little zeal for protecting the global environment and little desire to compromise for the greater good.


A Promise, a Death and a Dream
Most of the fighters competing here for a United States Olympic berth are being pushed more by the dream of winning a medal then by prospects of a lucrative professional career.
For Oscar De La Hoya, the idea of winning in Barcelona, Spain, has taken on a singular life of its own.
Rather than being pushed, De La Hoya for the last two years has been haunted, perhaps even tormented, by a promise he made to his mother that he would win an Olympic gold medal.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Don Majkowski, quarterback, and Bernard Ford, wide receiver.
Waived Ron Young, wide receiver.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Erick Anderson, linebacker, to two one-year contracts.
Hockey  National Hockey League


At the Bar; How one lawyer serves his client, when the client is Ross Perot and the service is political.
Thomas D. Barr peers out his office window at the real-life version of Saul Steinberg's famous New Yorker magazine cover with the Hell's Kitchen section of Manhattan in the foreground, followed by a lump of New Jersey and then the undifferentiated rest of America.
At first, all Mr.
Barr seems to see are problems: political, economic, social.
But somewhere along the horizon, way off in distant Dallas, he thinks he sees a solution.
It is his client, friend and, suddenly, his favorite Presidential candidate, Ross Perot.


Foreign Affairs; 'Macedonia' for Greece
What's in a name?
Ghosts or real historical demons.
Perhaps war or peace.
Nothing and everything.
The name in question is Macedonia, birthplace of Alexander the Great and Aristotle.
Some 1.9 million souls who used to constitute a republic within Yugoslavia now insist they must have that name for their newly independent state.
Greece, with its own province of Macedonia, says it will recognize the new state, with its capital of Skopje -- but only if "Macedonia" appears nowhere in its name.


Whoa! Water Runs Uphill! Drat. It Won't Come Down.
Inventors pursuing the chimera of a perpetual motion machine will doubtless prick up their ears at news of a device that makes water run uphill.
Disappointingly for them, the water cannot run down again, dashing any hopes of extracting cost-free energy from its fall.
The device is a wafer of silicon impregnated with a steadily increasing concentration of a water-repellent chemical.
When the wafer is slightly tipped, with its most water-repellent edge on the ground and the least repellent one up in the air, a drop of water placed at its foot will slowly move uphill, two chemists report in today's issue of Science magazine.
They are Dr.
Manoj K. Chaudhury of the Dow Corning Corporation in Midland, Mich., and Dr.
George M. Whitesides of Harvard University.


The Bulls Are Mad And They Are Even
The Chicago Bulls were angry today.
They felt they could have already won another National Basketball Association title.
At the very least, the Bulls believed they should have led, 3-1, in the four-of-seven-game N.B.A. finals.
Instead, the Bulls and the Portland Trail Blazers are tied, 2-2, because the Bulls failed to protect late-game leads in Game 2 and Game 4.
So when it was suggested to Chicago Coach Phil Jackson that the Bulls are no longer in control of the series, the frustration he felt within boiled to the surface.


Review/Art; A Forgotten Black Painter Is Saved From Obscurity
Kenkeleba Gallery, an alternate space on the Lower East Side, has always run on a shoestring, and in the current financing climate, that string is thinner than ever.
But straitened circumstances haven't stopped the gallery from organizing a large, almost museum-quality retrospective of the New England artist Edward Mitchell Bannister (1828-1901).
A black painter of considerable talent, Bannister was active in Boston and Providence, R.I., in the second half of the 19th century, but his achievement is barely known today.
This exhibition of nearly 80 works -- most of them lush, deftly painted landscapes and oil sketches -- should be the beginning of the end of that obscurity.
Bannister was born in St.
Andrews, a small seaport in New Brunswick, Canada, in 1828.
His father, who was from Barbados, died when he was 2 years old; his mother, who encouraged her son's interest in art, died when he was 14.
By the age of 20, Bannister was in Boston, working as a photographer's helper and a barber, but determined to be a painter.
Because of his race, he was denied all but the most minimal artistic training and was largely self-taught.
Nonetheless, by the late 1850's -- with the help of his wife, a successful wig-maker and hairdresser named Christiana Cardeaux -- he had established himself as a portrait painter and also become active in abolitionist circles.


Ziegler's Resignation Suggests a New Focus
With the resignation of the National Hockey League president, John Ziegler, expected to be officially announced today, the 24 team owners are now turning to the task of choosing a new leader in an atmosphere of turmoil and uncertainty.
Assuming Ziegler exits by Sept. 30, before the first face-off of the new season, will the N.H.L. owners go outside their clique and hire someone from the worlds of television or marketing or public relations, where the league has badly lagged?
Or will they remain insular and hire a loyal apparatchik from the front-office of a member club?


Senate Version on Aid for Jobless Falls Short of Changes in House
The Senate Finance Committee voted today to offer the long-term unemployed automatically renewable benefits, but the measure fell short of the sweeping changes in the unemployment insurance system passed by the House on Tuesday.
By giving the states wide discretion in deciding whether to grant the benefits, the Senate version could attract some Republican support and offer President Bush an opportunity to avert a politically difficult veto.


A Little Night Playfulness At a Stephen Sondheim Gala
Stephen Sondheim isn't known primarily as a purveyor of Broadway froth and fun.
But a giddy playfulness was the dominant mood of Wednesday night's gala benefit, "Sondheim: A Celebration at Carnegie Hall," a fund-raising event for the hall.
The event was taped for the PBS series "Great Performances" and recorded by RCA Records.
The show featured more than three dozen performers of varying luminosity, including Liza Minnelli, Bernadette Peters, Patti LuPone, Glenn Close and Madeline Kahn.
Paul Gemignani, a longtime associate of Mr.
Sondheim, conducted the American Theater Orchestra.
It was directed and choreographed by Scott Ellis and Susan Stroman, the team that put together the hit Off Broadway revue of songs by John Kander and Fred Ebb, "And the World Goes 'Round," and worked together on the New York City Opera production of "A Little Night Music."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media -- Campaign Watch; Perot Takes Issue, While Clinton Takes On Issue
Ross Perot did not want to "sound-bite" his answer on the deficit.
He did not want to "sound-bite" his answer on gun control.
And he certainly did not want to "sound-bite" his answer on health insurance.
"We've got to completely restructure the system," he responded to a question about health care reform.
"You say, 'Gee, can you sound-bite it?' No. Could Solomon sound-bite it? No."


Municipal Labor Leaders Hope Hospital Accord Will Help Them
Municipal labor leaders, who began a new round of contract negotiations with the Dinkins administration last week, said yesterday that they would try to capitalize on the raise of about 12 percent over three years that was won on Wednesday by the union that represents health-care workers in private nonprofit hospitals.
Leaders of the union coalition representing more than 200,000 New York City workers said they would include the contract obtained by the hospital workers' union in their presentations to the city's labor negotiators.
Several senior city officials acknowledged that the hospital contract, which they described as surprisingly generous, would further complicate their contract bargaining.


In Au Pair Trial, Police Testimony Supports a Defense Argument
At the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair, two police officers who were prosecution witnesses today provided the defense with support for its argument that the police might have overlooked evidence at the crime scene.
The defense is suggesting that someone other than the au pair broke into the house and set the fire.
In his testimony for the prosecution, Robert Miliambro, the second Mount Pleasant police officer to arrive at the fire in which 3-month old Kristie Fischer died, described finding empty containers for flammable liquids.
That testimony supported the prosecution theory that the fire was set by someone who knew the house well, such as the au pair.


Teen-Agers Describe Repeated Harassment
The teen-agers spoke with a jagged edge of anger in their voices about what they say is a deepening pattern of police harassment of people living in the poorest sections of the city.
It was just such harassment, they said, that led to the shooting of a neighborhood youth in a stolen car on Tuesday.
Standing at the intersection of 16th Avenue and South 17th Street, the site where Howard Caesar, 17 years old, was wounded by gunfire, some neighborhood residents said today that if something was not done soon to bring the police -- both black and white officers -- under control, this mostly black and impoverished city of 275,000 might explode much as Los Angeles did this spring.


Treasury Prices Post Modest Rise
New economic reports that seemed favorable for fixed-income investors were largely ignored by credit market participants yesterday, as prices of Treasury securities rose only modestly in light trading.
On the surface, the reported four-tenths of 1 percent rise in the Producer Price Index in May, the largest monthly gain in the last 19 months, was a nasty surprise.


U.S. Would Send Troops Only in a Relief Role
The United States is prepared to send troops to help supply and safeguard humanitarian aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina but has ruled out using troops in combat, officials said today.
While President Bush said "there's no commitment" on sending troops, other officials said troops might go, but only in humanitarian roles.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 595 money market mutual funds increased by $3.35 billion, to $496.38 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 219 institutional funds increased by $3.66 billion, to $182.37 billion.
The assets of the 283 general-purpose funds were up by $430.8 million, to $173.97 billion.
The 93 broker-dealer funds decreased by $742.0 million, to $140.04 billion, the institute said.


Senate Won't Ban the Tactic of Replacing Strikers
In a serious blow to organized labor, the Senate today killed a bill that would have prohibited employers from hiring permanent workers to replace striking union members.
The bill, the Workplace Fairness Act, was one of the highest legislative priorities for the nation's unions because the practice of replacing strikers has become increasingly common in recent years.


A Cyclist Is Fueled By Grief and Grit
As the Coast-to-Coast Bicycle Classic approached Spokane today, the riders began to form roughly two groups -- the jocks and the tourists.
The jocks are serious recreational athletes, who pack up their sleeping bags and tents at daybreak and are on their bikes by 6 A.M.
The tourists tend to leave an hour later and take their own sweet time.
John Peterson of East Northport, L.I., who celebrates his 30th birthday Monday, falls midway between the groups.
So when Peterson, a lean 6-foot-2, rode to the top of Stevens Pass in the Cascades Tuesday, a climb of 16 miles with a 3,000-foot elevation gain, and then managed Wednesday's 2,000-foot ride over the Pine Canyon Pass between Wenatchee and Waterville with some of the better riders, he felt pretty good about his new sport.


Honors
*
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, was the winner of the Best of Silver Anvil Award last night at the annual Silver Anvil Awards competition sponsored by the Public Relations Society of America, for a program, created in-house to help deter drunken drinking.


Art in Review
Steve Miller  Elga Wimmer Gallery 560 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through July 3
In earlier work, Steve Miller combined loosely painted abstract shapes with the splotches of the Rorschach ink-blot test, setting up an ironic contrast between the gesturally rendered paint and the standardized figures of the psychological test.
In the large grid of drawings that line three walls of this gallery, Mr.
Miller continues to explore this double vocabulary by painting, drawing, splashing and airbrushing abstract elements on top of silk-screened versions of medical photographs and X-rays.
But the irony that marked his earlier work is toned down here, replaced by a surprising formal openness.
As before, Mr.
Miller often highlights the raster lines of the video monitors from which many of the photographs are taken, using them to create an underlying mood of technological alienation.
Against this emotionally distanced background, the handmade marks sometimes take on the character of explosions.
It's as if the photographic image itself were bursting apart, spilling the fluid inside the video tube, or the photograph, or the human organs in the X-rays, across the paper.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
The east side of Broadway between 86th and 96th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Broadway Mall street fair.
Waverly Place between Broadway and University Place will be closed from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Village Reform Democrats Club street fair.
SUNDAY
Eighth Avenue between 15th and 18th streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Chelsea Eighth Avenue festival.
Fifth Avenue between 44th and 86th streets will be closed beginning at 11:30 A.M. for the Puerto Rican Day parade.


A Mixed Marriage's 25th Anniversary of Legality
Mildred Jeter Loving is now a widow, the marriage that made her famous having ended in tragedy.
But she remains the same intensely private woman she was a quarter-century ago, when her name entered the lawbooks, and she is as reluctant to acknowledge her contribution to the civil rights movement as she once was to participate in it.
In the wee hours of one morning in July 1958, the quiet life that Mrs.
Loving and her husband, Richard, enjoyed in this remote hamlet was shattered when three law officers opened the unlocked door of their home, walked into their bedroom and shined a flashlight on the couple.
What they saw confirmed what they had been told: Mrs.
Loving was black and Mr.
Loving white, making their marriage illegal in Virginia.


6 Newark Officers Give Accounts Of Shooting of Car-Theft Suspect
Six police officers under investigation in the shooting of a Newark teen-ager near a city park early Tuesday acknowledged for the first time tonight that at least one of them had fired his gun at the scene and that others had falsified police reports, a lawyer said.
The lawyer, Anthony J. Pope Jr., who is representing one of the officers, detailed their first statements about the shooting at a news conference shortly before midnight in which he said the officers, "guilt-ridden," were coming forward to tell investigators of their roles in the shooting of the youth, Howard Caesar, 17 years old.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Caterpillar Financial Services Corp., Peoria, Ill., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $800 million in debt securities through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
*
Commonwealth Edison Co., Chicago, has filed for up to $900 million in debt securities consisting of bonds and notes.


Julius Kuriansky; Lawyer, 82
Julius B. Kuriansky, a retired lawyer and longtime civic leader in Stamford, Conn., died on June 8 at the Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Stamford.
Mr. Kuriansky died of cancer, said his daughter, Joan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  SHAKY START TO BUSH'S TRIP
President Bush's trip to the Earth Summit in Brazil took a harrowing turn in Panama as gunshots and tear gas were fired nearby, forcing him to make a hasty exit before he could address a rally.
A1
Resentment against the United States lingers in Panama.
A11  LEADERS ARRIVE AT EARTH SUMMIT
A multibillion-dollar aid package to help save the developing world's environmental resources was taking shape as heads of state began arriving for the Earth Summit in Brazil.
Officials said Washington's contribution was likely to be small.
A10
U.S. delegation suffers from internal divisions and low morale.  A10
Powerbrokers from India, Malaysia, Singapore and Germany.  A10  YELTSIN'S BALANCING ACT
President Yeltsin said he would soon lift some major barriers to privatization.
But he declared that he would not permit the West to dictate economic policy to Russia -- even if this meant delays in Western aid.
A3  U.N.
TEAM REACHES SARAJEVO
In a last-ditch effort to head off a major human disaster in the Bosnian capital, a United Nations negotiating team arrived in Sarajevo to resume efforts to open the airport to relief shipments.
A6
The United States ponders a humanitarian aid role for its troops.
A6  LIMITED OFFER FROM CHINA
The Beijing Government invited Chinese living abroad to return "to serve the construction of the motherland." But it hinted that it might bar Chinese students from returning if they oppose Communism.
A7  4 MORE EXECUTIONS IN IRAN
Four people were executed in the Iranian city of Shiraz for "sabotage" during riots there in April, the Teheran Government said.
A8  LETDOWN FOR M.I.A.
INVESTIGATORS
A Vietnamese film maker was recently brought to the United States because he said he had information about Americans unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
Officials say he failed to produce useful material and is now seeking asylum.
A7  GYPSIES UNDER SIEGE IN ROMANIA
Valea Pietrelor Journal: A tiny gypsy community becomes the fifth in Romania to be driven out by angry, torch-wielding neighbors.
A4  German and British doubts about a treaty on European union.
A9  Lech Walesa denies he collaborated with Communist secret police.
A9  Cuba's leader greets U.S. businessmen with capitalist hints.
A8  National A12-15, B8-10, D17-18  BUDGET AMENDMENT DEFEATED
The proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget failed by nine votes to win the two-thirds majority needed in the House.
A1
Man in the News: Charles W. Stenholm. B8
The House roll call.  B8
Text of the amendment.  B8  PEROT ON TAXES
In a two-hour national television appearance, Ross Perot said he would "absolutely not" raise taxes except in the case of "an incredible emergency," and even then only with "clearance" from the people.
He said it would nonetheless be possible to cut the Federal deficit.
A1
Excerpts from Perot's remarks on a range of issues.  A14
Two candidates on "Today," and two very disparate appearances.  A14
Cuomo said Perot could be President but Clinton should be.  A15
Quayle was cheered at the Right to Life convention.  A15  MAJOR GAIN BY ASTRONOMERS
Evidence that planetary systems resembling the young solar system may exist in nearby parts of the galaxy was reported by four teams of astronomers working independently.
A1
NASA offered reassurances about Galileo's mission to Jupiter.
D17  INFANT-FORMULA CHARGES
The F.T.C. accused the three leading makers of infant formula of price-fixing in a Government program for poor women and children.
A1  BILL SOUGHT BY LABOR DIES
The Senate killed a bill that would have prohibited employers from hiring permanent replacements for striking workers.
A13
A Senate panel backed benefits for the long-term jobless.
A13  HONORARIUMS DROP IN HOUSE
Annual financial disclosure forms show a sharp decline in speaking fees to House members last year.
That drop followed adoption of a rule that prevents them from keeping the fees.
D18  CASINOS FOR NEW ORLEANS
The Lousiana Senate gave final legislative approval to a bill that would allow New Orleans to join Nevada and Atlantic City as a gambling mecca.
A12  ADVANCE IN GENE THERAPY
A type of gene therapy unlike any tried before has proved highly successful in treating brain tumors in laboratory rodents.
D17  GAIN REPORTED IN AIDS RESEARCH
In a development that could greatly assist research on AIDS vaccines, scientists have discovered an animal that can be infected with the AIDS virus and that then becomes ill, just as people do.
D17  Law Page B20  A woman whose marriage made history 25 years ago recalls the past.
A matter of honor. The weapon: the law.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 STUDENTS' SCORES DROP
After two years of rebounding academic results in the New York City school system, reading and mathematics scores dropped sharply this spring, many of the city's superintendents say.
A1  INQUIRY IN SHOOTING
A Newark teen-ager who was critically shot early Tuesday was wounded one minute before the Police Department formally learned that the car he had been driving had been stolen, the authorities said.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-25  Celebrating Stephen Sondheim.
C3  Japan bestows arts awards.
C3  For Children C12  Theater: "Richard III." C1  Film: "Housesitter."C1  Music: Otis Clay and Ann Peebles performing.
C3  Restaurants C16  Art: Lovis Corinth.
C20  Word and Image: Two British mysteries.
C21  Obituaries D20  Cathy E. Bennett, an authority on jury selection.
Nicholas Guy Anton; invented a cancer detecting device.
Sports B12-18  Baseball: Mets' millions for mediocrity.
B13  Baseball owners approve sale of Mariners.
B13  Hockey: Ziegler resigns as N.H.L. president.
B13  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  The courage to bend in Rio.
Folly defeated, by nine votes.
Topics: What a rose is.
Letters A24  A. M. Rosenthal: Once more unto the breach.
A25  Leslie H. Gelb: "Macedonia" for Greece.
A25  Richard Nixon: Yeltsin needs us.
We need Yeltsin.
A25


Women Alone Can't Make a Just Society; 'Graduation From Hell'
To the Editor:
How did I suddenly become Dick Cavett, enemy of women?
In "A Woman's Place" (Op-Ed, May 31), I find I spoiled Naomi Wolf's Yale commencement eight years ago, turning it into "the Graduation from Hell" with my anti-women humor. (It was not commencement but Class Day, a separate, more lighthearted event.)
She tells how I "took the microphone and paled at the sight of hundreds of female about-to-be-Yale graduates." (There were none in my day, but I don't recall paling. I knew they were there.)


'White Knight' at Sotheby's Cashes In Part of His Stake
In a move apparently to raise cash, A. Alfred Taubman, the real estate developer and shopping center entrepreneur, said yesterday that he would sell up to $103 million in stock in Sotheby's Holdings Inc., the auction house he heads.
Mr.
Taubman, in a letter to Sotheby's staff, said that "while I am seeking this liquidity, please be assured that my confidence in and commitment to Sotheby's has never been greater." He noted that he would remain the largest shareholder and would keep the chairman's job.


Beijing Invites Chinese Abroad to Return Home
The Government today invited Chinese living abroad to return "to serve the construction of the motherland," but it also hinted that it might bar Chinese students from returning if they oppose Communism.
The issue has arisen because the authorities are refusing to allow Gong Xiaoxia, a Chinese student at Harvard University, to return to China for a visit.
Ms.
Gong, who has been critical of the Government, is waiting in Hong Kong, hoping that the Chinese Government will relent and allow her back.


NEW COMPUTER BY CRAY RESEARCH USES SUN PROCESSOR
Cray Research Inc., introduced a supercomputer based on the Sparc microprocessor designed by Sun Microsystems Inc.
The computer, which is known as the S-MP, is the first in a planned series of Sparc-based products from Cray Research Superservers Inc., Beaverton, Ore., the subsidiary formed last December after Cray Research acquired Floating Point Systems.


Further Investigation Is Sought in the Killing of a Former Editor


Franklin F. Snyder; Medical Professor, 94
Franklin F. Snyder, an associate professor emeritus of obstetrics and anatomy at Harvard Medical School, died on Tuesday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 94 years old and lived in Newton Center, Mass.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his nephew, Frank Roth.


Accusation Of Fraud At Sears
The California Department of Consumer Affairs today charged Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's automotive repair shops with systematically defrauding customers by performing unnecessary service and repairs, saying it would seek to revoke the company's license to do such business in the state.
The department's Bureau of Automotive Repair said it was charging all 72 Sears auto repair shops in the state with fraud, false advertising and failure to clearly state parts and labor on invoices.
Other charges include false or misleading statements and willful departure from accepted trade standards.


Art in Review
'A Short History of Modern Italian Sculpture'  Baldacci-Daverio Gallery and the Murray and Isabella Rayburn Foundation 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through June 28
This show starts with a cumbersome objective: to crowd a century's worth of highly diverse sculpture -- including modernist classics like Boccioni's "Unique Forms of Continuity in Space," Marini's "Horseman" and Manzu's "Cardinal" -- into two New York gallery spaces.
Despite the kind of clearance-sale look produced in Baldacci-Daverio's narrow front room, however, the enterprise is justified by the presence of artists largely unfamiliar in the United States, but of considerable interest.
One of them is Arturo Martini (1889-1947), whose 1928 terra-cotta "Torso of a Boy" shows only the sensuously rendered musculature of its subject's back; another is Pericle Fazzini (1913-1987), represented by the bronze image of a stooping youth who seems about to lift off from earth behind the gulls flying from his head.
The standout in the show, however, is Antonietta Raphael (1900-1970).
Her life-size bronze of a fleeing woman carrying children like appendages on her body, and her image of a dead or sleeping woman's face, titled "Mask of Simona," seem close in spirit both to the expressive use of the body in much contemporary art and to the dissolving forms of Medardo Rosso from a century ago.
And like Fazzini, Raphael demonstrates an affinity for the fantastic that may be 20th-century Italian sculpture's signatory trait.


G.O.P. Details Sweeping Cuts In New Jersey
In a sweeping assault on virtually every part of state government, from programs for the poor to well-paid middle managers, the Republican legislative majority has identified $1 billion in proposed cuts from Gov.
Jim Florio's $15.7 billion budget for next year.
The Republican proposals, outlined in an inch-thick package of budget reduction options, would make cuts large and small: shutting down the Public Advocate's office, striking $10,000 for an annual golf tournament for blind veterans, halving the Homestead Rebate Program and taking millions of dollars from general assistance programs for the poor.


Sports of The Times; Vincent Survives The Cabal
HERE is what hockey should do before it replaces John Ziegler: It ought to abolish that starchy-sounding position of president and create the lofty post of a commissioner who would serve as a moral force between the owners and the players, between the devil and the deep blue sea.
Even the hockey owners finally had it with Ziegler going passive on violence and the game's lack of appeal in the United States, which may be intertwined.
One candidate could be Ken Dryden, the former Montreal goalie and former member of the Canadian Parliament, whose popularity and intelligence and dignity make him overqualified for the job as now constituted.
Hockey needs a man for all seasons.
Hockey needs a commissioner.


Market Place; Dow Is Sparkling But Is That Good?
THE Dow Jones industrial average has been the star of the stock market firmament in 1992.
And that in itself may be a bad sign.
Only twice in the last decade has the Dow's performance, on a relative basis, been so much better than the more broadly based Standard &amp; Poor's 500.
And those times, notes Byron R. Wien, the chief United States equity strategist for Morgan Stanley, were not great times to buy stocks.


Major Arts Prizes for Gehry and Kurosawa
The American architect Frank O. Gehry and the Japanese film maker Akira Kurosawa are among the five winners of the 1992 Japanese Praemium Imperiale awards for lifetime achievement in the arts, it was announced yesterday by the Japan Art Association.
Mr.
Gehry won for his contributions to architecture; Mr.
Kurosawa for theater and film; Pierre Soulages of France for painting; Anthony Caro of England for sculpture, and Alfred Schnittke of Germany and Russia for music.


Businessman Is Accused Of Mob Ties
In a glaring example of how hard it is to crack the Mafia's hold over New York City's concrete industry, a businessman given approval by a United States Attorney to buy two large mob-controlled concrete companies and keep them free of corruption was indicted yesterday on charges of making illegal payoffs to the mob and union officials.
The United States Attorney in Manhattan, Otto G. Obermaier, said candidly yesterday that he had been wrong in approving the sale.
He acknowledged "making a bet that did not turn out the way I wanted."


Those Bumbling Yankees Know There'll Always Be a Cleveland
The slumping, disjointed Yankees have a new starter and a new primary closer.
And they are taking the new act on the road.
Perhaps Cleveland, where the once-upon-a-time Bombers begin their 14-game road trip tonight, is the perfect place to break things in.
The Indians are the worst home team in baseball, with a 9-18 record.


Rule to End Frivolous Lawsuits Keeps One Going
The strike that nearly drove The New York Daily News to extinction over a year ago has all but faded into the pages of New York's bitter labor history.
But two luminaries of the city's legal community continue its battles more than a year after the presses began rolling again.
The fight is a curious one in which a renowned labor peacemaker, Theodore W. Kheel, is accused of abetting violence and a widely known ethics expert, Norman Redlich, is accused of exploiting the legal system.
In court papers and interviews, the two lawyers have further accused each other of vaingloriousness.


Topics of The Times; Fair Test for Commissioners
"A delicate balancing act." That's how Sheldon Oliensis, the former City Bar Association president who heads New York City's Conflict of Interest Board, describes the board's new ethics rules for members of the City Planning Commission.
The 13-member commission has broad authority over capital planning, zoning and other contentious land-use issues.
Yet only the chairman is a full-time city employee.
The recent charter revision left it to the conflicts board to devise tighter rules for part-time members.


Diner's Journal
Summer Closings
These Manhattan restaurants have scheduled closings during the summer:
AUREOLE, 34 East 61st Street, Aug. 23 to Sept. 8.
BOULEY, 165 Duane Street, June 18 to July 1.
CHANTERELLE, 2 Harrison Street, Aug. 2 to 17.
LA CARAVELLE, 33 West 55th Street, Aug. 23 to Sept. 8.
LA COLOMBE D'OR, 134 East 26th Street, Aug. 27 to Sept. 12.
LA RESERVE, 4 West 49th Street, July 2 to 13.
LE BERNARDIN, 155 West 51st Street, July 3 to 6; no Saturday lunch through early September.
LES CELEBRITES, Essex House, 160 Central Park South, Aug. 2 to Sept. 7.
LUTECE, 249 East 50th Street, July 31 to Sept. 8.
MONTRACHET, 239 West Broadway, at White Street, July 3 to 5.
PARK BISTRO, 414 Park Avenue South, near 28th Street, July 4 and 5, and Sept. 5 to 7.
PERIYALI, 35 West 20th Street, Aug. 30 to Sept. 9.
THE QUILTED GIRAFFE, 15 East 55th Street, July 19 to Aug. 17. The Changing Scene
OPEN: One Fifth, a seafood restaurant at 2 East Eighth Street, Manhattan.
Among the owners are Alfred Portale and Jerry Kretchmer of Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan.
Open for dinner Tuesdays through Saturdays; telephone: (212) 529-1515; (212) 260-3434.


On Eve of Visit to U.S., Yeltsin Reaffirms Russia's Commitment to Reforms
President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that he would soon issue decrees lifting some of the major barriers to privatization.
But at the same time he declared he would not permit the West to dictate economic policy to Russia, even if this meant delays in Western aid.
Mr.
Yeltsin made the statements in an interview four days before he leaves for a state visit to the United States in which money and arms will be the central issues.
He spoke on the eve of the first anniversary of his election as Russia's President -- a day he has proclaimed a national holiday and Russian Independence Day.


People
*
C.
Ray Freeman, chief operating officer at Dentsu Corp. of America, New York, will leave to join I.B.M. as international marketing director for the PS/2 personal computer.
Mr.
Freeman worked at I.B.M. for 15 years and managed I.B.M. advertising accounts at other agencies.
Dentsu will not fill his position.


Amdura Stock Plummets 62%
When trading in Amdura stock resumed yesterday, after being halted by the New York Stock Exchange on Tuesday, the shares promptly fell $5 a share, or more than 62 percent, closing at $3.
On a percentage basis, Amdura led the losers' list on the Big Board.


CHRONICLE
The board of the Henry Luce Foundation announced on Wednesday that it has elected JOHN WESLEY COOK of Yale University to succeed ROBERT E. ARMSTRONG as its president.
An art historian and theologian, Dr.
Cook is the director of the Yale Institute of Sacred Music, Worship and the Arts.
He takes his new post in September.
As he approaches his 60th birthday, Mr.
Armstrong has apparently decided that it is time to smell the roses -- or rather the cactuses.
He will enroll as a full-time student at the College of the Desert in Palm Desert, Calif., where he plans to study dry-climate ornamental horticulture.


INSIDE
Yeltsin Pledges Privatization
Days before a trip to Washington, Russia's leader pledged to ease barriers to privatization.
But he said the West cannot dictate policy.
Page A3.
Bill Sought by Labor Dies
The Senate killed a bill barring employers from hiring permanent replacements for strikers.
Page A13.
Indictments on Payoffs
A man approved by a United States Attorney to buy mob-controlled companies was indicted on charges of making illegal payoffs.
Page B1.
Trenton G.O.P.
Aims Knife
The Republican legislative majority in New Jersey has identified $1 billion in proposed budget cuts.
Page B1.
G.M.
Executives Removed
General Motors removed two top executives of its financing arm, along with current and former managers of its Long Island office.
Page D1. 'Animal Model' for AIDS
Scientists say a monkey species gets sick when infected with the virus that causes AIDS, so it could be useful in vaccine tests.
Page D17.


Producer Prices Up 0.4%; Retail Sales Rise 0.2%
Retail sales edged up a scant two-tenths of 1 percent in May while prices at the producer level spurted to their biggest increase in 19 months, Government figures showed today.
Both sets of results were seen as disappointments, but analysts said they were mostly concerned about the third straight month of essentially flat sales.
Combined with last Friday's report showing the job market was also weak last month, the retail sales report fanned doubts about the sustainability of the economic recovery and appeared to push the Federal Reserve closer to a long-awaited cut in interest rates, which to many people would complement an earlier move by the Fed in April.


U.N. Envoys Resume Effort To Get Food Into Sarajevo
In what looked increasingly like a last-ditch effort to head off a major human disaster in this besieged city, a United Nations negotiating team arrived here today to resume efforts to open Sarajevo Airport to relief flights that would carry food, medicine and other emergency supplies to nearly 400,000 desperate people.
The almost nonstop bombardment that Serbian besiegers have directed at this city for a week halted briefly when Brig.
Gen.
Lewis MacKenzie, the head of the United Nations contingent in Bosnia and Herzegovina, arrived at the Presidency Building in central Sarajevo.
But the cannonade resumed again after the 49-year-old Canadian officer left again for the United Nations headquarters across a vista of urban devastation three miles away.


Hostos College Is Linked to a $200,000 Forged-Check Scheme
The Bronx District Attorney's office is investigating reports of an embezzlement scheme at Hostos Community College that has siphoned off at least $200,000 through forged tuition refund checks in the last two years, law enforcement and school officials said yesterday.
The officials said the scheme came to light when a bank became suspicious and got in touch with administrators at Hostos, one of the 21 colleges in the City University of New York system.


Topics of The Times; Unbolting Baseball's Door
Herman Melville saw 19th-century Japan as a "double-bolted land" -- shut tight to keep out foreigners.
Nintendo's president, Hiroshi Yamauchi, might say the same of American baseball today.
Nintendo's $75 million investment in the Seattle Mariners has finally been approved, but baseball's pooh-bahs drove a hard bargain.
Nintendo is putting up more than half the money to purchase the team from its current owner.
Clearly, Nintendo will be the majority owner.
But to accommodate the major leagues' pathological aversion to foreign influences, Mr.
Yamauchi agreed to give a Seattle businessman virtually absolute authority to run the team.


At the Movies
Sayles on Power
Anybody have a title for John Sayles?
The film maker responsible for works including "City of Hope," "Eight Men Out," "Matewan" and "The Return of the Secaucus Seven" is in the editing room these days, working on something he calls "the Louisiana project."


Art in Review
Ian Davenport  Paul Kasmin Gallery 580 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through June 27
The 26-year-old British painter Ian Davenport is receiving a lot of attention in his own country.
Just two years out of art school, he was given a one-man show at the Waddington Galleries in London, and his approach to abstraction has been greeted in some quarters of the press as an esthetic breakthrough.
He works with monochromatic household paint that he pours onto a vertical canvas.
The initial applications seem to be made at measured intervals from the canvas's top edge to set up a basic pattern, allowing gravity to take over once the paint begins to flow down.
The technique, almost identical to that of Morris Louis's stained paintings of the 1960's, seems motivated by the similar intention of creating an organic but nonexpressionistic abstract art.


Regulators Sue Bankers
Federal regulators sued officers and directors of the National Bank of Washington, the Justice Department announced today.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation charged Luther B. Hodges, former chief executive and director of the failed bank, and 10 other former officers with violating banking regulations and helping to cause the bank's collapse through their negligence.


3 Held in Shooting of Boy On His Kindergarten Bus
Two 15-year-old boys and a 17-year-old were arrested today and charged with assault for the gunfire that struck a school bus on Wednesday, critically wounding one kindergarten pupil in the head.
The police said the shooting was the culmination of two weeks of growing tension between rival groups of drug dealers in the poor Hill neighborhood.
On Monday night the police had arrested one person after a shot was fired during a confrontation between the groups, Detective Sgt.
Robert Lawlor said, "but obviously that did not help."


Women's Olympic Squad Tilts Toward the Veterans
The one non-professional named to the United States women's basketball team yesterday holds another special distinction, often right in her arms.
Fifteen months ago, or four months after giving birth to her son, Peter, Suzie McConnell decided her basketball career didn't necessarily have to end.
She was too young, 24 years old, to just be a high school coach.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Edberg and Sampras Advance
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg and No. 2 Pete Sampras avoided the wave of upsets yesterday to reach the quarterfinals of the Queen's Club tournament in London.
Edberg, the defending champion, battled for 2 hours 13 minutes to edge Wally Masur, 6-4, 6-7 (5-7), 6-4, in the grass-court tournament considered the major warm-up to Wimbledon.
Sampras produced a solid serve-and-volley game to defeat Gianluca Pozzi, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5.
Jason Stoltenberg upset fourth-seeded Guy Forget, 3-6, 6-1, 6-4, and Shuzo Matsuoka easily downed No. 5 Goran Ivanisevic, 6-4, 6-3.
Pat Cash, the 1987 Wimbledon champion now ranked 214th, first defeated No. 8 Jakob Hlasek, 6-4, 7-5, in a rain-delayed match and then was a 6-4, 6-3 winner over 10th-seeded Amos Mansdorf.
Seventh-seeded Brad Gilbert beat No. 9 David Wheaton, a Queen's finalist last year, 6-4, 5-7, 11-9. (AP) Garrison Wins: Top-seeded Zina Garrison reached the quarterfinals of a grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England, but three of the top-seeded players were eliminated.
Garrison beat Shirli-Ann Siddall, 6-3, 6-3, to set up a quarterfinal match against No. 7 Pam Shriver, who defeated Michelle Jaggard-Lai, 6-4, 6-1.
Tenth-seeded Jo Durie was a 5-7, 6-3, 6-4 winner over No. 2 Nathalie Tauziat; No. 9 Larisa Savchenko-Neiland defeated No. 3 Gigi Fernandez, 6-4, 6-4, and Andrea Temesvari defeated fifth-seeded Natalya Zvereva, 1-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4. (AP) SOCCER  Denmark Ties England


East Harlem Gas Explosion Kills Worker
An East Harlem building, renovated and awaiting the arrival of poor and homeless tenants, was torn by a gas explosion yesterday afternoon that left one worker dead, four others seriously injured and neighbors badly shaken.
Four firefighters were slightly injured, and subway and Metro-North trains on the East Side were halted for an hour until officials could be sure the building would not collapse further.


Text of the Proposal On a Balanced Budget
Following is the text of the proposed constitutional amendment on a balanced budget, sponsored by Representative Charles W. Stenholm, Democrat of Texas, and cosponsored by 277 of his House colleagues.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled (two-thirds of each House concurring therein), that the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution if ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years after its submission to the States for ratification:


Mariners' Ex-Owners Make Off With Booty
Submitted for your approval: the Overvalued Baseball Team.
Case in point: the Seattle Mariners.
In 1981, George Argyros bought the team for $13.2 million.
In 1987, an appraiser valued the club at $58.6 million.


Blue Jays Finally Solve Clemens
Blue Jays 4, Red Sox 0
TORONTO, June 11 (AP) -- Jack Morris outpitched Roger Clemens and Toronto beat the Boston ace for the first time in 10 decisions, stopping the Red Sox by 4-0 tonight.
Hot-hitting Joe Carter, Dave Winfield and Pat Borders homered to account for all the runs off Clemens (9-4).
Morris (7-3) won with a four-hitter and his first shutout since Game 7 of last year's World Series.


Canadian Official to Lead Population Council
Margaret Catley-Carlson, Canada's Deputy Minister of Health and Welfare, has been selected to head the Population Council, becoming its first woman president and its first president from outside the United States.
The council, an international, nonprofit group created in 1952 by John D. Rockefeller 3d, is widely recognized as a leader in contraceptive research and in helping more than 50 developing countries with family planning.


On My Mind; Once More Unto the Breach
Once again, it is up to the United States to make the decision for Europe -- as it has been ever since World War II and as it will be for years to come.
But because Europeans are calling for the U.S. again does not mean Americans must rush to their bugle -- and most certainly not alone or out there in front.


Quotation of the Day
"It's been a very good trip, with the exception of the tear gas." -- MARLIN FITZWATER, the White House spokesman.  [ A11:1. ]


Reebok Has O'Neal's Size (21!)
No. 1 draft pick-to-be Shaquille O'Neal, whose age is still less than his shoe size, signed a multiyear sneaker, sunglass and apparel contract with Reebok today, estimated at $3 million a year.
Reebok will make O'Neal, the 7-foot center from Louisiana State, the cornerstone of its basketball division, much in the same way Nike developed its relationship with Michael Jordan.
Reebok, according to sources, will pay O'Neal a guaranteed $3 million for his rookie season and will introduce a new sneaker for him, called InstaPump.
The length of the contract was not disclosed.


U.S. Delegation in Rio Strained and Divided Over Policy
In an Earth Summit exhibition hall as vast as an aircraft hangar, office space rented by the United States ranks 14th in size, equal to the 1,292 square feet rented by Kuwait.
Squeezed into cramped quarters, assailed in daily protests as Earth Summit villains and undercut by criticism from officials in Washington, the United States delegation suffers from internal divisions and what some members say is the plummeting morale of an endangered species.


Focusing on Children of Africa and U.S.
The conditions affecting children in Africa and black children in America are the focus of "The Day of the African Child," a weeklong series of free events that continues this weekend.
The series is sponsored by Unicef, the United States Committee for Unicef, and the Organization of African Unity.
Today at noon, a discussion of the situations facing children in Africais to take place at Unicef House, Labouisse Hall, 3 United Nations Plaza, at 44th Street.


New Jersey And Union Announce Settlement
The state of New Jersey and its largest public employees' union, the Communications Workers of America, announced today a tentative settlement on a three-year contract that freezes wages for 15 months.
Union officials said the contract agreement, reached before the expiration of the existing agreement for the first time in 20 years, is a recognition of bleak fiscal reality.
The current contract expires on June 30.


For Children
Roller-Skating  Wollman Rink Central Park Entrance at 59th Street and Avenue of the Americas Manhattan (212) 517-4800 Recommended ages: 3 and up Through mid-October
Artie nearly flew off the ramp onto the smooth cement rink, impressing the more feeble and awkward adults nearby as well as his more timid friends, 7- and 8-year-olds at a roller-skating birthday party.
The ice is gone at Wollman Rink, but for the agile all that has changed is what they're wearing on their feet.
In warm weather, part of the rink is devoted to a miniature golf course and Bankshot (a basketball-like game for adults and children) court on one side.
But there's plenty of space to practice stroking, stopping, turning, jumping, spinning, just going forward and even a little speed racing.
Artie, who was wearing a skater's unofficial uniform (baseball cap, loose shirt, black Lycra shorts), has been Rollerblading since he was 6 years old. (He is now 7.) He shrugged off a compliment, but once back on the rink he turned the compliment into a chance to show off his hot-dogging skills, leading the envious to conclude that some people are genetically programmed to balance on in-line skates.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes; 'Today' Gives Perot 2 Hours To Answer Queries
The NBC News program "Today" extended its live phone-in interview session with Ross Perot to the full two-hour length of the program yesterday morning.
The interview with Mr.
Perot, who has yet to announce his independent candidacy for President, was scheduled to last one hour, from 7 to 8 A.M.
But Jeff Zucker, executive producer of "Today," said yesterday that he had made a spur-of-the-moment decision and devoted the entire second hour of the program to Mr.
Perot as well.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.96
5.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.63
3.67
5.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.80
5.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.94
6.97
8.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.89
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.81
8.83
9.54
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.61
7.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Holes in Their Bats and Doubts in Their Minds
"You don't just assemble a group and expect it to win in the first year."
Bobby Bonilla's statement hung in the clubhouse air in Montreal late Wednesday night, and it can't help but hang over the Mets as they face the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates tonight at Shea Stadium.


Owners Are Swayed By Vincent's Speech: 'He's in Total Charge'
Adopting a firm but conciliatory and statesmanlike approach, Commissioner Fay Vincent addressed baseball's owners yesterday and defused the volatile conflict that flared over a failed attempt to wipe out his authority in labor matters.
In his speech, at the end of the majors leagues' quarterly meeting in New York, Vincent talked about baseball's problems and the need for unity to solve them.
Several owners and club executives said that with his comments Vincent had gained renewed support for his office among owners who previously had stood in an uncertain middle.


Some Germans and Britons Grow Skittish Over Unity Treaty
Second thoughts about a treaty on the European Community's monetary and political union continue to multiply in Germany and Britain.
German opposition to the replacement of the Deutsche mark by the European Currency Unit has been growing steadily since voters started reading the fine print of the treaty, which Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the other 11 leaders signed in December in Maastricht, the Netherlands.


Mariners Are Settled, But Giants Get Antsy
Major league baseball yesterday signaled the end of troubles for one of its franchises by approving the sale of the Seattle Mariners to an international group in near-unanimous fashion.
But concerns immediately turned to another franchise as the San Francisco Giants were notified that they might pursue options, including relocation, because of that team's inability to find regional support for the financing of a new stadium.
In another franchise development, Commissioner Fay Vincent confirmed that he had agreed to the request of some National League owners and would take under advisement the possibility of invoking his best-interests-of-baseball powers in order to realign the league when it expands to 14 teams next season.


Arcadia Journal; End of the Road for a Possum Festival
You can still visit the highway site just south of town where six law officers riddled Bonnie and Clyde with bullets 58 years ago.
You can sample Snuffy's Pizza, billed as "The best cotton-pickin' pizza y'all ever ett."
But unless Rodney Cook comes to his senses or local businessmen succeed in keeping his dream alive, this could be the last year Arcadia will host its annual Possum Festival.


Cathy E. Bennett, Who Pioneered Jury-Selection Method, Dies at 41
Cathy E. Bennett, who pioneered new strategies for picking and persuading juries, died on Tuesday at her home in Galveston, Tex.
She was 41 years old.
She died of breast cancer, her family said.


Court Upholds Conviction in the Steinberg Killing
New York State's highest court today upheld the conviction of Joel B. Steinberg for the 1987 killing of his illegally adopted daughter, Lisa, ruling that his failure to call a doctor as she lay near death met the legal standard for intentional manslaughter.
"Parents have a non-delegable affirmative duty to provide their children with adequate medical care," said Judge Judith S. Kaye, writing for the majority in the State Court of Appeals.
"Thus, a parent's failure to fulfill that duty can form the basis of a homicide charge."


Court May Impose Redistricting Plan
A Federal court ruled today that it would impose its own Congressional redistricting plan on New York if a separate plan approved by the Legislature was not in place by July 8.
Because that deadline will be difficult to meet, the ruling threw New York's redistricting process into new disarray and increased the likelihood that the United States Supreme Court would ultimately have to decide the issue.


2 American Teams Win Bridge Titles
Two United States bridge teams won major titles Wednesday at the Pan-American Championships in Corpus Christi, Tex., but both were hard pressed.
In the final of the Open Series, after five days of qualifying and knockout play had reduced 24 teams to 2, Canada took the lead at the start.
That team had a slender lead of 10 international match points with 16 deals remaining, but then lost 15.
Winning by 5 after a match of 64 deals were Cliff Russell of Miami, Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Bob Levin of Chicago and Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif.


Miscellany
*
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, Rockville, Md., an advocacy group for professionals who treat speech disabilities, urged the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co., Boston, to withdraw or change a commercial featuring a young girl who stutters.
The organization charged that the spot, created by Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston, provided misleading information and exploited stutterers.
A spokesman for Hancock said the spot, part of a trend toward advertising that shows disabled and handicapped people, was intended to be supportive of stutterers.


For Many, No Surprise In Turmoil
In the four-year-old office building where Louis Phelps and his staff processed thousands of financing applications from John McNamara for cars that did not exist, news of the shake-up at the General Motors Acceptance Corporation came as no surprise.
John A. Crockett, an agent for the New York Life Insurance Company, which has offices and holds the mortgage on the building, said the rumor mill in the basement coffee shop had been buzzing for weeks about the trouble soon to visit the G.M.A.C. office.  'There Should Have Been Flags'
Mr.
Crockett questioned General Motors' finding that there was no evidence of wrongdoing in the granting of hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of loans to Mr.
McNamara's dealership in Port Jefferson Station.
"They may say that, but maybe they should have done a little more investigating," he said.
"There should have been flags."


In Congress, a Year for Full Disclosure
Members of the House of Representatives reported a sharp decline in the amount of money they received from speaking engagements last year after a rule took effect preventing them from keeping the income.
The annual disclosure reports made public today on most House members showed that they collected about $1.2 million in speaking fees last year.
The fees were turned over to charities.
In 1990, the members took in $5.6 million, and in 1989 they collected a record of more than $6 million.


Top Infant-Formula Makers Charged by U.S. Over Pricing
The Federal Trade Commission charged today that the three leading makers of infant formula had illegally limited competition in bidding on a nutrition program subsidized by the Federal Government.
As a result, the commission said, states administering the program paid higher prices, lost millions of dollars in potential rebates and provided fewer poor people with food aid.


BUSH MADE TO FLEE A RALLY IN PANAMA AS PROTEST ERUPTS
President Bush's journey to Brazil and the Earth Summit took a harrowing turn in Panama today as gunshots and tear gas were fired at a nearby protest, forcing Mr.
Bush to make a hasty exit before he could address a rally.
Mr.
Bush and his wife, Barbara, were not injured in the incident, which happened at midafternoon in downtown Panama City.
The gunfire and the gas, which drifted into a crowd of more than 15,000 Panamanians who had gathered to hear Mr.
Bush, created a panic that briefly threatened to envelop the platform on which the President sat.


Tough Old-Style Campaign For Pepsi's 'New Age' Drink
PEPSI-COLA'S experimental entry into the warm-and-fuzzy "new age" category of the beverage market is being advertised with the same rough-and-tumble tactics the company uses in fighting the Cola Wars.
In April, Pepsi-Cola introduced Crystal Pepsi, a clear version of its flagship brand, in test markets around the country.
Television and radio commercials spoof Perrier, the best-known name in an estimated $700 million category of beverages meant to offer alternatives to traditional soft drinks like colas.


2d Key Republican in House Says He Won't Run Again
In the second resignation this week by a Republican in New York State's House delegation, Representative David O'B.
Martin of the state's northeastern corner, who has used his seat on the Armed Services Committee to win Federal projects for his economically distressed district, announced today that he would not seek re-election.
The six-term Congressman, a Marine Corps fighter pilot in the Vietnam War and the only New York Republican on the influential committee, said he decided to step down now instead of serving another two-year term so that his successor would have a chance to begin accruing seniority and because of the job's excessive demands.


Where Comics Stand Up
Here is a selective roundup of New York City's stand-up comedy clubs.
Except for Caroline's, they offer a "showcase" format, in which three to six performers in succession each do 10 to 40 minutes of material.
The list includes only those clubs that offer comedy full time.
Caroline's Comedy Club
1626 Broadway, at 49th Street, Manhattan, (212) 757-4100.
New York's most handsomely appointed comedy club and the only one in the city to book big-name comedy stars regularly, Caroline's recently moved to the theater district from the South Street Seaport after a 15-month hiatus.
With seating for 275 to 300 people, the new Caroline's is larger than its predecessor, which seated about 175.
One enters Caroline's from the street and descends a winding staircase carpeted in blue to the "Buzz Bar" where "Showtime's Comedy Buzz," a 15-minute entertainment-news program, is taped.
The crescent-shaped main showroom is unusually wide and has a sleek modern ambiance.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The three leading makers of infant formula were charged with violating antitrust law by illegally limiting competition in bidding to supply a federally subsidized nutrition program.
Two of them, Bristol-Myers Squibb and American Home Products, reached settlements, but Abbott Laboratories will fight the charge.  [ Page A1. ]
General Motors dismissed two executives at its financing unit and managers of a Long Island branch that serviced a Buick dealer accused of defrauding G.M. of $436 million.  [ D1. ]  In the Long Island office where thousands of financing applications were processed for cars that didn't exist, the shake-up was no surprise.  [ D5. ]


Watch Birds and Your Heart Will Soar
To the Editor:
In discussing the endangered Endangered Species Act (front page, May 26), you mention the gnatcatcher, a bird unknown to all, save birdwatchers.
Unhappily, most birds fall into this category.
Of the more than 800 species that occur in North America, how many can you positively identify?
No more than nine, I'll bet: the robin, blue jay, cardinal, pigeon, sparrow, mallard, Canada goose, mute swan and the bald eagle.
The next time you're in a bookstore, flip through a field guide.
You'll be astonished at the variety of birds.
Then go to Central Park, where more than 200 species of birds reside or pass through every year.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed John Morris, outfielder, and Lance Parrish, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Junior Felix, outfielder, from the disabled list.
Recalled John Orton, catcher, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Signed Chris Gay, pitcher, to minor-league contract.
National League


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"EMPTY HEARTS," Circle Repertory Theater, 99 Seventh Avenue South, at West Fourth Street, Manhattan.
John Bishop's courtroom drama.
Through Sunday.
Remaining performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $32.
Information: (212) 924-7100.
"ECHOES OF DISCONTENT," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Independent films and videos from South Korea and the Philippines.
Through tomorrow.
Call for specific screenings and times.
Tickets: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students and children.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
KOREAN COSTUMES AND TEXTILES, I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art, 590 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
Weekend Hours: today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 745-6100.
"JUDY GARLAND: A CELEBRATION," New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, Manhattan.
Through tomorrow.
Weekend hours: today and tomorrow, noon to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 870-1630.
WILLIAM M. HARNETT, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Still lifes.
Through Sunday.
Weekend hours: today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
CURTIS MITCHELL, Andrea Rosen Gallery, 130 Prince Street, SoHo.
Installations and wall hangings.
Through tomorrow.
Weekend hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 941-0203.
ARTS EXHIBITION, American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, Audubon Terrace, Broadway at 155th Street, upper Manhattan.
An exhibition of paintings, sculpture, drawings and manuscripts by newly elected members of the academy and winners of awards given by the academy, including David Levine, Martin Puryear, Chuck Close, Elizabeth Murray, Sam Shepard, Louis Auchincloss, Kurt Vonnegut, Francine du Plessix Gray and Ann Beattie.
Through Sunday.
Weekend hours: today through Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 368-5900.
ART EXHIBITION, Queens Museum of Art, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
"Sergei Bugayev: Afrika," a multi-media installation by the Russian artist.
Through Sunday.
Weekend hours: today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $2 ($1 for students, the elderly and ages 5 to 12; free under age 5).
Information: (718) 592-5555.
Closing Next Weekend
PHOTOGRAPHY SHOW, International Center of Photography, 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street, Manhattan.
"Dmitir Baltermants: A Soviet Photojournalist's Retrospective, 1939-89." Through June 21.
Open Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Wednesdays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3.50 ($2 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 860-1783.


Sounds Around Town
Cabaret With Irony
Ingrid Caven, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Miss Caven, a German singer and actress who was briefly married to the film director Rainer Werner Fassbinder and appeared in his films, is the real thing: an earthy, funny, passionate heir to the European cabaret tradition of Edith Piaf and Marlene Dietrich.
But instead of projecting Piaf's anguished indomitability or Dietrich's glamour, she imbues the role of diva with a mischievous, self-conscious irony.
That self-consciousness doesn't make Miss Caven any less compelling, only more modern.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15 P.M.
Tickets are $15 and $25, and there is a two-drink minimum.
Plainly Poetic Ferron
Concert for Unity, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824.
Ferron, the Canadian who headlines the Concert for Unity, a benefit for the Gay Games and an associated cultural festival, is arguably the most gifted singer and songwriter to emerge from the women's music movement.
Her voice is rough-hewn but sensitive; her lyrics are at once homespun and poetic and suffused with a sense of spiritual wonderment.
Sharing the bill are Toshi Reagon, Barbara Higbie and Teresa Trull.
Show time is 7:30 P.M. tomorrow.
Tickets are $20 to $35.
Guys Who Harmonize
Wiseguys, the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
The talented musical-comedy trio of Jim Caruso, Campbell Martin and John Boswell, a new member, excels at 30's and 40's-style group harmonies, which they apply with an exceptional panache to a medley of "Luck Be a Lady" and "Lady Be Good." The rest of the program ranges from a little-known Stephen Sondheim song, "Time," to original comedy songs like Mr.
Boswell's amusing "My Toupee." Shows are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. tonight. (There is no show on Saturday.) There is a $25 music charge, plus a $10 minimum.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Sidelines; Cuomo Won't Run but Will Talk at Drop of a Hat
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the man who won't be President but can't stop talking about the men who would be, said yesterday that Ross Perot could be ("I have no negatives to say about him"), but that Bill Clinton should be ("Even if we don't like the saxophone.")
In a strolling, stopping, standing encounter with reporters after a speech on immigration in Manhattan, the oracle of Albany alternately damned Mr.
Perot with faint praise for his studied vagueness and praised Mr.
Clinton with faint damns for his calculated cool, all the same insisting, "I'm not particularly good at politics."


In His Own Words: How Perot Would Govern as President
THE ECONOMY
We need to take the shackles off of American business.
Our foreign competitors, Germany and Japan, the two economic superpowers, have an intelligent, supportive relationship between business and government.
We need that.
Then once we put that in place, then the next step is to industry by industry, company by company, to develop long-term plans, not 30-minute plans, not quarter to quarter plans, long-term plans.


After a Paint Attack, Columbus Gets a Cleaning





Legal Settlement Widens Rights of Detained Aliens
After a 14-year legal battle, the Immigration and Naturalization Service has agreed to inform people arrested as illegal aliens of their legal rights and to offer them the opportunity to consult a lawyer.
The settlement, which came in a class action suit brought in 1978 by the Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law in Los Angeles, could affect the more than 1.5 million people who are arrested each year nationwide, the organization's executive director, Peter Schey said Wednesday.
Preliminary approval of the agreement was announced by a Los Angeles Federal court on Tuesday and a final hearing has been set for July 29.


Class-Action Lawsuit Filed in Payroll Case
A class-action lawsuit was filed yesterday against the president of a New Jersey check-cashing company who already faces criminal charges in the theft of $25 million from more than 100 clients, from small businesses to the New York Stock Exchange.
The suit, filed in the Federal District Court in Manhattan, asserts that the president, Robert Feltzenberg, used the safe of his company, Payroll Express Corporation of Elizabeth, N.J., to store "gold and jewelry derived from stolen proceeds."


Building Homes and Hope in Watts
Amid a bustle of workers and clouds of dust, Thad Williams surveys the site where a kind of mini-suburbia is going up in the heart of Watts: a one-mile stretch of $150,000 houses intended, he says, to bring the black middle class back home.
The project, the first commercial single-family subdivision built in Watts since World War II, is a point of special pride in this neighborhood in a city where many blacks complain that black contractors are relegated to secondary roles in big private projects, even with the influx of government money to rebuild this riot-torn city.


Gas Explosion at East Harlem Building Leaves One Dead


CHARGE OF SPYING DENIED BY WALESA
His eyes blazing, his voice rising in anger, President Lech Walesa emphatically denied today that he had collaborated with the Communist secret police, and accused the recently ousted Government of trying to blackmail him.
The allegation about Mr.
Walesa, who founded the Solidarity movement in 1980 and has a solid anti-Communist reputation, first came to light last week when the Government of Prime Minister Jan Olszewski published a list of supposed informers, including Mr.
Walesa.


Inquiry on Human Leg
Authorities used dogs today to search for clues into a sawed-off human leg that a dog brought home to its owner last week.
"We're treating it at the present time as a possible homicide," said Detective Lieut.
Lenny Miller of the Ulster County Sheriff's Department.
The decomposed limb was sawed off about 18 inches above the foot, LieutenantMiller said.
The toes had been cut off at the first joint.
A dog owned by John and Kate Longobardo of Wawarsing, on the Rondout Reservoir about 75 miles northwest of New York City, came home with the limb Friday night.
Authorities said they would send the limb to the state police laboratory in Albany for examination by a forensic pathologist.


New Austrian President Deserves Better
To the Editor:
The May 25 headline describing Thomas Klestil's election as President of Austria over the Socialist candidate, Rudolf Streicher, calls Mr.
Klestil a rightist.
"Mr. Klestil's Demons" (Topics of The Times, May 28) states that he would not have won without the support of the voters of the right-wing Freedom Party, led by Jorg Haider.
This leads you to conclude that the President-elect is no better than his predecessor, Kurt Waldheim, and that sets the stage for continuing to depict Austria as basically an anti-Semitic, racist state, where people have not learned the lessons of the past.
Thomas Klestil is a career diplomat, whose candidacy was supported by the Austrian Peoples Party, which represents the center of the political spectrum in Austria. (The Social Democrats are left of center, and the Freedom Party occupies the right wing.) Mr.
Klestil would probably be considered a liberal in the United States, where political thinking is further to the right than in most European social democracies.


Helping Students to Avert Troubles
IF you see a four-year-old white Pontiac pull up by your house now, you'll know who's coming.
That's Angela's car.
Angela Edwards.
She's coordinator of Project Boost, another of those well-intentioned urban acronyms that can seem strangely depressing until you meet the people behind the letters.
So let's quickly dispose of the letters: Better Overall Outcome through Student and Family Training (no one knows where the F went).


U.S. DISAPPOINTED BY HANOI DEFECTOR
The Defense Department recently brought a Vietnamese Government film maker to the United States because he said he had new information about Americans still unaccounted for from the Vietnam War, officials say.
But the film maker, Trung Hieu, failed to produce any useful material, and is now seeking political asylum.
The case is likely to set off a new round of raised hopes and charges of fraud by opposing forces on this emotionally charged issue, just before a crucial round of public hearings is held by the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs.


No. 2 Official Is Appointed At Thiokol
The Thiokol Corporation, a maker of solid rocket motors for the space shuttle and military missiles, said yesterday that it had chosen John R. Myers, who has headed a Connecticut engine manufacturing company, as its president and chief operating officer, effective July 6.
Mr.
Myers had been the president of the Lycoming division of Textron Inc., which sells engines to the military and commercial aerospace industries.
U.
Edwin Garrison, the chairman and chief executive, had also been president but for the last year has been searching for an executive to strengthen the management team.


Child World And Lionel in Merger Talks
Two toy retailers operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, Child World Inc. and the Lionel Corporation, said yesterday they were discussing combining their operations.
If completed, the merger would create a chain of roughly 140 stores, and enable each retailer to achieve some economies of scale, according to company officials.


Women Alone Can't Make a Just Society; A Shared Affront
To the Editor:
Like Naomi Wolf, I hope that the women who heard her speak at their graduation from Scripps College (Op-Ed, May 31) will push to find and express their public voices.
I find it impossible, however, to square my own recollections of an event that serves as the cornerstone of Ms.
Wolf's address.
Much of Ms.
Wolf's speech resonates with her painful memory of a Yale "Graduation from Hell" eight years ago, in which she recalls that only the women were silenced and shamed by Dick Cavett, the commencement speaker, while the men listening "were confirmed in the power of a powerful institution."


Balanced-Budget Amendment Fails to Gain House Approval
A proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget fell short of the two-thirds vote needed for passage in the House of Representatives today, after which the measure died for the year when its Senate sponsor announced he would not seek a vote there.
Though a significant majority of representatives supported the amendment, the vote was a surprising Congressional repudiation of national polls showing similar public support and of the widespread expectation here only weeks ago that House passage was certain and Senate approval very likely.
But once those impressions spread around the country, opponents inside and outside Congress worked energetically to defeat the plan.


The Art Market
Sotheby's and Liquidity
It appears that A. Alfred Taubman, the chairman of Sotheby's, and Max M. Fisher, the company's vice chairman, need cash.
Yesterday Sotheby's announced it had filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a proposed public offering of 10 million shares of Class A limited-voting common stock from personal holdings.
Mr.
Taubman is expected to sell 8.5 million shares, worth about $103 million at current prices, and Mr.
Fisher and Martinique Hotel Inc., a corporation owned by Mr.
Fisher's family, are expected to sell 2.5 million shares, worth about $30 million.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON CAMPAIGN STAFF ASKED TO FORGO PAYCHECKS
The Clinton campaign is struggling with more immediate problems these days than Ross Perot's robust candidacy.
About 200 campaign staff members have been asked to forgo their paychecks next week.
The campaign organization is paying $400,000 for the first of at least three half-hour commercials it plans to broadcast starting Friday.
The program will be on NBC from 8 to 8:30 P.M.


Monkey Susceptible to AIDS Is Milestone in Vaccine Work
In a development that could greatly assist research on AIDS vaccines, scientists have discovered an animal that can be infected with the AIDS virus and that gets sick, just as people do.
The animal is Macaca nemestrina, a light brown southeast Asian monkey, commonly known as the pigtail macaque.
The only other animal known to be susceptible to H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, is the chimpanzee.
But chimpanzees do not actually develop the disease; also, unlike the macaque (pronounced ma-KAK), chimpanzees are an endangered species, expensive and difficult to raise.


Art in Review
Group Show  Stux Gallery 163 Mercer Street SoHo Through July 31
Landscapes, both as subject and as genre, are the focus of the seven photographic works in this small show.
The artists here all quote, with varying degrees of self-consciousness, familiar picturesque landscape styles.
But at the same time they try to have it both ways and keep an ironic distance from their subjects.
The team of Michael Clegg and Martin Guttmann, for example, has drawn a pair of power lines across the top of their winter landscape with a black marking pen.
In his large color shot of a harbor scene, Jeff Wall includes the industrial activity around the docks along with the beautiful, cloud-covered mountain peaks in the distance.
The most spectacular disruption of the landscape comes in a wall-sized color print by Ange Leccia, who photographed explosions in nine barrels that he placed in a field in northern France.
The resulting picture shows orange flames shooting toward the sky like oil-well fires in Kuwait, in the middle of the otherwise pastoral scene.


Interlake Prices High-Yield Issue
Among high-yield issues priced yesterday was a $220 million offering by the Interlake Corporation, which is selling senior subordinated debentures due in 2002 through underwriters led by Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Priced at 100, the debentures will yield investors 12.125 percent.
Underwriters note, however that the high-yield issue is callable by the company in five years and also features a sinking-fund provision that will retire about 23 percent of the issue's face amount, beginning March 1, 2001.


New President At Ketchum Chicago
For the second time in two months, Ketchum Advertising has changed presidents at one of its large offices.
The agency said yesterday that Timothy Dorgan, 39 years old, would become president in Chicago, succeeding Lee Lippman, 55, who would leave effective today.
Mr.
Dorgan had been president and chief operating officer at Noble &amp; Associates in Chicago.


Shake-Up at G.M.A.C. in Wake of L.I. Fraud Case
Moving to restore confidence after being victimized by a fraud prosecutors say was committed by a Buick dealer and was one of the biggest at a financial institution, the General Motors Corporation today removed two top executives of its financing arm.
It is also removing current and former managers of the finance unit's branch office in Hauppauge, L.I., which supervised the accounts of the indicted dealer, John M. McNamara.
Mr.
McNamara, a respected figure on Long Island until his arrest on April 15, pleaded not guilty last week to charges that he had defrauded G.M. of $436 million.
A Stunning Departure
Prosecutors say that over a period of seven years he forged documents indicating that he had sold 70,000 customized vans to customers in the Middle East.
General Motors lent him millions of dollars based on those documents.
In its indictment, the Government said the vehicles never existed.


Legislators Vote to Ban Photo Radar For Speeders
By 74 to 1, the New Jersey Assembly voted today to ban the use of photo radar, an automated device that photographs speeders and sends evidence of their transgressions in the mail.
Protests against the system have been growing since road signs went up in April announcing that the machine would be tested by the New Jersey State Police under a Federal grant from the Department of Transportation.


Athletes Are Leashed, But Their Tails Wag
Think of Michael Jordan as a tall dog, a Weimaraner, perhaps, smooth, clever and somewhat other-wordly in appearance.
If you think of him this way, it doesn't really matter what happens this weekend between the Bulls and the Trail Blazers or whether Jordan retains his best-in-show title as American sports' premier salesman-role model.
Jordan, after all, is just a pet jock.
Mark Messier is a pet jock, an all-white husky, and those big, amiable outfielders who jumped into our laps this year, Danny Tartabull and Bobby Bonilla, are Labrador retrievers.


Delegates From 4 Nations Warm to a High-Profile Role: Global Powerbroker
Trailing clouds of reporters through the corridors of the Earth Summit convention center or forging coalitions behind closed doors, several faces have emerged from the 7,000 delegates as international powerbrokers.


Executive Changes
APPLEBEE INTERNATIONAL INC., Kansas City, Mo., a restaurant chain, appointed George D. Shadid chief financial officer.
CHEMICAL BANKING CORP., New York, appointed Luke S. Hayden senior vice president and head of secondary marketing for the national consumer business group.


Craig Ellwood, 70, An Architect, Is Dead
Craig Ellwood, an architect known for his minimal steel-and-glass designs, died on May 30 in Pergine Valdarno, Italy, where he lived.
He was 70 years old.
He apparently died of a heart attack, said his wife, Leslie.


Art in Review
Lorie Novak  Jayne H. Baum Gallery 588 Broadway (between Prince and Houston Streets) SoHo Through July 3
Using the simple device of projecting snapshots onto various backdrops, Lorie Novak creates environments that are as shadowy and evocative as memory.
Here she moves outdoors, projecting slides of her own family and other pictures of people onto trees at night and photographing them with very long exposures.
The results, presented as large color prints, are rife with Surrealist overtones.
Frequently the projected face takes on the jagged outline of the tree it appears against, suggesting a tattered fragment of a photograph or a particularly detailed form of topiary.
In other pictures the tree's leaves become the figure's skin, as if the person had become a monument covered with ivy.
A white-haired matron in pearls, for example, has the timeless solidity of the Marquis de Sade in Man Ray's drawings of him as a stone fortress.


Little, Brown Picks Publisher
Dan Farley, the publisher and vice president of trade paperbacks for Simon &amp; Schuster, has been appointed publisher and vice president of Little, Brown &amp; Company's adult trade division.
Mr.
Farley will be responsible for the marketing and promotion of books, as well as sales and subsidiary rights for the adult trade, children's and Bullfinch divisions, said Charles E. Hayward, Little, Brown's president.


Rookie Comes Home Already a Success
Karen Noble has already made an impact as a rookie on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour by finishing second in the Mazda L.P.G.A.
Championship last month, but there is nothing she wants more than to do well this week.
Noble is New Jersey's only representative on the tour and this week's event, the Shop Rite L.P.G.A.
Classic, at Somers Point near Atlantic City, is the only elite tournament to be staged this year in New Jersey.


Clues Point to Young Planet Systems Nearby
Evidence that planetary systems resembling the young solar system may exist in nearby parts of our galaxy was reported today by four teams of astronomers working independently.
Three of the research papers they presented at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society focused on a star called beta Pictoris, which is visible from the Southern Hemisphere.
All three investigations found chemical substances in a disk around the star identical to substances believed to have made up a similar disk of dust and debris that once encircled the Sun.


Suburban a Doodle Dandy No More
The 106th running of the Suburban Handicap, one of New York's landmark races, will be switched from July 4 to July 18 to fill a gap that has developed suddenly in the American Championship Racing Series.
In its new slot, the Suburban will replace the New England Classic as the seventh event in the series of nine races for senior handicap horses like Best Pal, Strike the Gold and Fly So Free.
The vacancy occurred late last week when the operators of Rockingham Park in New Hampshire reported that they could not post the $500,000 purse for the New England Classic because of a downturn in their business.


Pact on Environment Near, But Hurdles on Aid Remain
A multibillion-dollar aid package to help save the developing world's environmental resources took shape here today as national leaders began to arrive for the Earth Summit's concluding phase.
After working through the night, negotiators were said to have agreed on almost all aspects of an ambitious package of measures to promote environmentally sustainable development in the poorer south, but officials said the United States contribution was likely to be small.
Negotiators still struggled to resolve their differences over the aid that the wealthier industrial nations of the North would offer the poor nations of the South to offset the extra cost that the latter face for safeguarding the environment and preserving disappearing forests.
Talks Through the Weekend
As a result of the standoff, the Earth Summit's chief organizer, Maurice Strong of Canada, announced today that negotiations would continue into the weekend so President Bush and other leaders can help shape the final compromise.
"Involving the heads of state and government personally will give us a better result," Mr.
Strong told a news conference today.
"By Sunday we hope they will have produced a full agreement for approval by the summit's final plenary session."
But diplomats said the decision to involve heads of state and government in the final talks reflected the intractable difficulties that had arisen and that could now be resolved only by compromises at the highest political level.
As their price for agreeing to Agenda 21, the plan for making economic development environmentally sustainable, developing countries want the industrialized world to meet a 20-year-old commitment to raise its aid to seven-tenths of 1 percent of economic output by 2000, from four-tenths of 1 percent at present.
How Much Is Wanted
They also want donors to enlarge the size of the $1.3 billion Global Environmental Facility that they set up three years ago in the World Bank and to add a special "earth increment" to the World Bank agency that supplies loans on easier terms so it can provide virtually free environmental aid to the very poorest nations.
The United States, which has contributed $50 million to the Global Environmental Facility so far, is prepared to consider an increase and is ready to study an "earth increment," officials say.
Washington is also offering $150 million in new aid to help developing countries safeguard their forests.
But today the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Michael Young, reiterated Washington's long-standing refusal to accept any target for its overall aid, arguing that such targets do not reflect the developing world's ability to absorb the money.
He also said such loan commitments absolve poor countries from the need to attract foreign investment.
Instead, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, William K. Reilly, presented a plan to carry out quickly a new convention curbing emission of the so-called greenhouse gases; most of the plan had already been announced.
Mr.
Reilly also said President Bush would propose a global inventory of biological resources when he addresses the Earth Summit on Friday.
European and other Western countries, which have all accepted in principle the aid target of seven-tenths of 1 percent, are now trying to convince leaders in the developing world that donors will increase environmental aid to secure an agreement here -- even if many will not commit themselves to reach that figure by a particular date.
Several delegations have already indicated that their leaders may present new aid offers when they address the Earth Summit.
As a result, developing countries say they are waiting to see just what is offered.
"We want to see what they come up with, so the negotiations will go on for another day or two," said Jamsheed A. Marker, Pakistan's Ambassador to the United Nations, who is also spokesman for the Group of 77, as the developing countries call themselves.
An Offer From Japan
Japanese officials have said Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa plans to announce an increase in the amount of environmental aid that Japan offers to developing countries to $1.4 billion a year over the next five years, from about $800 million a year between 1989 and 1991 .
But in order not to embarrass President Bush, these officials say, Mr.
Miyazawa will probably delay announcing plans to raise Japan's total development aid to $70 billion during the coming five years, from $50 billion over the last five years.
The announcement could come in early July at the Munich summit meeting of the seven major industrial democracies.
The 12 members of the European Community are also putting together a $4.3 billion package of environmental aid projects, which they plan to present at the final sessions.
While the package will include both existing projects and some new money, European diplomats hope it will encourage developing countries to compromise on their demands.
Forest Talks Also Blocked
The continuing standoff over money has contributed to the stalemate between North and South over steps to preserve the world's forests.
Tonight a senior United States official said Washington had virtually abandoned its hopes of securing a firm commitment to negotiate a binding international convention to safeguard forests.
"We are not going to get a convention," the official said.
"It's too much of an article of faith for the Group of 77.
But Malaysia, which has opposed even a nonbinding set of forestry principles, was reported by delegates to be adopting a more flexible stand, and Brazil, which has the world's largest forests, was said to be anxious to promote a compromise to assure success at the meetings to which it has played host.
Thus, diplomats said, India has emerged as the developing country most opposed to any move by the Earth Summit that might imply international control of the world's remaining forests.


TV Weekend; Very Old and Very New Soap Operas Back to Back
Where does soap opera end and reality begin?
Television entertainment obviously couldn't care less.
Tonight at 9, CBS has "Guiding Light: The Prime-Time Special," celebrating the daytime drama's 40th anniversary on television -- and not available for prereview.
Counting its radio years, the soap has reached age 55, putting Johnny Carson's 30-year stint on NBC in the upstart category.
Though not very likely, "Guiding Light" could theoretically run out of plot complications and character variations.
But television is convinced that it has another programming weapon in reserve: the so-called reality shows.
These are the cheap productions using real people and unknown actors, the kind who cannot command expensive contracts.
CBS's "Rescue 911," from Arnold Shapiro Productions, is one successful example.
So what's the next step for CBS?
More Shapiro productions, of course.
Enter, tonight at 10, "Secret Lives of Husbands and Wives."


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday about Paul Tsigrikes, who was named marketing director at Redbook magazine, omitted the name of his successor at House Beautiful in some editions.
She is Licia Hahn, previously marketing director of European Travel &amp; Life.


NOVELL TO BUY ANNATEK SYSTEMS FOR $10 MILLION
Novell Inc. said it had agreed to acquire Annatek Systems Inc. of Boulder, Colo. for $10 million in cash.
Annatek, a privately held company, produces automated software distribution and management systems that consolidate software distribution, installation and updates, and coordinate activities between mainframes, servers and personal computers on a network.


Man in the News: Charles W. Stenholm; The Texas Congressman Behind the Amendment
The legislative shepherd who guided the constitutional budget-balancing amendment in the House of Representatives is a conservative Texas Democrat who played a starring role a decade ago in making Reaganomics a reality.
But the Congressman, Charles W. Stenholm, wants it known that he no longer considers himself a Reagan disciple.
Today, he bitterly regrets having mustered the crucial support of Southern Democrats, known as the Boll Weevils, for Mr.
Reagan's economic policies, which piled up mountains of debt.


Topics of The Times; What a Rose Is
Whatever the weather -- and whatever is the right word for the weather brought this year by May and June -- the season now turns into its showiest time.
The big bloomers are out -- the peonies, rhododendrons and roses -- and spring, which is always generous, turns positively lavish in its last days.
The rhododendrons are floral overachievers, bundling their blossoms into clumps that would be bulky if they did not have a kind of outsized charm.
The peonies are effusive, both delicate and overweight at the same time.
They lead a short and lovely life before turning blowsy, as ripe beauties do.
But in a vase they are timeless -- as if they had been freshly picked from an old French flower print.


Review/Film: Housesitter; Likes Him, Loves His Home
IF, as some skeptics suggest, there is hidden, somewhere deep below Central Park, one mammoth kitchen that prepares the food for every Chinese restaurant in New York, it now seems possible that Hollywood might have its own secret megaworkshop for the assembly-line manufacture of movie comedies.
Why else would they all taste so much alike and vanish from memory even before they're over?
To be sure, the comedies have different titles and are distributed by different companies.
Some are passably funny.
Yet they all share a surpassing blandness and an almost patriotic need to uphold middle-class values, as observed not in the world in which we live, but in generations of television sitcoms that, with time, have created their own values.
These comedies can't even be easily enjoyed as escapist entertainment.
They are so out of touch that they effectively deny any reality one would wish to escape from.


Review/Theater; Richard III; McKellen's Richard Is for This Century
WHEN Shakespeare's Richard III refuses to eat dinner until he is brought the head of the allegedly traitorous Lord Hastings, his henchmen hustle poor Hastings offstage to do the dirty deed.
But in Richard Eyre's Royal National Theater production of "Richard III," transported to the 1930's and ignited by Ian McKellen's transcendent star performance, the audience's dinner is in jeopardy as well.
Hastings's severed, silver-haired head, unceremoniously dumped into a red fire bucket, is soon set before Mr.
McKellen, who idly pokes a worming finger into its bloody muck as if he were searching its orifices for buried treasure or, worse, private pleasure.
What exactly Richard hopes to find in Hastings's head remains a mystery perhaps best left unsolved, but that strange, ghoulishly funny bit of business is typical of Mr.
McKellen's uninhibited approach to the Shakespearean villain the 20th century has long since sadly recognized as its own.
Without relinquishing any of the evil in the part, the actor finds some of the malicious humor in Richard that Brecht and Chaplin once found in Hitler.
Neither a crookback nor sexually overheated, Mr.
McKellen's king is a stunning antiheroic alternative to the archetypal Olivier image.
He is something to see, and quickly, for "Richard III" is stopping at the Brooklyn Academy of Music for only two weeks before taking off on a cross-country tour.


Despite Distrust, Most Panamanians Seem Friendly to U.S.
The protests in Panama during President Bush's stopover there yesterday underscored lingering resentment against the United States in some sectors at a time when most of the Panamanian nation seems to look to Washington with friendly eyes.
The protests could have evolved from a number of sources.
One would be supporters of the former military ruler, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, who was captured in the American invasion of December 1989 and tried and convicted in Miami on drug-trafficking charges.


Chief Named For Financial Services Unit
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation has turned to an executive who spent most of his career at the rival General Electric Company to head its troubled financial services subsidiary.
Robert A. Watson, who is 46 years old, will succeed Leo H. Yochum as chief executive of Westinghouse Financial Services on July 1, although Mr.
Yochum will remain as chairman.


COMPANY NEWS
AT&amp;T PARADYNE CORP., Largo, Fla., announced a multiyear, $30 million data communications equipment sales agreement with Unitel Communications Inc., of Canada.
CUMMINS ENGINE CO., Columbus, Ind., acquired the remaining 36 percent of Onan Corp. from Hawker Siddeley Overseas Investments Ltd. of Britain for $64 million.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DIP IN READING AND MATH SCORES
After two years of rebounding academic results in the New York City school system, reading and mathematics scores dropped sharply this spring, many of the city's superintendents say.
Although Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has not finished analyzing the results of standardized tests that some students took in April and May, reports from half the city's 32 district superintendents indicate that the school system's recent upbeat trend -- which saw a decline in dropout rates and a rise in attendance -- may be faltering.
A1.
CO-OP ACCUSED OF DISCRIMINATION
Seeking to expand the legal definition of marriage to include gay partnerships, the New York City Human Rights Commission has accused an East Side cooperative of discriminating against a gay man who inherited an apartment from his companion.
At a commission hearing yesterday, the commission's staff charged that the co-op board of 60 Sutton Place refused to allow a 54-year-old hotel owner to move into an apartment that had belonged to his companion, who died in 1989.
B3.
EMBEZZLEMENT INQUIRY AT HOSTOS


Reading for Re-entry
To the Editor:
I agree with Richard Wade and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Commission on Libraries that literacy should be made a part of the release and rehabilitation system for prisoners (Op-Ed, May 29).


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Pledges No Tax Rise, Except in 'Emergency'
Ross Perot, whose position on raising taxes has shifted in recent years, said yesterday that, as President, he would "absolutely not" raise taxes, except in the case of "an incredible emergency."
Mr.
Perot went on to pledge not to raise taxes in any event without some unspecified form of advance "clearance" from the American people.
At the same time that he promised to hold the line on taxes, Mr.
Perot also said during a two-hour television appearance that while he opposed the balanced budget amendment defeated yesterday in the House of Representatives, he would favor laws that outlaw deficit spending and require a balanced budget.


Scores in Math Test And in Reading Fall In New York Schools
After two years of rebounding academic results in the New York City school system, reading and mathematics scores dropped sharply this spring, many of the city's superintendents say.
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has not yet completed an analysis of the results of standardized tests that elementary and junior high school students took in April and May.


Chicago Removes 'Homeless Huts'


Clark County, Nev., In Bond Offering
A $250 million tax-exempt bond offering by Clark County, Nev., is priced to yield a maximum 6.55 percent for an issue due in 2012 through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Other long-term issues include a bond due in 2016 that is priced to yield 6.53 percent and another issue due in 2017 that is priced to yield 6.52 percent.


Assembly Leaders Reject Delay Enforcing Auto Emission Rules
An attempt in the Legislature to delay enforcing strict reductions in auto emissions appears to have been turned back, preserving a cornerstone of New York State's plan to combat air pollution in the coming decades.
The delay, strongly favored by auto manufacturers and some oil companies, passed the Republican-led State Senate in March and was gaining momentum after an Assemblyman from the Syracuse area said he had gathered 72 sponsors, just 3 short of the votes needed for passage.


Maneuvering Begins in Queens
Although the lines are not yet clear on New York State's once-in-a-decade redistricting map, they ignited a furious battle today between two of the state's veteran Democratic Congressmen, possible opponents under the most likely redistricting plan.
And by the end of the day, it appeared clear that what had begun as maneuvering for position could escalate into a bitter campaign should the two face off in a Democratic primary.


Scientists Report Novel Therapy for Brain Tumors
A type of gene therapy unlike any tried before has proved highly successful in treating brain tumors in laboratory rodents, scientists have found.
So outstanding are the results from the experimental animals that the researchers have received permission from a Federal regulatory panel to try the new method in human patients.
They hope to begin clinical trials in August.


Castro, Looking for Investors, Courts Executives From U.S.
When 125 foreign businessmen, most of them Americans, descended on Havana on Wednesday for a day of briefings on investment opportunities that remain largely off-limits because of a three-decade-old United States embargo, President Fidel Castro decided to personally assure them of a proper reception.
Along with many of his senior deputies, Mr.
Castro greeted the visitors in a lavish reception in the Palace of the Revolution.
From a leadership whose public face is often both distant and austere came a two-hour charm offensive that seemed to signal that the inevitability of market forces has struck home in Cuba.


Times's Project For Convention
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that it would distribute a free daily convention bulletin for participants at the Democratic National Convention in New York in July.
The bulletin will be published from July 11 to July 16.
Convention Times, which will include advertising, will also include information like the daily convention agenda, lists of shops and restaurants and maps of the city.


Hidden and Haunted Behind the Headlines; Parents of an Accused Long Island Teen-Ager Are Prisoners of Sensation-Seekers
It was an early evening on Berkley Lane, the dead-end street of single-family homes where Amy Fisher lived until her arrest.
Hank Arkin watched a white sedan turn down the road, cruise past 2092, turn around and leave.
"Usually, we get 10 strange cars a year down this block," said Mr.
Arkin, who owns the house across the street.
"Try 20 a day."


Women Alone Can't Make a Just Society; The Chaplain's Lament
To the Editor:
Naomi Wolf complains (Op-Ed, May 31) that "when women come too close to masculine power, someone will draw critical attention to their bodies." It is hardly necessary for men to take on this responsibility; women do it quite adequately.
From the moment a young male reaches puberty, he is bombarded with sexual stimuli by the culture in general and his female peers in particular.
The way women dress and conduct themselves makes it virtually impossible for men to overlook their physical charms.
Nothing is more absurd than a television talk show in which a feminine panel denounces sexual harassment, while dressed in such a way as to exhibit acres of its own flesh.


Restaurants
The soft, genteel appearance of Jewel of India, an inviting restaurant on West 44th Street, belies the aggressive, spice-stoked fare that emerges from the kitchen.
This place is not for tame palates (although mild dishes can be found), and the overall quality at this early stage is impressive.
This spacious, multi-million-dollar space on two floors is owned by Victor Khubani, one of the owners of Tandoor on Madison Avenue, and Bhushan Arora, the former manager.
Their notion at Jewel of India was to brighten up the traditional dark Indian decor and give customers plenty of space.
The results are delightful.
Beige walls are adorned with mother-of-pearl and brass.
Silk tapestries and marble add an element of luxury.
Upstairs, in a peach and beige room, a daily $10.95 buffet lunch is served.
This is a good place for large groups because of the ample space and low noise.


It's Not Always Yo, Ho, Ho but the Pirates Sail Along
There are layers of subtext to the surface camaraderie of the clubhouse for the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Personal politics, contract posturing, affairs of ego and questions about race are present along with the laughter, the friendship and, of course, the success.
Amid it all, there is probably no more central a personality than Andy Van Slyke.
The center fielder is a man of talent (Van Slyke has hit .339 through 58 games), wit (Van Slyke hung the designation "Poison Avery" on the Braves' left-handed pitcher during the 1991 Pirates-Braves league championship series) and occasionally controversial wealth (he signed a three-year $12.6 million contract extension before the 1991 season).


Potential Bidder Gives U.P.I. A Reprieve in Its 11th Hour
With only 24 hours left before it ran out of cash, United Press International got a 10-day reprieve today when a New York lawyer who is well connected politically put down $180,000 to evaluate buying the service.
The potential buyer is Leon H. Charney, who served as a special adviser to President Jimmy Carter at the Camp David peace talks and is the moderator of a current-affairs program, "The Leon Charney Report," on WNYC, a public television station operated by New York City on Channel 31.


Louisiana Legislature Approves Casino Gambling
A bill legalizing casino gambling in New Orleans was approved tonight by the Louisiana Legislature.
The passage paves the way for New Orleans to join Las Vegas and Atlantic City as major urban gambling centers.
The bill, which Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards has said he would sign, moved with surprising swiftness through the Legislature this week.
The bill was voted down by the State House of Representatives last week but revived early this week, then was passed narrowly by the House on Monday evening and by a Senate committee on Wednesday.
The full Senate passed it this evening by a vote of 21 to 18.


Pop/Jazz; Why Soul Goes On Forever: It's Life, Love and Death
Soul music is the sound of gospel passion poured into matters of home and heart.
In the 1960's, the music distilled rhythm-and-blues, gospel, pop and rock into a style that mirrored rising expectations.
Ever since, it has been a model for songwriters who envy its concision and for performers who want to reclaim its fervor.
And soul music has held its own, its dignity surviving overwrought revivals by everyone from the Blues Brothers to Michael Bolton.
"The music has withstood the test of time," said Otis Clay, a 50-year-old soul singer who has been performing professionally since 1962.
"It never sounds dated because it is some of the greatest music ever made. The music is very simple, and the simplicity of it is what blows people's minds. Everybody lives, loves and dies, and that's what this music is about."


On Stage, and Off
A Company's Next Move
The new season at Tony Randall's National Actors Theater is still short two plays and has yet to firm up its directors and its acting company.
But the people in charge know where they want to have parties.
The organization, which recently concluded its debut season on Broadway at the Belasco Theater, has announced a move to the Lyceum Theater.
An executive who works with the company and spoke on condition of anonymity says its board decided the lobby at the Belasco was too small for its social functions.


Books of The Times; 2 Serious Mysteries With the Nerve to Be Fun
Kissing the Gunner's Daughter  By Ruth Rendell  378 pages.
The Mysterious Press. $19.95.
Belgrave Square  By Anne Perry  361 pages.
Fawcett Columbine. $18.
Traditional British mystery writers remind us that at heart their stories are nothing less than novels, with memorable characters, engaging backgrounds and incidental information conveyed palatably.
To place superior mysteries only on the genre shelf is to diminish their value as serious fiction that has the nerve to be fun.
When they feature familiar detectives -- today's examples are Ruth Rendell's Chief Inspector Reginald Wexford and Anne Perry's Inspector Thomas Pitt and his helpmate, Charlotte Pitt -- they're even more comforting for the reader.
Chief Inspector Wexford's venue is Sussex, where, if not careful, we're liable to learn a good deal about life in provincial England.
The Pitts operate in Victorian London, where class differences are never forgotten, against a realistic political and historical backdrop.


Women Alone Can't Make a Just Society
To the Editor:
Thank you for "A Woman's Place" (Op-Ed, May 31) by Naomi Wolf, adapted from her inspiriting commencement address to the women of Scripps College.
It's about time women openly offered encouragement and guidance to other women, heedless of whom it might offend.
Ms.
Wolf shares with young women what they can or should expect from now on.
Moreover, the "survival kit" she offers comes equipped with wisdom, telling women to demand top dollar for their work, to reject men's sexism and to speak up.
However, it also carries a message of the responsibility we must bear once we achieve equality.


Bavaro Is Set to Sign
Last July, on the opening day of training camp, the Giants waived Mark Bavaro, their one-time All-Pro tight end, because his left knee had not mended from serious surgery.
He sat out the entire season, but today a healthier Bavaro is scheduled to fly to Cleveland and sign a one-year contract with the Browns.
Bavaro would have earned $750,000 last season had he not been released by the Giants.
Art Modell, the Browns' owner, indicated by telephone last night that Bavaro's salary with the Browns would be lower, but he also said the contract would include incentives based on productivity.


Yeltsin Needs Us. We Need Yeltsin.
President Boris Yeltsin of Russia will come to the summit meeting in Washington on June 16 and 17 not looking for a handout but to join hands in a new partnership based on shared democratic values.
The U.S. must seize this opportunity not only because of our ideals but also because of our interest in peace and progress.
Those who question President Yeltsin's commitment to democracy and free-market reforms and urge the West to keep Russia at arm's length make a tragic mistake.


Review/Photography; Tantalizing Variations on the Family Snapshot
From family snapshots to pictures of the bowling team, images of people gathered together form a central genre of photography.
"Multiple Exposure: The Group Portrait in Photography," at the Zabriskie Gallery, offers a welcome if somewhat specialized survey of pictures of this sort.
Leslie Tonkonow, who organized the exhibition, has chosen to emphasize work by 20th-century art photographers like Walker Evans, Andre Kertesz, Man Ray and William Wegman.
Although many of these photographers look to commercial or amateur photographs for aspects of their own style, only a small selection of these vernacular pictures are included in the exhibition, which was shown earlier this year at the Ezra and Cecile Zilkha Galery at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn.
Even so, more than a few pictures in the exhibition are essentially variations on the family snapshot.
Lee Friedlander includes himself in the frame, along with his wife and two daughters, in a black-and-white photograph that has a casually cheerful air.
Tina Barney, meanwhile, presents a large, intensely colored print of herself and her sons at a family cookout.


Corrections
A brief article on Wednesday about former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance's call for increased American involvement in United Nations peacekeeping operations misstated the proposal.
Mr.
Vance, now a United Nations special envoy to Yugoslavia, called for an increased Defense Department role in coordinating United States participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations; he did not suggest that the Pentagon assume primary responsibility for such operations.


Folly Defeated, by Nine Votes
Things looked bad this week.
One after another, proponents of a constitutional amendment to balance the Federal budget rose on the House floor to celebrate their supposed discipline.
Some discipline.
The earliest possible effective date was 1998.
And "effective" could only refer to jeopardizing the economy and trivializing the Constitution.


Talent Pool Is Shrinking In U.S. Men's Gymnastics
A coach for 25 years, Francis Allen realized a lifelong dream last month when the United States Gymnastics Federation named him the men's coach of the Olympic team going to Barcelona, Spain, this summer.
Yet all the work leading to his appointment brought him another realization: that so long as current trends continue, years might pass before the United States men's team can challenge the best in the world, traditionally, athletes from the various republics that comprised the Soviet Union.


Review/Art; German Artist Haunted By a Threatening World
The German painter Lovis Corinth (1858-1925) was by all accounts an enormous, bumptious man -- "like a polar bear with small red eyes," the art historian Julius Meier-Graefe recalled -- but he had an artist's touch of extraordinary delicacy.
That delicacy is only sometimes evident in the luridly theatrical figurative paintings that made his fame at mid-career, but it became the essence of his work toward the end of his life, when he refined his vision in the more modest mediums of etching and watercolor.
It was the vision of an intensely complex man, as he is revealed in the National Academy of Design's "Lovis Corinth: Prints, Drawings and Watercolors From the Family Collection," the first major museum show of Corinth in 25 years, and the first public exhibition of work bequeathed by the artist to his two children.
Born into a peasant farming family (he never forgot the days he spent in a village slaughterhouse as a child), Corinth was, by inclination, a monarchist.
Trained in the classicizing academic traditions of 19th-century Paris, he retained a strong connection with German art's penchant for the grotesque.
Although he fulminated against artistic innovations like Cubism, he was himself a precursor of Expressionism.
His avidly nationalistic politics were, one senses, as much a product of personal fear as a rational conviction.
Germany's defeat in World War I coincided with the onset of Corinth's own physical decline, and his psyche seemed haunted by the need to find safety in a threatened and threatening world.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a hearing on a development plan for Brighton Beach misidentified the hearing site.
It was City Hall, not Brooklyn Borough Hall.


Cosmo Sirchio, 58, A Fashion Designer And Businessman
Cosmo Sirchio, a fashion industry executive and former fashion designer, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Mr.
Sirchio was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan and Newtown, Conn.
He died of complications from AIDS, said his companion and business partner, Donald Friese.


Four Are Shot in Phoenix Office; Woman and Gunman Are Killed


The Spoken Word
READING, Harlem Artistic Space, 3 East 128th Street, Harlem.
Esther Iverem, an author, is to read from her work.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 690-2603.
READINGS OF CHILDREN'S BOOKS, Books of Wonder, 132 Seventh Avenue, at 18th Street, Chelsea, and 464 Hudson Street, at Barrow Street, lower Manhattan.
Tedd Arnold, author of "The Signmaker's Assistant," is to read from his work.
Tomorrow at noon at the Seventh Avenue store.
Free.
On Sunday at 11:30 A.M., staff members at both stores will give free readings of stories suggested by the audience.
Information: (212) 645-8006 or 989-3270.


What Former Mayor Really Said About the U.N. and Why
To the Editor:
"New York Rediscovers the U.N." (editorial, June 2) states that "New York's concern marks a wholesome change from the days when former Mayor Edward Koch groused about troublesome foreigners."
I challenge you to produce out of your news morgue a single quote on my part that could be the basis for that statement.


The Serious Business of Comedy Clubs
"THERE are too many comedians," Rita Rudner declared recently.
"Pretty soon the Government is going to pay you not to be a comedian the same way they pay you not to grow wheat." Ms.
Rudner, who is one of the country's four or five most successful young female comics, was commenting on the glut of performers in a field that until Eddie Murphy's ascent to superstardom and the proliferation of comedy on cable television was difficult to break into.
Then in the early 1980's, comedy became "the rock of the 80's," as Caroline Hirsch, the owner of Caroline's -- New York's most prestigious comedy club -- called it a decade ago, and the stampede began.


Accordion History
Two performances of William Schimmel's "Opera Fisarmonica" are to take place this weekend, tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 7, at the Anahid Sofian Studio, 29 West 15th Street, Chelsea, Manhattan.
Mr.
Schimmel subtitles the opera "A Realization of the Life and Works of Pietro Deiro," the Italian immigrant credited with bringing the accordion to America in 1906.
It begins with "Five Essences," based on a violin concerto by Prokofiev.
Mr.
Schimmel is the accordionist, Micki Goodman the director and choreographer.
There are additional performances at the same times next weekend.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 876-0827.


Salomon Names Co-Head of Equities Unit
Moving to shore up the business most damaged by the Treasuries market scandals, Salomon Brothers Inc. announced yesterday that it had named a former executive with Morgan, Stanley &amp; Company as co-head of its equities division.
The naming of the executive, Rodney B. Berens, 47 years old, comes after months of tumult in the equities division, including the departure of its longtime head, Stanley Shopkorn, and a number of other defections throughout the unit's ranks.


Blazers' Small Change Pays Dividends
In the decisive minutes Wednesday night, when the game was going to be won or lost, the Portland Trail Blazers were smaller and perhaps more vulnerable.
But they were better, too.
Two of their wide-body players, Kevin Duckworth and Buck Williams, sat on the bench.
Danny Ainge went in, and the Blazers' three-guard lineup -- Ainge, Clyde Drexler and Terry Porter -- turned what seemed like a certain loss into a Game 4 victory over the Chicago Bulls, 93-88, tying the National Basketball Association finals at two games apiece.


Economic Needs of States Propelled Gambling Surge
Louisiana's adoption of casino gambling yesterday reflects a trend that has accelerated in the past few years, driven less by arguments about wagering than about jobs and taxes.
"Nevada and Atlantic City had casino gambling pretty much to themselves until about 1988," said William R. Eadington, the director of the Institute for the Study of Gambling and Commercial Gaming at the University of Nevada at Reno.
"Now it has shown up in South Dakota, Iowa, Colorado and on many Indian reservations."


COMPANY NEWS: A $22,800 Economy Car; G.M. Begins Selling The Saturn in Taiwan
In its first year of production, G.M.'s Saturn has proved quite a popular car in the United States among buyers and dealers.
Now the Saturn Corporation is looking abroad.
Yesterday the General Motors unit began selling its Saturn coupes and sedans in Taiwan.
Taiwan represents Saturn's first export market and a first step in a strategy to export cars to Japan by the mid-1990's and then to other foreign countries.


CHRONICLE
With the summer social whirl revving up in the Hamptons, one requisite stop this weekend is a cocktail party at MARTHA STEWART'S in East Hampton, L.I.
It will benefit Planned Parenthood of Suffolk County.
Among those expected at the party tomorrow, milling about in the crowd of 700: Calvin and Kelly Klein, Christie Brinkley, Jann and Jane Wenner, Mark Hampton, Linda and Morton Janklow, Herbert Ross and Lee Radziwill, Ronald and Jo Carole Lauder, J. Bruce Llewellyn and Shahara Ahmad, Judy Licht and Jerry Della Femina and Charles and Bette-Ann Gwathmey.


Sounds Around Town
60's Intensity
Pharoah Sanders, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7902.
Pharoah Sanders is a gritty, tough tenor saxophonist who moves easily between be-bop and modal styles, throwing shouts and moans in either form, and he'll also sing a bit.
Everything he does has a 1960's intensity.
Shows are through Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight, with no third show on Sunday.
There is a $15 cover, plus a $10 minimum.
Wandering Tonalities
Cecil Taylor, Condon's, 117 East 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 254-0960.
Whatever it is Mr.
Taylor plays, it's without a genre to support it.
A virtuoso pianist, he wanders somewhere between the tonalities of European concert music and the improvisational freedom suggested by jazz.
He's performing with a quintet, and it's a chance to catch up with one of America's great virtuosos.
Sets are tonight through Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $15, and there is a two-drink minimum.


Nicholas G. Anton, 85, Is Dead; Invented Cancer Detecting Device
Nicholas Guy Anton, a physicist, engineer and inventor of monitoring devices that detect radiation and cancer, died on Wednesday at his daughter's home in St.
Louis, while on a visit.
A former resident of Brooklyn, he was 85 years old and lived in Coconut Creek, Fla.
He died after a brief illness, said the daughter, Dr. Nanci Bobrow.


State Assessors Raise Taxes on Most Apartments in New York City
Property taxes for owners of New York City's cooperatives, condominiums and rental apartment buildings would increase slightly next month under a decision yesterday by the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment, city officials said last night.
The city officials said they would file an appeal because they felt the state board had ignored provisions of state law in making its decision.


Panel Accuses Co-op of Violating Inheritance Rights in a Gay Partnership
Seeking to expand the legal definition of marriage to include gay partnerships, the New York City Human Rights Commission has accused an East Side cooperative of discriminating against a gay man who inherited an apartment from his companion.
At a commission hearing yesterday, the commission's staff charged that the co-op board of 60 Sutton Place refused to allow Harry Kirkpatrick, a 54-year-old hotel owner, to take over the lease of an apartment that had belonged to his companion, Martin Weiner, who died in 1989.


An Idea Grows in Brooklyn
Does it make sense to eliminate a $1.3-million program to save $170,000?
Not to Brooklyn College Athletic Director Leonard Roitman.
Facing $5.3 million in budget cuts, a committee at the college on Monday proposed that all intercollegiate athletics be eliminated to save $170,000 of the total.
Roitman figured he and his colleagues could do better.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Quayle, at Anti-Abortion Meeting, Presses 'Cultural Elite' Attack
Vice President Quayle took his campaign for traditional values to the nation's largest anti-abortion group today, with a full-throated, almost joyful iteration of the kind of social conservatism that fired the Republican Party in the 1980's.
Greeted by chants of "Four More Years!" and posters that declared, "Murphy Brown Doesn't Speak for Me," Mr.
Quayle asserted that he would press his case even though the "cultural elites" in "some of our newsrooms, sitcom studios and faculty lounges" may not like it.
"We're going to speak up for life," he declared.
"We're going to speak up for family values. We're going to speak up for America."


CHRONICLE
The Tisch name -- already on a hospital, a film school and a children's museum -- will soon be on a library, and for PRESTON ROBERT TISCH, president of the Tisch Foundation, that has personal significance.
The foundation has announced that it is donating $10 million to Tufts University to build a new library to augment the existing one on its campus in Medford, Mass.


Sports of The Times; Survival Of the Fittest
THE marathon began last evening: two boxing rings, 24 bouts and 48 fighters, each taking the other's best shot in hopes of earning a shot at the Olympics, and whatever lies beyond.
They have come here from 29 states, trained in all sorts of gyms for the opportunity of competing in these trials and making the 12-man United States Olympic team.


Super Food Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 9


Wiltek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Blazers Aren't Taking White Flag to Chicago
Their faces said one thing, but their voices said another.
Somehow, the Portland Trail Blazers still seem to believe they can win this thing.
When they walked slowly toward their locker room after tonight's game, the Blazers wore looks of weariness and resignation.
With time to think about it, though, the 119-106 loss they suffered to the Chicago Bulls didn't seem so bad.


Albert Gordon, 81, Biologist Who Aided Blood Cell Research
Dr.
Albert Saul Gordon, a physiologist whose work at New York University advanced the fight against blood disease, died yesterday at Long Beach Memorial Hospital on Long Island.
He was 81 years old.
He died of heart failure while visiting family members on the way to his summer home in Copake, a resort town in Columbia County, N.Y., his family said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
DINKINS CHASTISES EDUCATION OFFICIALS
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday lashed out at the Board of Education, the day after school officials blamed city budget cuts for disappointing results in reading and math scores.
But in a three-page statement, the Mayor never mentioned the test scores, which dropped sharply this spring.
Instead, he focused on the board's quarrelsome handling of a new AIDS curriculum and what he called its "ineffectual governance" of the school system.
Page 1.
CARDINAL'S MARCH CALLED TACTICAL SHIFT
John Cardinal O'Connor's decision to lead a march to an abortion clinic today is being viewed on both sides of the abortion battle as a striking departure from his usual tactics, one that even his allies in the anti-abortion movement acknowledge reflects frustration over recent setbacks in the efforts to stop legalized abortion.
Page 27.
FINANCIAL EXCHANGES PLAN JOINT MOVE
In a development project that could bring all of New York City's major financial exchanges under the same Wall Street roof, executives of the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the city's five commodities exchanges are in preliminary negotiations to build a new trading complex.
The proposal, acknowledged yesterday by several senior executives, and outlined in greater detail in discussions with people close to the negotiations, is being advocated aggressively by City Hall.
Page 27.
REGION POLICE OFFICERS SUSPENDED IN NEWARK
Six Newark police officers under investigation in the shooting of a 17-year-old suspected car thief were suspended from duty without pay yesterday, and the city's Mayor and police director complained that the officers' statements about the shooting were too sketchy.
Mayor Sharpe James has expressed concern about the possibility of street disorders since the youth, Howard Caesar, was shot early Tuesday as he walked away from a stolen car.
Although emotions did not seem high around West Side Park, the scene of the shooting, Mayor James said that the officers' "cover-up" of their roles in the shooting had placed Newark "at risk." Page 1.
MAN CHARGED AS TEEN-AGER'S ACCOMPLICE
A Brooklyn auto supply salesman has been charged as the mystery man who sold Amy Fisher the gun used in the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco and who acted as her driver.
Miss Fisher, 17 years old, is accused of shooting Mrs.
Buttafuoco on the doorstep of her Massapequa home.
The police have said she was having an affair with Joseph Buttafuoco, a 36-year-old auto body repairman, and plotted for several months to kill his wife.
Page 28.
NEW JERSEY LAND PLAN ADOPTED
After more than six years of debate and revisions, New Jersey adopted statewide land-use guidelines yesterday that are aimed at forcing growth into compact population centers and away from random sprawl.
State and local regulatory agencies are expected to base decisions about development according to the plan's five planning areas, from densely populated urban districts to environmentally sensitive, off-limits areas.
Page 28.
Regulators declare American Savings Bank insolvent. Business Day, Page 42.
F.B.I. seizes records of builder of Iroquois Pipeline. Business Day, Page 42.
About New York by Douglas Martin Page 27


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER Germany Ties C.I.S. in Final Minute
Germany, the defending World Cup champion, played to a 1-1 tie with the Commonwealth of Independent States yesterday at the European championships in Norrkoping, Sweden.
Igor Dobrovolski scored in the 63d minute on a penalty kick, but Thomas Hassler tied the score for Germany in the final minute on a 20-yard free kick.
German forward Rudi Voller broke his left arm in a 37th-minute collision with Oleg Kuznetsov. (AP)
Netherlands 1, Scotland 0: Dennis Bergkamp scored in the 78th minute to give the defending champion Dutch team a 1-0 victory over Scotland in Goteburg, Sweden.
Frank Rijkaard headed the ball into the goalmouth, where it went to Bergkamp. (AP) GOLF Forsman Leads by 2 Strokes
Dan Forsman scrambled to a five-under-par 66 and a two-stroke lead yesterday after two rounds of the storm-plagued Federal Express St.
Jude Classic in Memphis.
Seventy-seven golfers will finish the second round this morning.
Forsman had a 36-hole total of 12-under 130.
In second is Jim McGovern, who tied a course record with a nine-under 62 on the 7,006-yard, par-71 T.P.C. at Southwind course. (AP)
Snead Still Hot: J. C. Snead shot a 66 for a 36-hole record of 13-under-par 131 in the Seniors Players Championship in Dearborn, Mich.
Bob Charles was five shots back after a 69 on the 6,876-yard, par-72 T.P.C. of Michigan course. (AP) TENNIS Gilbert Upsets Sampras in Straight Sets
Second-seeded Pete Sampras, having trouble with his service returns, was upset by No. 7 Brad Gilbert, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals at Queen's Club in London.
Top-seeded Edberg, the defending champion, rebounded on the grass courts to beat Pat Cash, 6-7 (7-9), 7-6 (7-4), 6-3. (AP)
McEnroe Wins: Fifth-seeded John McEnroe defeated No. 3 Aleksandr Volkov, 6-4, 6-3, to reach the semifinals of a grass-court tournament in Rosmalen, the Netherlands.
Today, McEnroe will play Michael Stich, the defending Wimbledon champion. (AP)
Shriver Surprises Garrison: Pam Shriver defeated top-seeded Zina Garrison, 7-5, 6-3, in the quarterfinals of a grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England.
Garrison served her seventh double fault on match point. (AP)


Yeltsin Says U.S. Servicemen Were Held by Stalin
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia told a Senate committee in a letter today that the Soviet Union detained and imprisoned American servicemen during World War II, when the two countries were allies, and afterward, often in violation of conventions governing prisoners of war.
He also said Soviet officials had lied to the United States about the fate of missing Americans.
Mr.
Yeltsin's letter, released in translation by the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, acknowledged for the first time that nine American aircraft had been shot down over the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war in the 1950's and that there had been survivors.


Classical Music in Review
Christian Colberg
Violinist Merkin Concert Hall


Review/Opera; Rossini's 'Guillaume Tell' Dabbles Lyrically in Politics
Rossini's opera "Guillaume Tell" is so rarely performed it has almost become an oddity.
But Lotfi Mansouri's striking new production for the San Francisco Opera, which was also the American premiere of the new critical French edition of the work, may help move it toward the center stage of contemporary taste.
"Tell," which the 37-year-old Rossini wrote for the Paris Opera in 1829, is a model of the political opera of the period, a dramatization of the birth of the nation-state; love and familial loyalties are pitted against the conflicting demands of the political realm.
Based on Schiller's play about the fabled Swiss archer who is challenged by an oppressive tyrant to split the apple on his son's head, "Tell" was admired by Berlioz and Wagner and probably influenced Donizetti and Verdi as well.
In its themes and its mixture of styles, it anticipated the evolution of European opera and thus qualifies as something of a milestone.
Perhaps, , because of the changes in taste this opera represented and because Rossini was already stupendously wealthy and famous, after this opera he simply retired and never wrote another.


Head of Bosnia Serbs Announces Cease-Fire
The political leader of the Serbs fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina announced today that starting Monday morning his side will observe a unilateral cease-fire around Sarajevo and throughout the country.
Radovan Karadzic, who leads the political wing of the Serbian forces that have taken control of two-thirds of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, said at a news conference here that he had written Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali inviting at least 800 members of the United Nations peacekeeping force to monitor the cease-fire from the Serbian positions.


Dye Hands One of His Hats to Lude
Auburn appointed MIKE LUDE as its new athletic director yesterday, replacing PAT DYE.
The 69-year-old Lude, who retired as athletic director at the University of Washington after 15 years, had been executive director of the Blockbuster Bowl.
Dye had served as athletic director and football coach since 1981, but he gave up the administrative post April 30 at the request of Auburn's president, WILLIAM MUSE.
Dye, who remains as the football coach, retained his $146,500 annual salary.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; ENDORSING CLINTON, LEANING TO PEROT
Ross Perot may have a following among members of the United Automobile Workers Union, whose national organization has already endorsed Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas for President.
The Detroit Free Press commissioned a poll in late May of 150 U.A.W. members in the Detroit area.
Fifty said they were most likely to vote for Mr.
Perot, 37 favored Bill Clinton and 15 were for George Bush.
The rest had not made up their minds or gave no answer.


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Man Held In Gun Sale To L.I. Girl
A Brooklyn auto supply salesman has been charged as the mystery man who sold Amy Fisher the gun used in the shooting of Mary Jo Buttafuoco and who acted as her driver.
The man's lawyer said he had been used as a "pawn" in "a vicious and heinous act."
Peter Guagenti, 21 years old, of the Bensonhurst section, pleaded not guilty today to criminal possession of a weapon, criminal sale of a weapon and to hindering prosecution for not turning himself in.
Mr.
Guagenti, who faces a maximum sentence of seven years, was held in $100,000 bail.


Quotation of the Day
"There's always a belief in the community that the police cannot police themselves. We must dispel that, and that's why we need a speedy resolution of the matter. We want to send a message that this department can police itself." -- MAYOR SHARPE JAMES of Newark.  [ 1:3. ]


Meyer H. Robinson Is Dead at 86; Manischewitz Maker Co-Founder
Meyer H. Robinson, a philanthropist and co-founder of the company that made Manischewitz wines, died yesterday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Lawrence, L.I.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
The east side of Broadway between 86th and 96th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Broadway Mall street fair.


Boys High: Romanesque Revival to Gothic Horror


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues; Abortion Foes See Pivotal Voting Role
At the National Right to Life Convention here this week, cheerful women's voices floated through the air, mingling with religious hymns, children's laughter and an unswerving faith that President Bush will be re-elected this fall because anti-abortion voters will put him over the top.
And though every special-interest group might like to think the same about its influence and its candidate, political analysts say the prospect of a three-way race pitting Mr.
Bush against Bill Clinton and Ross Perot, who both support a woman's right to choose abortion, may mean that argument is not too far from the truth.


Patents; Precision Dosage For Liquid Medicine
Mark E. Reyman, an entrepreneur in Mount Vernon, N.Y., obtained a patent this week for a squeezable medicine bottle that allows a precise measure of liquid to be squeezed out.
Mr.
Reyman said the bottle made it much easier for parents to give medicine to reluctant children, because it eliminates the need to measure out doses gingerly in a dropper or on a spoon.
It would also help people whose hands tremble or who have the use of only one hand.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; QUAYLE SAYS PEROT DISPLAYS CONTEMPT FOR CONSTITUTION
Vice President Dan Quayle today delivered the Bush campaign's most direct and forceful attack yet on Ross Perot, calling him a "temperamental tycoon who has contempt for the Constitution of the United States."
As the Bush team searches for weapons to use against Mr.
Perot's undeclared independent candidacy, the Vice President offered voters what amounted to a political ultimatum: elect a Republican Congress to work with President Bush in a second term, or choose a Democratic President.


Teacher in the Bronx Is Held in Sex Abuse Of Three 3d-Graders
A teacher at a Bronx elementary school was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing at least three of the girls in his third-grade class, sometimes in the hallway and sometimes in the classroom in front of other students, the police said.
The teacher, Wayne Rubin, 28 years old, was arrested after a one-month investigation by the New York City Board of Education and the Police Department's special victims squad.
The three students told investigators that Mr.
Rubin had touched their breasts and buttocks in incidents dating back to February.
And three others at Public School 86, in the Fordham section, have not yet decided to press charges, said Lieut.
Hazel Stewart of the special victims squad.


E.M.S. Technician Accused of Assault
The police said yesterday that they were investigating a Brooklyn woman's complaint that she had been sexually assaulted by an Emergency Medical Service technician Thursday night, after she had called for an ambulance because she was having difficulty breathing.
The 23-year-old woman, who was not identified, was treated for the breathing problem at Methodist Hospital and then released, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
Early yesterday morning, the officer said, the woman complained to the police that she had been "unnecessarily fondled" by the attendant.


U.S. Aid Fails to Help Panama, Report Says
A Government study has concluded that "no significant impact on the economy" has been accomplished by a $420 million package of United States aid to help Panama after the United States invasion in 1989, The Washington Post reported today.
The study was conducted by the General Accounting Office, the principal investigative arm of Congress, at the request of several members of Congress.
Frank C. Conahan, head of the national security division of the G.A.O., said tonight that he could not confirm The Post's account, saying only that such an inquiry was under way.


Ziegler To Leave Post In September
As expected, John Ziegler announced officially yesterday that he would resign as president of the National Hockey League on Sept. 30.
He will fulfill the last four years of his contract as a consultant to the league.
"Gratitude, not regret, runs through my heart today," Ziegler said in a statement that was in keeping with his refusal to speak in public about the factors that eventually led to his departure after 15 seasons on the job.


Pact Reached On Reducing Tax Incentives
Mayor David N. Dinkins and New York City Council leaders announced an agreement yesterday to eliminate many tax breaks for new office towers in midtown and lower Manhattan as part of an overhaul of the city's largest tax incentive program for developers.
While cutting off tax breaks for new construction in Manhattan south of 96th Street, the revamped program would bolster incentives for developers who renovate existing buildings in Manhattan over the next two years.
It also would retain significant tax breaks for new construction or renovation above 96th Street and in the other four boroughs.


Observer; These Precious Few
The Marines want a few good men and we want a few good political candidates.
That's why we sent search teams across America.
Here are a few we found:
1.
Walt Kenbuckle: Of the 8,648,753 candidates running for public office this year, Walt is the only one in favor of government waste.
His opponent, Marjorie ("Chargin' Marge") Bascom, says Walt is lying.


National Health Enhancement reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
ACQUISITION CAPABILITY INC., New York, announced the formation of a new subsidiary, American Cooling Industries, which is intended to develop and promote a new proprietary line of products for the air-conditioning and refrigeration industry.
ALLOY COMPUTER PRODUCTS INC., announced that it had filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
This will not affect the introduction of a new line of networking software products, which will be introduced next week.


CHRONICLE
BEN COHEN, a founder of Ben &amp; Jerry's, the ice-cream company, attended five colleges but was never tempted to go to any of their reunions.
"The only organization I was ever associated with whose reunion I had any desire to go to was Bucks Rock Camp," he said yesterday.
"It was the first place I ever felt at home."
Today, Mr.
Cohen and 1,500 other former campers and counselors from around the world plan to converge on the camp, in New Milford, Conn., to celebrate its 50th anniversary.
Mr.
Cohen is bringing the ice cream.


Fretter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Senators' Outside Fees Show Sharp Drop in '91
Senators earned more than $1 million from speeches and articles in 1991 before a new rule took effect last summer that prevented them from keeping such income, according to their latest financial disclosure statements.
The disclosure statements, which were made available today, showed that more than a third of the senators had forsaken any speaking and writing fees even before they were required to do so, and that the members donated $781,000 from speeches and their writing income to charity.


Comtech Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


PRESIDENT, IN RIO, DEFENDS HIS STAND ON ENVIRONMENT
President Bush told world leaders at the Earth Summit today that he had no apologies for his Administration's environmental record and called for a "prompt start" to carry out the accords signed here.
"America's record on environmental protection is second to none, so I did not come here to apologize," Mr.
Bush said, rebutting the criticism heard since the Rio summit meeting began 10 days ago.


Russia and U.S. Trim Gap on Arms Cuts
Russia and the United States announced today that they had narrowed their differences over an agreement to radically reduce their nuclear arsenals.
But they said further negotiations would be necessary at next week's summit meeting between President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d flew to London today and met his Russian counterpart, Andrei V. Kozyrev, for three and a half hours of talks that were scheduled at the last minute in an effort to wrap up a new arms accord before the summit meeting.
But the two men emerged to say that though both sides had offered new compromises, gaps still remained.


Gelman Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Peter von Zerneck Actor, 84
Peter von Zerneck, a character actor who appeared in 1940's films, including "Notorious" and "13 Rue Madeleine," died on Wednesday in Toluca Lake, Calif., where he lived.
He was 84 years old.
He died of complications after surgery, said his son Michael Zerneck of New York City.


Bridge
The Pan-American Championships in Corpus Christi, Tex., will end tomorrow with the Open Pairs and Women's Pairs.
These were the Open leaders after four out of six qualifying sessions: 1, Lynn Deas of Newport News, Va., and Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md., 1,522 match points; 2, Richard Popper of Wilmington, Del., and Richard Roeder of San Diego, Calif., 1,508; 3, Santiago Figueroa and Jaime Carrera of Colombia, 1,498.
These were the leaders in the Women's event: 1, June Deutsch of Chicago and Beverly Rosenberg of Sherman Oaks, Calif., 1,095; 2, Jan Cohen and Shawn Womack of Los Angeles, 1,081; 3, Marinesa Letizia of Bloomington, Ind., and Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., 1,060.


The Stars Were Wearing Stripes
Two women made the calls Thursday night at the United States Basketball League game between the Atlanta Eagles and Philadelphia Spirit, marking the first time an all-female officiating crew has handled a men's professional basketball game.


AURA SYSTEMS HUNTS FOR AUDITOR FOR THIRD TIME
Aura Systems Inc. is looking for a new auditor for the third time in seven months, and the latest transition will delay the release of its already-overdue fiscal year 1992 results.
The news accelerated a selloff that has driven down its stock price about 70 percent since mid-January and has reduced the market value of the producer of electromagnetic devices by about $225 million.
Aura shares fell $1.625 yesterday, to $3.50, in over-the-counter trading.


Louis Rudisch Is Dead; Metallurgist Was 90
Louis Rudisch, a metallurgist who invented a crystal for popular radio kits and adapted a process for casting jewelry parts, died last Saturday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old and lived in Queens.
He died of complications of pneumonia, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Florilegium Chamber Choir
Ascension Church


Information International Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30


American Air Is Target Of 2d Suit
Northwest Airlines filed suit against American Airlines yesterday, accusing the carrier and its chairman, Robert L. Crandall, of cutting fares to drive weaker carriers out of business so that it can increase its dominance in many markets.
The suit was the second filed by a major airline against American whose move on May 27 of cutting the lowest discount fares by 50 percent and reducing the advance purchase to 7 days from 14 set off a huge scramble by fliers to take advantage of the low fares.


Classical Music in Review
Young Artists Concert Series
Bryant Park


Halifax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Court Limits Legal Standing in Suits
The Supreme Court today dismissed a challenge to the Interior Department's interpretation of the Endangered Species Act, ruling that the environmental group that brought the challenge was not sufficiently injured by the policy to be entitled to file a lawsuit.
In limiting its decision to the issue of legal standing to sue, the Court did not take a position on the substantive question in the case: the validity of a regulation issued during the Reagan Administration that limits the reach of an important provision of the Endangered Species Act to within the United States.


Johnson's Book Isn't in Every Store
Some store chains are refusing to sell MAGIC JOHNSON's book on preventing AIDS because of its blunt language about how to avoid the sexually transmitted disease, the book's publisher said yesterday.
PETER OSNOS, the publisher of Times Books, said Kmart Corporation and the Walgreen's drug store chain were among retailers objecting to the book.
The book, "What You Can Do to Avoid AIDS," was written by Johnson, who retired from professional basketball because he has the virus that causes AIDS.


Amdura Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


House Democrats Promise a Deficit-Cutting Plan
With the battle over the balanced-budget amendment over, House Democrats on both sides of the barricades said today that they planned to begin work next week on a plan that would sharply reduce the Federal deficit by raising taxes and cutting spending.
The proposed amendment fell nine votes short of the two-thirds majority needed for passage in the House on Thursday.
But today Democrats appeared to come out of the exercise eager to show their determination to do something about the deficit, which is estimated at $370 billion for 1992.
Republicans have already vowed to use the vote against the Democrats in the fall Presidential and Congressional election campaigns.


Canada Ending Phone Monopoly on Long-Distance Calls
Canada, taking a leaf from the United States, today ended the century-old monopoly of Bell Canada and provincial telephone companies in long-distance service.
The decision by the Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission, the counterpart to the Federal Communications Commission, gives two Canadian enterprises a toehold in the $7.5 billion annual long-distance market.


TransTechnology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


9 on Nominating Panel Dismissed From Tonys
In an unusual three-hour meeting on Wednesday, the administrators of the Tony Awards voted to replace 9 of the 12 members of the committee that chose this year's nominees.
The abrupt dismissal less than two weeks after the 1992 Tony Awards presentation on May 31 came, administrators said, because they wanted to alter the panel's composition to insure that more nominators are working theater professionals, rather than academics, writers and arts executives.
The three nominators who are believed to have been asked to serve again, however, are all arts executives: Theodore Chapin, the executive director of the Rodgers and Hammerstein Organization; Fran Kumin, an official of Theater Communications Group, and Suzanne Sato, an arts executive with the Rockefeller Foundation.


Justice Dept. Is Reviewing A 1986 War-Crimes Case
John Demjanjuk is not the only convicted Nazi war criminal whose case is being re-examined by the Department of Justice.
Since last year, Department officials confirmed yesterday, internal investigators have been looking into accusations that prosecutors mishandled the 1986 extradition of Andrija Artukovic, a former leader of the Nazi puppet state of Croatia whom Yugoslavia later sentenced to death for war crimes.


Base Ten Systems reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Two Emerge on a Wind and a Prayer
The change in wind conditions from morning to afternoon created a difference of night and day in the scoring today as the opening round of the $400,000 ShopRite L.P.G.A.
Classic unfolded with two nonwinners on the tour leading the pack.
In the morning, when there was no wind and the greens were receptive, scores were low.
In the afternoon, with the wind swirling and the greens not so friendly, scores were high.
By late in the day, Linda Hunt and Hiromi Kobayashi shared the lead with the five-under-par 66's they shot under the ideal conditions enjoyed by today's early starters at the 6,270-yard Greate Bay Country Club course.


Review/Cabaret; Avant-Gardist Rage
For an avant-gardist, adversity can be the stuff of dreams.
It can fuel the creative engines, and it can draw a spotlight to the results.
For Karen Finley, both apply.
Her best works are furious, scathing responses to injustice, especially against women.
And the speed with which her audience has grown in the last year is directly attributable to the zeal with which conservatives have tried to muzzle her. (Ms. Finley is one of four performance artists who were denied grants by the National Arts Endowment last year and have filed suit against the agency.)
Ms.
Finley and Jerry Hunt, a composer with a deadpan sense of humor that serves as a foil for Ms.
Finley's sharper wit, are collaborating on "The Finley/Hunt Report," which opened on Thursday at the Kitchen (512 West 19th Street).
They begin the 90-minute piece as a satire of a television talk show, discussing off-color subjects in the glib tones and smiley cadences television interviewers use for innocuous chatter.


COMPANY NEWS: Directory Assistance; Fill It With Yellow Pages And Please Check the Oil
Remember "Let Your Fingers Do The Walking"?
A researcher at the Florida Institute of Technology is running 10 telephone company trucks on a chemical that can be made from wastepaper like that used in telephone books.
"Now, we've got the directory doing the driving," said Jan Rickey, a spokeswoman for the Florida Energy Office, which is sponsoring the research along with the BellSouth Corporation.


Elusive Evidence of How the Sun Shines
New evidence about to be published by two international teams of scientists may help to resolve a longstanding intellectual dilemma among astrophysicists -- the failure to prove a theory that explains why the sun shines.
The two teams, each using huge detectors made of the element gallium, have detected elusive particles known as neutrinos that have the right energy and in almost the right quantities as predicted by the theory.
Previous attempts to detect the neutrinos have picked up only a fraction of the number predicted, leading to worries that the theory, known as the Basic Standard Model, might be flawed or incomplete.
Teaming Up
One team is an American-European consortium whose detector, a 30-ton solution of gallium, lies in a chamber off the Gran Sasso highway tunnel through the Abruzzi mountains northeast of Rome.
The second team, a Russian-American partnership, used a detector of 60 tons of gallium based deep in the Caucasus mountains.
Both teams recently announced their results at a meeting in Granada, Spain, and the former has already submitted an account of its finding to a leading European journal, Physics Letters B.


Schools' Distress Signal
In winter, Livingstone Hilaire teaches in his coat as the wind whistles through the rotted window sashes of his classroom at old Boys High, sometimes sending the glass panes smashing to the floor.
His students complain that it gets so cold they can't keep their hands out of their coat pockets to take notes.
In the spring, all that gets better is the weather.
Neighboring classrooms have gaping holes in the old tin ceilings from years of water damage.
Paint flakes fall in a light snow, and no one is sure of the lead content.
In the hallways, the water fountains cannot be used because the water comes out filthy and full of rust.
The girls' bathroom lacked a working sink for more than two years.


Pact for Northern Ireland Is Seen as Progress
The leaders of Northern Ireland's principal Protestant and Catholic political parties agreed late Friday night to a process that could lead to significant joint meetings with officials of the Irish Republic on the future of this British province.
After seven weeks of talks, the leaders agreed to form a committee to discuss the possibility of such a meeting, the first in 18 years, with republic officials.
The committee will also discuss ways of establishing a new, locally administered government for the province, which has not had one since 1974, when the London Government assumed direct control.
Keeping Talks Alive
The British Secretary of State for the province, Patrick Mayhew, announced the agreement at Stormont, site of the provincial Legislature before it was dissolved by London in 1974 in an effort to control the civil war.
In 23 years of fighting, 2,990 people have been killed.
The agreement was seen as a significant step in an effort to prove that a peaceful settlement involving Protestant and Catholic politicians and officials from both parts of Ireland is still feasible.


Chock Full O'Nuts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bosnian Forces Counterattack Serbian Positions
Maj.
Sefer Halilovic held one finger in his ear to block the blast of heavy artillery shells exploding less than 100 yards away from the Government headquarters in central Sarajevo today, and spoke urgently into his walkie-talkie.
"This is your chance, Juka," he said.


From The Corps To the Arms Of Misha
About a month ago, Yvonne Borree, a dancer in the New York City Ballet, called her mother with some momentous news.
"Mom, you might want to sit down," she told her.
Her mother was worried.
"Oh, God, you're pregnant," she said.
But this was news of another sort.
Ms.
Borree had been chosen to dance with Mikhail Baryshnikov in a duet by George Balanchine -- despite the fact that the 22-year-old dancer was a mere member of the corps de ballet.
Mr.
Baryshnikov and Ms.
Borree will perform the piece, "Duo Concertant," tonight and next Thursday and Friday at the New York State Theater.
Mr.
Baryshnikov will also be seen on Tuesday in "Three Preludes," a new solo by Mark Morris that will be repeated on June 24 and 27 in the evening.


Flying on the Brown-Bag Special
Like their bargain-hunting passengers, the nation's airlines are flying economy this summer -- and probably for a long time to come.
Desperate to stem huge losses, many carriers are making changes that sound like those movie scenes in which the captain orders his crew to jettison anything that is not bolted down.
To lighten their financial loads the airlines are doing everything from deferring orders for planes to cutting out snacks, utensils and timetables.


Protests Against Japanese Troop Deployment


Pico Products reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


INSIDE
Moscow Says It Held G.I.'s
Russia's President told a Senate committee in a letter that the Soviet Union imprisoned American servicemen during World War II.
Page 6.
Burden of Serbia's Partner
As international sanctions take hold, Montenegro is growing restive in its role in Yugoslavia.
Many citizens suggest a complete break.
Page 3.
Opposing F.B.I.'s Bias Pact
A predominantly white group of F.B.I. agents is questioning the bureau's settlement of a discrimination complaint by black agents.
Page 7.
Redirecting Tax Incentives
Mayor Dinkins and City Council leaders agreed to encourage development outside Manhattan in an overhaul of tax incentives.
Page 25.
Bulls Near Second Title
The Bulls, behind Michael Jordan's 46 points, won in Portland, 119-106, and can repeat as N.B.A. champions in Chicago tomorrow.
Page 29  Inflation?
Barely a Trace
Consumer prices rose just 0.1 percent in May, and the report seems likely to nudge the Federal Reserve closer to cutting interest rates.
Page 35.


7 Giants Of Finance May Share Quarters
In a development project that could bring all of New York City's major financial exchanges under the same Wall Street roof, executives of the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the city's five commodities exchanges are holding preliminary talks about building a new trading complex.
The proposal, acknowledged yesterday by several senior executives, is being advocated aggressively by City Hall.


Italy Doesn't Waver in Commitment to Europe
To the Editor:
"Italy at Risk to Be Titled Sick Man of New Europe" (news article, June 1) by your Rome correspondent contains several negative views on Italy's situation.
As these stem from an interpretation of Italian reality that I do not share, I shall refrain from any comments thereon.


Polifly Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Penn State University's contract to make Pepsi-Cola the university's official beverage misstated the date of Penn State's first home football game this season.
It is scheduled for Sept. 12.


Judge Gives New Jersey 2 Weeks to Appeal Order on Health Care
A Federal judge today gave New Jersey two weeks to appeal his order to change its system of financing health care for the poor, rather than five months to change the system.
The ruling allows the state to ask an appellate court to review his May 27 order to change the state's system of adding a 19 percent surcharge to the bills of patients in many insurance plans to finance other hospital debts.


U.S. Approves Decommissioning Of Unwanted Shoreham A-Plant
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission said yesterday that it had approved plans to decommission the Shoreham nuclear plant, and the Long Island Power Authority, which owns it, said it could start taking the plant apart by the middle of next week.
Decommissioning would be the equivalent of interment for Shoreham, which was conceived by the Long Island Lighting Company with an application for a construction license in May 1968 and led a brief, dim life in the summer of 1985, when Lilco ran the plant at low power.


Patents; Quick-Dry Coating For Nail Polish
Lifetime Cosmetics Inc., a small company in Dallas, has patented a nail polish top coating that it says dries within three minutes when it is exposed to ultraviolet light.
Nail polish coatings often take as long as 20 minutes to dry.
The new polish incorporates light-sensitive compounds selected from a family of chemicals called methacrylates.


Clinton Cites Bush 'Errors'
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas continued to direct his oratorical fire at President Bush today, asserting that the White House had committed "grievous errors" in failing to commit to global agreements on the environment proposed at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro this week.
"George Bush is out of touch with this new era," Mr.
Clinton, the likely Democratic Presidential nominee, said at a news conference in Washington.
"He doesn't understand that rising global temperatures can threaten our standard of living."


Streamlining Help Out of Existence
"MY batterer got me pregnant two years in a row, then decided he didn't like me no more," the tall, dignified woman said.
She said her husband learned to hit her in ways that didn't leave marks, threatened to take her three children away and became insanely jealous if she even spoke to a neighbor.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Discusses Policy, Not Perot, in TV Forum
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas carried his campaign of specificity to a national television audience tonight in a taped half-hour question-and-answer session with a specially assembled group of 150 undecided voters.
The program was broadcast by NBC after the Clinton campaign arranged for the Democratic National Committee to pay $373,000 for the time.
It represented a new foray for the Clinton campaign in its effort to be heard above the din created by the independent candidacy of Ross Perot.


Echlin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


With Climate Treaty Signed, All Say They'll Do Even More
With President Bush's signing of the landmark treaty on climate today, the world's nations have embarked on the lengthy and uncertain road of trying to avert the feared warming of the globe from the continued buildup of of heat-trapping gases.
The White House has long taken a cautious approach to the threat of global warming, and weakened the treaty targets sought by the Europeans.
But today Mr.
Bush called for speedier action on the treaty, and the 12 countries of the European Community prepared to go beyond the treaty's mild requirements.


Talks in Rio Wrap Up Principles For Preserving the World's Forests
Environment ministers at the Earth Summit finally wrapped up a set of voluntary principles aimed at preserving the world's dwindling forests, a goal that was a United States priority at the conference, and were working feverishly tonight on a global cleanup plan.
The Administration did not obtain a commitment to turn the forest preservation principles into a binding international convention, but the document, approved early today, leaves open the possibility of a new forest treaty in the future.
The document describes the forest principles as an "authoritative" statement insuring that all countries have a right to use their forests to advance their economic development, but that they should do so only "on a sustainable basis."
The principles thus chart a tortuous middle course between the desire of countries with tropical forests, like Malaysia, India and Brazil, to assert theirsovereignty over a valuable natural resource and the wish of most Northern countries to define forests as a global asset.
William K. Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, expressed some disappointment with the outcome today, saying the principles were "not as strong as we would have liked."
But some other Western officials said the principles went further than they had expected at the start of the summit talks.
"They don't close off the possibility of a convention, and closing it off was the objective of Malaysia," an official said.
It was also suggested that the proposed new Sustainable Development Commission, which will monitor compliance with commitments made at the Earth Summit, could call for negotiations on a binding treaty when it reviews the way the world's forests are being managed.
"The talk around the ministers' meeting last night, though it couldn't be said in there, was that this should be a priority for the Commission on Sustainable Development," another Western official said.
In negotiations, many developing countries said the industrial world only values tropical forests for the carbon dioxide they absorb because this reduces the sacrifices the North must make to avert global warming.
The principles call for "environmentally sound national guidelines" for development and recognize that while forests meet many economic, social and cultural needs, they also act as "carbon sinks and reservoirs" that slow climate change.
These same representatives of the world's rich and poor countries worked tonight to resolve outstanding issues over aid and atmospheric pollution that are blocking completion of the new global cleanup plan, known as Agenda 21, which the summit hopes to endorse on Sunday.
Vows to Do More
To encourage developing countries to compromise on these issues, the United States, Canada, Germany and the 12 European Community countries, speaking as a bloc, all pledged to do more to help poorer nations safeguard the environment.
But it was impossible to judge immediately how much new money they were really offering.
Developing countries want the Western industrialized nations to make good by the year 2000 on a promise they made more than 20 years ago to raise development aid to 0.7 percent of their economic output.
None of the Western heads of state or government who addressed the summit today would make such a promise.
But Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said he wanted to reach that target "as soon as possible," and in the meantime committed his Government to an unspecified "increase in official development aid."
President Bush and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada both said they would increase the amount of aid to help poorer countries protect their ecological systems.
But it was unclear whether this involved new money or reapportioning existing aid budgets.
Europeans Pledge $4 Billion
Prime Minister John Major of Britain made no mention of development aid when he addressed the summit.
But the 12 European Community countries, as expected, said they would give $4 billion, including some "new and additional resources," to finance key aspects of Agenda 21, describing this as "an initial contribution."
By making these offers, Western leaders say they are seeking to convince developing countries that they mean to help them cope with the extra bills they face for making development environmentally sustainable and thus encourage them to accept the goals set in Agenda 21.
But negotiators are still trying to settle on wording that encourages aid donors to reach the 0.7 percent target by the end of this century without actually committing them to do so.
Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia continues to oppose passages in Agenda 21 encouraging countries to use "economic measures" to promote energy savings, fearing that this will lead to the introduction of new carbon fuel taxes that would reduce the world's appetite for oil.


DeVlieg-Bullard Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


On Amazon, Foes Are Reptiles and Environmentalists
With a nervous glance to a sunken lagoon beyond her manioc fields, Francisca Ramos da Conceicao talked about her dread of the return of the Amazon's high water season in July.
When the world's mightiest river floods, the swelling waters disperse fish, the primary food for jacare, also known as the Amazon caiman, South America's cousins to North America's alligators.
One evening last August, an 18-foot-long jacare emerged from the lagoon here to forage for dinner in waters flowing around the stilts of Mrs.
Ramos' palm thatch cottage.


Zmeskal's No. 1 Status Wobbles
When Kim Zmeskal performs, she hears lots of high-pitched squeals.
This is for two reasons.
One, many of those who attend gymnastics events are children, mostly little girls brought by their parents.
Two, as a three-time national women's champion and defending all-round world champion, Zmeskal is the one gymnast most of them know.
All this noise, however, had only limited salutary effect on Zmeskal on Thursday night in her run through the compulsory round of the women's Olympic trials.
After each of 13 women had taken turns on the four apparatuses, she stood in second place behind Shannon Miller and looked none too happy about it, either.


Airport Noise Relief Still Lies Ahead
To the Editor:
Contrary to a May 21 news article, the House of Representatives has not given local jurisdictions increased power to enact noise regulations more stringent than Federal standards.
The House passed the 1992 Federal Aviation Administration reauthorization package, which does not increase or decrease local power over aircraft noise.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL HEALTHCARE INC., New York, named Alfred J. Discepolo president and chief executive.
BANK OF AMERICA, San Francisco, named Debra McGinty-Poteet senior vice president.


Weprin Seeks a Compromise on Guns for Police
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin pressed the New York City Police Department today to expand its testing of semiautomatic handguns, saying he saw it as the best way to avoid the virtually certain passage of legislation that would force the department to arm all its officers with the weapons.
Mr.
Weprin, in his first public comment on the bill, added his voice to a growing chorus for a compromise aimed at preventing the Legislature from ordering the city to arm its officers with guns opposed by its Mayor and Police Commissioner.
His raising the threat of a vote is clearly designed to prod the Police Department into expanding the testing and to avoid a painful political showdown on the floor of the Assembly.


Lowrance Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Moon Church a Stranger to Academic Freedom
To the Editor:
We were outraged by "Moonie U. in Bridgeport?" (editorial, May 10).
As the only collaboration of major faith groups committed to countering destructive cults, we are resolute in our opposition to the University of Bridgeport's acceptance of $50 million from an affiliate of the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church.


Bush Is Asked to Direct Aides to Testify on Iraq Aid
President Bush was asked today to direct top Administration officials to testify before a House committee considering whether to seek an investigation of the Administration's policy of helping Saddam Hussein before the Persian Gulf war.
The head of the House Judiciary Committee asked for the testimony to help the committee determine whether to request the appointment of an independent counsel in the case.


East Jerusalem Has Been a Spoil of War
To the Editor:
"Israel Remembers War, and Its Spoils" (news article, June 1), on the celebrations of the 25th anniversary of the reunification of Jerusalem in the 1967 war, refers to "parts of East Jerusalem that belonged to Jordan until the 1967 war." This area never belonged to Jordan.
It was part of the British Mandate until the British withdrew in 1948.


Inflation Nearly Vanishes; the Fed Has Its Cue
The Labor Department reported today that consumer prices rose a barely perceptible one-tenth of a percent in May.
The positive inflation news seems likely to nudge the Federal Reserve closer to the elusive "final" easing of monetary policy that has been widely anticipated for more than two months.
Not only has inflation been held to a 3 percent pace so far this year, giving the Fed the room to move, but there were signs of renewed weakness in the economy in the spring, especially in the crucial retail and housing sectors.
Moreover, the M-2 money supply, cited by the Fed in April as a reason to ease policy, continues to lag far below target.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about Paramount Communications' quarterly earnings misstated the entertainment division's operating income.
It was $91.7 million, not $81.7 million.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day yesterday, about new Pepsi-Cola beverages, misidentified Perrier's advertising agency.
It is Waring &amp; LaRosa, not Ally &amp; Gargano.


Even in the Wilderness, Truly Drinkable Water
Dr.
Anne Moore remembers the days when a hike through the backwoods included a cool, refreshing drink of water from an unspoiled mountain stream.
But these days, she takes a special piece of equipment along on her outings -- a lightweight water filter.
"I always purify my water now," said Dr.
Moore, who is an epidemiologist with the parasitic diseases branch of the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
"There are just so many more people in the back country these days."


U.S. Sues Prominent Figures In Washington Bank Failure
The Government has sued some of Washington's most powerful lawyers and executives on charges that their negligence, imprudence and unethical behavior as officers and directors of the National Bank of Washington contributed to its collapse.
The charges, filed late Thursday, were made against Luther H. Hodges Jr., the bank's chairman, who was Deputy Secretary of Commerce in the Carter Administration, and 10 directors, including Thomas H. Boggs Jr., a leading lobbyist and fund-raiser for Democratic causes; Robert B. Washington Jr., a former chairman of the District of Columbia Democratic Committee, and Theodore Pedas, a movie producer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6 BUSH DEFENDS U.S. STANCE AT RIO
Saying that America's environment-al record was "second to none," President Bush defended his opposition to many of the biggest initiatives at the Earth Summit in Brazil.1  FRAGILE HOPE FOR CLIMATE TREATY
Although critics in Rio de Janeiro continued to chide the Bush Administration for weakening a treaty aimed at controlling gas emissions, many experts see the accord as a potentially forceful instrument.  1  Ministers agreed on a set of principles to preserve forests.  4  AMAZON'S INHABITANTS REBEL
A teen-ager killed by a jacare -- the Amazon cousin to an alligator -- has been transformed by politicians into a martyr sacrificed to the interests of meddling environmentalists.  4  COUNTEROFFENSIVE IN SARAJEVO
Armed mostly with automatic rifles and pistols, defenders in jeans and down vests struggled to retake the heights of Sarajevo and silence the guns that are reducing much of the city to rubble.  3  Montenegro becomes restive in its role as Serbia's last ally.  3  PANAMANIANS SEEK CULPRITS
A day after a melee that caused President Bush to flee from a plaza, calm returned to Panama City.
Many accused the police of having caused the fiasco by using excessive force to disperse protesters.  5  COMPROMISE IN ULSTER
Leaders of Northern Ireland's main Protestant and Catholic political parties agreed to a process that may lead to joint talks with the Irish Republic on the future of the British province.  6  GAP NARROWS IN ARMS TALKS
Russia and the United States said they had narrowed their differences over an accord to radically reduce nuclear arms.
But they said more negotiations would be needed at the summit meeting between President Bush and President Yeltsin.  6  MOSCOW ADMITS IT HELD G.I.'S
President Yeltsin of Russia told a United States Senate committee in a letter that the Soviet Union detained American servicemen during World War II, when the two countries were allies, and afterward.
He also said Soviet officials had lied about the fate of missing Americans.  6  TESTIMONY SOUGHT ON AID TO IRAQ
The House Judiciary Committee asked President Bush to instruct top officials to testify on the Administration's policy of helping Saddam Hussein before the gulf war.  5  Mejorada del Campo: A rugged monument to religious faith.  2  National 7-12  QUAYLE LAMBASTES PEROT
Vice President Quayle labeled Ross Perot a "temperamental tycoon who has contempt for the Constitution of the United States," an attack that foreshadowed a Republican strategy of depicting Mr.
Perot as too risky a choice for President.  1  DEMOCRATS DESIGN A PLATFORM
A small group of Democrats began trying to draft a party platform so general that all elements of the party would accept it and yet specific enough to distinguish Democratic principles from those of Republicans and Ross Perot.  8  ABORTION FOES TALK OF VICTORY
Abortion foes met at the National Right to Life Convention in Virginia, confident that President Bush would be re-elected this fall because of their support.  9  Clinton discussed policy with a national television audience.  8  DEMOCRATS VOW TO TAME DEFICIT
A day after rejecting a balanced-budget amendment, House Democrats said they would soon begin work on a plan that would cut the deficit by raising taxes and cutting spending.  7  OFFICIAL'S DOUBTS ABOUT 'IVAN'
A Federal prosecutor said he doubted for years whether John Demjanjuk, the retired Cleveland auto worker who was sent to Israel to face charges as the savage operator of the gas chambers at the Nazis' Treblinka death camp, was indeed Ivan the Terrible.  1  Reviewing the case of another convicted Nazi war criminal.  12  ENVIRONMENTAL LAWSUIT SPURNED
The Supreme Court dismissed an environmental group's challenge to the Interior Department's interpretation of the Endangered Species Act, ruling that the group was not sufficiently injured by the policy to be entitled to file a lawsuit.  12  WHITE F.B.I.
AGENTS COMPLAIN
A predominantly white group of F.B.I. agents filed papers seeking to intervene in the bureau's tentative settlement of a discrimination complaint by black agents.  7  EXPLAINING WHY THE SUN SHINES
New evidence about to be published by two international teams of scientists may help solve part of a longstanding intellectual puzzle about why the sun shines.1  ASSAILING HUTS FOR THE HOMELESS
Since last fall, Stan Washington and a handful of other homeless people have lived in plywood huts built by a volunteer group.
This week Chicago officials started taking the huts away, saying they were unsafe.  7  Religion Notes: On married priests and short tenures.  10  Metropolitan Digest, 25  CITY HALL VS.
SCHOOL BOARD
Mayor Dinkins lashed out at the Board of Education one day after school officials blamed city budget cuts for disappointing results in reading and math scores.
He said the board's governance of the school system was "ineffectual." 1  6 OFFICERS SUSPENDED
Water purifiers for the wilderness.
Obituaries 13  Gustave Schirmer Jr., a producer, director, and agent.
Meyer H. Robinson; Manischewitz co-founder.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  1-800-TROUBLE.
Czecho-Slovakia's hyphen.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: These precious few.  23  Anthony Burgess: Beds of nails.  23  Michael I. Sovern: Short of cash, long on perspective.  23


Caremark A Spinoff By Baxter
Baxter International, the world's largest hospital-supply company, announced yesterday that it was spinning off its big Caremark home-care unit into a separate publicly owned company.
In an action Baxter has been discussing since April, its board of directors approved plans for a tax-free distribution of new Caremark shares to Baxter stockholders by Dec. 31.


MOJAVE PIPLINE STUDIES EXPANSION INTO CALIFORNIA
The Mojave Pipeline Company, a joint venture of the Enron Corporation and El Paso Natural Gas, began a study yesterday to determine whether there was sufficient market interest for a $300 million pipeline expansion into central California.
The expansion would run from Bakersfield, Calif., where the Mojave pipeline system now terminates, north to Sacramento and the east San Francisco Bay area.
The proposed pipeline would transport 400 million cubic feet of gas a day, primarily from the Permian Basin in Texas and the San Juan Basin in New Mexico.
Mojave says it could move natural gas to Northern California industries for about 40 cents per million British thermal units, compared with about $1, which Mojave says they currently pay.
Mojave says it will save consumers $80 million to $100 million a year.


Patents; Keeping Ice Out of Food That's Frozen
THE scourge turns up in many forms: soggy, wilted green beans; ice cream that tastes like refrigerator frost; dry, rubbery fish.
In many of these cases, the cook is not at fault.
The villains are ice crystals that build up in the food while it is stored in a freezer.
Ice crystals can destroy the creaminess of ice cream, makes peas wrinkled and mushy and turns a plump strawberry flaccid.


Letter: On the Judiciary; Mr. Carnes Is Strong on Civil Rights
To the Editor:
"Replacing Judge Johnson: Try Harder" (editorial, May 31), against confirmation of Edward Carnes to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit to replace Judge Frank Johnson, is just dead wrong.


Two Guerrillas Killed By Israelis in Lebanon
Israeli troops backed by tanks, artillery and helicopter gunships advanced out of their so-called security zone in southern Lebanon today and clashed with Muslim guerrillas, killing two of them, Lebanese officials said.
An Israeli military spokesman said the action had followed an attack by guerrillas in which two Israeli soldiers were slightly wounded.
The Israelis returned to the zone several hours later.


Guidepost
Freezers and Power Failures
Summer storms often cause power failures that can last for several days.
But a prolonged power failure does not mean that everything in your home freezer has to be eaten at once or thrown out.
There are ways to save it.
KEEP THE DOOR CLOSED
If your freezer is fully stocked the contents will remain frozen for at least two days; if half full, at least one full day, but keep the door closed as much as possible.
No peeking.
NEXT, DRY ICE
If the power failure continues beyond a day or two, buy dry ice, 25 pounds for each 10 cubic feet of freezer.
Do not handle the dry ice with bare hands; the ice will burn them.
Use gloves to place the chunks of ice on top of the foods.
The larger the chunks of ice the better.
In a fully loaded freezer the ice will be effective for 3 or 4 days; in a half-loaded freeze, 2 to 3 days.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS
If the food thaws all is not lost.
Uncooked food may be cooked and frozen again.
Baked goods may be safely refrozen after thawing, but they will be somewhat dried out.
If foods have thawed only partly and there are still ice crystals in the package, they may be refrozen, though even partial thawing reduces the quality.
Partial thawing means the temperature of the package has not risen above 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
If in doubt place a thermometer between the wrappings and the food.
FRIENDS WITH ELECTRICITY
If all else fails, throw yourself on the mercy of a friend who has a freezer and electricity.


Review/Pop; Sensual, Yet Friendly And Simple
The first and obvious observation about the singer Mick Hucknall of Simply Red is that he's another thief of black music, freely borrowing from the Philadelphia sound, Motown, Steve Wonder, George Benson, Marvin Gaye and countless others.
Singing in a reedy high voice, his pitch elastic when reaching toward high notes, he approximates gospel music's melismatic undulations.
Ultimately, however, Mr.
Hucknall doesn't have so much to do with the tradition as detractors might imagine.
At Simply Red's sold-out show at Summer Stage in Central Park on Wednesday night there was no fervor or ardency, no need to simulate the catharsis bred from thousands of Saturday night parties or Sunday morning services.
Like most British fans of American music, Mr.
Hucknall is ever a connoisseur, taking a certain easy sensuality from his sources and transforming it, adding a rock intensity and a simplicity to it.
And he left out the singular aspect, where the performer recounts problems to the audience as he might to a friend.
Mr.
Hucknall was addressing instead the larger pop world.


To Keep Czecho-Slovakia's Hyphen
Communism can pass easily into nationalism.
The two creeds have much in common.
Each offers a simple key to tangled problems.
One exalts class, the other ethnic kinship.
Each blames real grievances on imagined enemies.
As a Russian informant shrewdly remarked to David Shipler in The New Yorker: "They are both ideologies that liberate people from personal responsibility. They are united around some sacred goal."
In varying degrees and with different results, old Bolsheviks have become new nationalists in Serbia and many former Soviet republics.
And now the same phenomenon has surfaced in Czechoslovakia, where fragmented election results leave the 74-year-old federation in doubt.


Mejorada del Campo Journal; Raising a Temple to God, Brick by Crooked Brick
With a rich patrimony of medieval churches and cathedrals and a society that is increasingly secular, Spain has no apparent need for another place of worship.
Indeed, if viewed as a business, religion here is now operating well below capacity.
But in this dusty town of 20,000 people 15 miles east of Madrid, where two Roman Catholic churches already compete for the dwindling number of faithful who attend Mass every Sunday, a new cathedral with room for 1,000 people is going up for reasons that have nothing to do with supply and demand.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.68
3.80
5.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.65
3.63
5.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.77
5.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.88
6.94
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.87
8.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.81
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.60
6.61
7.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Innovo Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Hobbs Gets the Job at Alabama
The University of Alabama made it official, promoting DAVID HOBBS to head basketball coach to replace WIMP SANDERSON.
Hobbs received a four-year contract paying $90,000 a year. (AP)


Court Ruling Throws Out New Districts
A State Supreme Court justice in the Bronx threw out the Legislature's new redistricting plan today, saying it was unconstitutional because the lines drawn for the State Senate would "excessively" and "gratuitously" cross county boundaries.
The justice, Alan J. Saks, gave the Legislature until June 23 to revise the plan.
If it does not, he said, he will appoint a panel of three experts to draw a new legislative map.


Panama, the Morning After, Questions How Police Acted
The streets were placid, security was relaxed and signs of protest had vanished from this big bayside city today, only hours after President Bush's brief and ill-starred stopover here.
But that belied a bubbling national debate about the handling of the visit, which ended abruptly on Thursday afternoon in a stinging cloud of tear gas and the brief if distant pop of gunfire.
The city's left-leaning newspaper, La Estrella de Panama, shouted "Fiasco!" on its front page today, a noun that reflected many Panamanians' embarrassment about the collapse of the President's long-awaited trip.
Mr.
Bush was forced to abandon a speech and flee under an escort with its guns drawn from Plaza Porras when the Panamanian police lobbed tear gas and fired warning shots to disperse about 200 rock-throwing protesters.
The tear gas set off a panic among the crowd of 15,000 that threatened to engulf the tractor-trailer bed on which Mr.
Bush and the Panamanian President, Guillermo Endara, were seated.
Today, officials said 30 to 50 protesters had been arrested, far more than the dozen or so that the Government had estimated on Thursday.
Videotape played endlessly on the city's television stations showed police chasing, wrestling and sometimes beating resisting protesters with sticks.
The television broadcasts showed that the participants included two prominent opponents of Mr.
Endara's Government: Balbina Herrera, a legislator and member of the Democratic Revolutionary Party, the organ of Panama's former dictator, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega; and Cleto Sousa, who heads the Panamanian People's Party, a leftist organization.
But much of the reaction centered on the police, who were widely criticized for allowing demonstrators to get too close to the plaza and then using too much force to disperse them.
"They were absurdly close -- right on the edge of the square," said Terry Ford, a Panama City businessman who got a full dose of gas.
The city's leading daily, La Prensa, accused the police of overreacting; the paper said the protesters had barely begun throwing rocks and other objects before the police charged them.
Even Mr.
Endara's spokesman, Louis Martinz, said late Thursday that the panic and Mr.
Bush's retreat "could have been avoided" had police kept the protesters farther away.
The national security force under General Noriega was corrupt and brutal and was abolished after the United States invasion in December 1989.
The United States has promised money to help train a new police force, but the funds, which were appropriated in 1990, have not yet been disbursed.
Some Panamanians and the newspapers expressed dismay at Mr.
Bush's descent on the city, accompanied by security preparations and a staged welcome by thousands of flag-waving citizens.
Their major complaint, as one put it, was that it was inappropriate for Mr.
Bush to come to Panama amid such a carnival atmosphere when the country had not fully recovered from the scars of the invasion.
It is questionable, however, whether Thursday's protests represent the country's real feelings about either Washington or the 1989 invasion.
Newspaper polls have consistently shown that 80 percent to 90 percent of Panamanians approve of the United States military presence.
Other polls show widespread support for a continued United States presence here, even after ownership and operation of the Panama Canal is turned over to Panama in the year 2000.
Mr.
Ford, the businessman, said Panama's real feelings came through when Mr.
Bush's limousine and a small pack of security cars fled, roaring down a side street.
Crowds pulled out handkerchiefs and began waving them at the limousine in a spontaneous expression of friendship, Mr.
Ford said.
And Mr.
Bush, a broad grin on his face and a microphone in his hands, boomed through a loudspeaker as he sped out of sight: "Thank you! Thank you! Thank you!"


White F.B.I. Agents Dispute Bureau Accord With Blacks
An organization of predominantly white agents for the Federal Bureau of Investigation filed papers late Thursday seeking to intervene in the bureau's tentative settlement of a discrimination complaint by black agents.
Organization officials said today that they were questioning the need for giving blacks preferential treatment.


The Computer Gets a Ringside Seat
It was a little late in coming, but the computerized age of electronic scoring in amateur boxing began this evening.
On the heaviest night of the United States Olympic boxing trials, manual scoring was replaced with computerized consoles.
The change didn't appear to affect the outcomes, but it did alter the way certain fighters approached their matches.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Consumer prices rose a scant one-tenth of a percent in May, the Labor Department reported.
The positive inflation news seems likely to nudge the Federal Reserve closer to the widely anticipated but elusive "final" easing of monetary policy.  [ 35. ]


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 9


One's Own Hoop: Portable, Dunkable
For basketball players who don't have access to permanent hoops, there are now portable ones -- some strong enough for slam dunks.
The hoops, which can be assembled in minutes, can be stored indoors and brought outside for use on patios, driveways or in courtyards.
Lifetime Products of Clearfield, Utah, has introduced the Quick Court, which weighs 110 pounds and can be adjusted to a height of 7 to 10 feet.
A self-leveling mechanism on the base makes it possible to use the portable hoop on uneven surfaces.
Quick Court is strong enough to stand on its own but is sturdier if its base is filled with sand or water: it can hold up to 500 pounds of sand or 500 gallons of water.
The company recommends filling the base when the hoop is to be used by older, heavier players who like to slam dunk.


His Name Is Tomlin and His Game Is Beating the Mets
The Mets' coaches-turned-drill-instructors tried to take it back to the basics last night.
Jeff Torborg, manager-turned-revisionist, tried to take his lineup back to the drawing board.
Unfortunately for the Mets, the Pittsburgh Pirates, or more specifically Pirates left-hander, Randy Tomlin, took them back to last week in terms of performance, defeating the Mets for the second time in five days.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on May 28 about amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, referred incorrectly in some copies to a plant food toxic to brain cells.
It is chickling pea, not chickpea.


Rymer Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Title Insurance Industry Loses Antitrust Ruling
The Supreme Court ruled today that acquiescence by state regulators in price fixing by the title insurance industry did not shield title insurance companies from liability under Federal antitrust laws.
The 6-to-3 decision overturned a lower court's ruling that had granted antitrust immunity to the title insurance industry in four states.
The decision today was a victory for the Federal Trade Commission, which had warned the Court that the lower court's approach could threaten antitrust enforcement in many industries that face some degree of state regulation, from utilities to liquor to trucking.


Elizabeth Arden Chief In Surprise Resignation
Joseph F. Ronchetti, the scrappy, driven cosmetics executive who resuscitated the moribund Elizabeth Arden line, stunned the retail, fashion and beauty communities yesterday, announcing he would resign as president and chief executive when his contract expires Aug. 3.
Unilever, the vast British-Dutch consumer products company that owns Arden, will merge it with Unilever's Calvin Klein Cosmetics Company in a unit called the Prestige Personal Products Group.


East Jerusalem Has Been a Spoil of War; No P.L.O. Contact
To the Editor:
The Neturei Karta Organization -- which you describe in "A Palestinian Who Is a Jew Fights Israel" (news article, May 1) as "a small sect of rigorously Orthodox Jews who are just as rigorously anti-Zionist, regarding the existence of the Israeli state as a violation of divine will" -- takes exception to statements in that article.
No one you mention in it has the right to speak for Neturei Karta.


New Jersey Adopts Guide To Control Future Sprawl
After more than six years of debate and revisions, New Jersey adopted statewide land-use guidelines today that are aimed at forcing growth into compact population centers and away from random sprawl.
State and local regulatory agencies are expected to base decisions about development according to the plan's five planning areas, from densely populated urban districts to environmentally sensitive, off-limits areas.


Corrections
A listing of garden events in The Home Section on Thursday misstated the date for a workshop on Japanese gardening at the John P. Humes Japanese Stroll Garden in Mill Neck, L.I.
It will be held on Thursday, June 18.


American Savings Is Closed
New York State banking regulators declared the American Savings Bank and its Riverhead Savings Bank subisidiary insolvent yesterday, as a result of bad commercial real estate loans, and divided its New York area branches among several institutions.
The move may result in losses of up to $30 million for thousands of depositors with accounts exceeding $100,000.


Morehouse Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Moon Church a Stranger to Academic Freedom; A Temporary Bailout?
To the Editor:
As an academic consultant to the Unification Church's International Religious Foundation and its predecessors from 1978 to 1989, I found "Moonie U. in Bridgeport?" (editorial, May 10) interesting and fair.
From my experience, it has always been the practice of Sun Myung Moon and his church to stay out of policy-making decisions in Unification Church-funded interreligious projects (such as the foundation), intercultural enterprises (like the Professors World Peace Academy), their conferences, publications and other productions.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Platform; Democrats Begin Drafting a Blueprint They Hope All Can Follow
Faced with a different kind of tension from the ones that have divided their party in the past, a small group of Democrats began today the quadrennial chore of trying to draft a party platform so general that all elements of the party will accept it and yet specific enough to distinguish Democratic principles from Republican ones.
Unity now prevails, more or less, on issues like civil rights, military aggression and abortion that once split the party and led to sit-ins, walk-outs and even riots.


Ross Cosmetics Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Approaches to New York City Give Visitors a Poor Impression
To the Editor:
The entrances to New York City from the airport terminals are an ugly, graffiti-scarred, refuse-strewn eyesore.
Grand Central Parkway, the Van Wyck Expressway, Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive and its access ramps (particularly the one at 96th Street), both entrances to the Lincoln Tunnel, the access avenues to the Queens-Midtown Tunnel and close-in portions of the Long Island Expressway are defaced by graffiti, obliterated road signs, discarded hubcaps and other automobile parts, garbage, paper refuse, pieces of tires, assorted filth and, in some instances, the hulks of abandoned vehicles.


Little Graduates Get a Head Start From Drug Program


Dinkins Challenges School Board After Reports of Poor Test Scores


Religion Notes
Priests as Husbands
Faced with a serious shortage of Roman Catholic priests, three-quarters of American Catholics favor allowing priests to marry, according to a nationwide survey conducted in May by the Gallup Organization.


Culp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


CHRONICLE
What will PRESIDENT BUSH do with the rest of his weekend after he returns from Rio de Janeiro?
FRANKIE HEWITT, the producing director of Ford's Theater, in Washington, said that Mr. and Mrs.
Bush are scheduled to give a reception tomorrow evening at the White House for the stars and benefactors of "A Festival at Ford's." The show, a celebration of Hispanic culture, is a benefit for the historic theater and for the National Hispanic Scholarship Fund.


Gus Schirmer Jr., 73, a Director, Producer and Promoter of Theater
Gustave Schirmer 4th, a theatrical director, producer and agent, died on Wednesday at the Brotman Medical Center in Culver City, Calif.
He was 73 years old and lived in Hollywood.
He died of kidney failure, said Frank Liberman, a friend.


O'Connor's Vigil Signals A Shift in Abortion Fight
John Cardinal O'Connor's decision to lead a march to an abortion clinic today is being viewed on both sides of the abortion battle as a striking departure from his usual tactics, one that even his allies in the anti-abortion movement acknowledge reflects frustration over recent setbacks in the efforts to stop legalized abortion.
The anti-abortion forces are hoping that such a gesture from the Cardinal will reinvigorate their campaigns, focusing widespread attention on the movement, which recently experienced the failure of a major effort to block abortion clinics in Buffalo.


Official Says He Had Doubts About Handling of 'Ivan' Case
Years before the case provoked a furor in the United States and Israel, Federal prosecutors were confronted with doubts about John Demjanjuk, the retired Cleveland auto worker whom they had identified as Ivan the Terrible, the savage operator of the gas chambers at the Nazis' Treblinka death camp.
In interviews in recent days, George L. Parker, a member of the Demjanjuk prosecution team, recalled conversations with other lawyers on the case in which he discussed his misgivings about whether Mr.
Demjanjuk was in fact the murderous Ivan of Treblinka.


Using Bonds to Prepare for Future Needs
Mark F. Cavalier, a senior vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers, is building a ladder -- a financial ladder -- to pay for his children's educations.
It is a simple technique that he also recommends to others to improve their return on savings without excessive risk.
"Laddering" simply means buying bonds and notes of different maturities, so that they do not all mature at once.
When planning for the children's educations, for example, he matches the maturities to the years they are likely to be in school so the amount of money available each year can be projected accurately.


Review/Ballet; Closing Some Choreographic Gaps
One of the most important things dancers must do in performing American Ballet Theater's current production of "Don Quixote" is to fill in considerable dramatic and choreographic gaps.
That was illustrated by two very different performances, on Wednesday afternoon and evening at the Metropolitan Opera House.
In the afternoon, almost all the lead dancers were new to their roles, and the ballet, staged by Vladimir Vasiliev, looked both vacant and busy.
The evening cast seemed to have decided simply to have fun with it all, and the results were much better.
The level of dancing throughout both performances was very high, however, with Cheryl Yeager and Robert Wallace models of precision and daring as the afternoon's Kitri and Basil, and Amanda McKerrow and Jeremy Collins throwing caution to the winds in headstrong performances in the evening.
Ms.
Yeager's balances were particularly impressive.
Ms.
McKerrow danced like a savage, reckless projectile.
Mr.
Wallace's multiple turns had a glittering slither to them.
And both men had the balletomanes in the audience gasping over their rivoltades, a difficult step in which a male dancer seems to jump over his own leg, turning over in the air.
But neither Ms.
Yeager nor Mr.
Wallace, new as Basil, projected much dramatically.
She was bubbly.
He was male.
Mr.
Collins, on the other hand, brought an amusing, sexy hint of irony to the role.


What to Do About Reynolds? Case Puzzles Almost Everyone
After discussing the issue for nearly two hours by telephone yesterday, the executive committee of The Athletics Congress was unable to decide what to do about the possibility that Butch Reynolds might compete in the United States Olympic track and field trials, which start next Friday in New Orleans.
Frank Greenberg, the president of T.A.C., the governing body of track and field in the United States, said the 22-member group needs additional legal information before discussions continue by telephone tomorrow night.


Homeless Prefer Huts to Chicago's Public Housing
For more than two years, Stan Washington lived on and below the streets of this city, struggling through its wicked winters and scorching summers, his slender frame exposed to the elements and the thugs.
His possessions were stolen, his body beaten and his dignity abused.
Then last fall a group of volunteers, calling themselves the Mad Housers, built Mr.
Washington and 17 other homeless men and women individual wooden huts "that can be locked like a real house," he said.


The Cost of That Dog in the Window
Here are estimated costs of caring for a pet dog.
Lifetime figures are based on an average life span of 11 years.
Totals do not include purchase price, which ranges from no cost to $5,000.


Montenegrins Strain at National Ties
With the noose of international sanctions tightening day by day, Montenegro, the last republic of old Yugoslavia still allied with Serbia, is growing restive.
Many of its citizens are openly suggesting that it break its ties to Belgrade and affirm the independence it once had.
Three months ago the people of this mountainous land voted in a referendum to bond with Serbia in a common state.
But that was before the Serbian-controlled Belgrade Government brought international condemnation on all Yugoslavia for its support of the Serbian uprising in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Many Montenegrins now say they see no reason for having to suffer United Nations sanctions for decisions and policies made in Belgrade.


With Jordan as Ace, Bulls Take Upper Hand
No matter how much effort or how many points it took, Michael Jordan was determined to win tonight.
And so were the Chicago Bulls.
Playing like champions from start to finish, the Bulls whipped the Portland Trail Blazers, 119-106, and moved within one victory of repeating as National Basketball Association champions.
By winning Game 5 at Memorial Coliseum, the Bulls took a 3-2 lead in the four-of-seven-game championship series and can clinch the title Sunday by winning Game 6 in Chicago.
Meanwhile, the Trail Blazers suffered their second home loss during the finals and can only claim the title by winning Game 6 and Game 7 in Chicago.
No N.B.A. team has ever won the finals by winning the last two games on the road.


Yankees Take to Road And Get Nowhere Fast
The venue changed for the Yankees, but the misery continued.
They took their struggling baseball act on the road tonight and the reviews were poor again.
So were the offense, the defense and the result.
Charles Nagy welcomed the Yankees into town by baffling them, an achievement that has become routine for opposing pitchers.
Nagy silenced the Yankees on five hits and ushered the Indians to a 3-0 victory at Cleveland Stadium.


Maddox Would Like to Succeed White
GARRY MADDOX, known as the Secretary of Defense when he played center field for the Philadelphia Phillies, is campaigning to succeed BILL WHITE as president of the National League.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BABBITT DISCLAIMS INTEREST IN VICE PRESIDENTIAL JOB
Bruce Babbitt, the former Governor of Arizona and 1988 Democratic Presidential candidate, confirmed today that he has been contacted by Bill Clinton's Vice-Presidential search team.
He said that the position had not been offered and that he was not interested in joining the Democratic ticket.
Mr.
Babbitt said Mr.
Clinton, who is 45 years old, should pick someone "older, with a little gray hair."
"You can't have two yuppies on this ticket," he said. Mr. Babbitt is 53.


Review/Film; She's the Wrong Woman to Mess With
"Aces: Iron Eagle III" is an action film for anyone who thinks women look good toting machine guns, or that "ordnance" is a word easily used in conversation.
As directed by John Glen, who is best known for his James Bond films, it takes a no-nonsense approach to stern dialogue and military maneuvers.
It also stretches noticeably to incorporate Rachel McLish, a glamorous body builder, into an otherwise ultramasculine story.
Ms.
McLish may struggle with even the simplest dialogue ("She's gone to stay with friends for a few days"), but she otherwise gets right into the spirit of things.
When menaced by a would-be rapist, for instance, she manages to knee him in the groin and knife him in the throat simultaneously.
"Aces" isn't outstandingly violent, but it clearly feels that gestures like those deserve to be applauded.


Classical Music in Review
Riverside Symphony
Alice Tully Hall


Dr. Harry Eagle Is Dead at 86; Formulated Cell-Growth Medium
Dr.
Harry Eagle, a medical scientist whose many discoveries included a method for growing cells in test tubes that was a breakthrough for biological research, died yesterday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y., where he was admitted three weeks ago.
He was 86 years old and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
He died of cancer, said Arthur Oshins, a spokesman for the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, from which Dr.
Eagle was retired.


Report on Inflation Pushes Bond Prices Up
News that consumer prices in May rose at their slowest pace in four months helped to raise prices of Treasury securities and push down interest rates yesterday.
Despite the surprisingly low rise of one-tenth of 1 percent in the Consumer Price Index, trading volume remained light.


1-800-TROUBLE
"THE DIGEST'S PRESIDENTIAL POLL IS ON!" the editors of The Literary Digest trumpeted on Aug. 22, 1936.
"THE DIGEST'S smooth-running machine moves with the swift precision of thirty years' experience to reduce guess-work to hard fact." So saying, the editors sent out postcards to 10 million Americans and on the basis of the replies, predicted that Alf Landon would demolish Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Roosevelt won, 523 electoral votes to 8, and The Literary Digest went out of business.


6 Newark Officers Suspended in Shooting Inquiry
Six Newark police officers under investigation in the shooting of a 17-year-old suspected car thief were suspended from duty without pay today, and the city's Mayor and police director complained that the officers' statements about the shooting were too sketchy.
"There's still a lot of gaps in statements we want to see answered," said William R. Celester, the police director, as he announced the suspensions at a news conference.
"We're just not satisfied the whole truth is out there."


Alomar and Doherty Are Suspended
Detroit Tigers pitcher JOHN DOHERTY and Cleveland Indians catcher SANDY ALOMAR Jr.  were suspended yesterday by American League president Dr.
BOBBY BROWN for their roles in a bench-clearing brawl on June 8.
Doherty, banned for four games, and Alomar, banned for three, have appealed the ruling and remain eligible to play.


Bavaro Returns, but Now He's a Brown
MARK BAVARO wasn't easy to tackle when he was an All-Pro tight end with the Giants.
And he wasn't easy to discourage after he was waived by the Giants last summer because of knee problems.
After sitting out football for a year, Bavaro returned to the National Football League yesterday by signing a one-year deal with the Cleveland Browns.
Bavaro will be joining Browns Coach BILL BELICHICK, who was the Giants' defensive coordinator during Bavaro's six seasons with New York.


Your Taxes; Investing in Russia Likely to Be Eased
ONE obstacle impeding United States private investment in Russia is likely to be lowered during Boris Yeltsin's visit to the United States next week: taxes.
President Yeltsin and President Bush plan to sign an income tax treaty.
The treaty would limit Russian taxes on subsidiaries of American companies.
More important, it would let American companies reduce their United States taxes to compensate for income taxes levied by Russia on retained earnings, dividends paid to the American owners, or interest payments by companies in Russia to American lenders.
In general the changes would bring business relations between the United States and Russia into conformity with similar arrangements among most other countries.


Keith Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The 'How' in Home Improvement
Depot Don, meet Martha Stewart.
At Home Depot, the nation's largest chain of warehouse-sized do-it-yourself stores, socket wrenches and lawn mowers are now available through a bridal registry.
And homeowners can get interior design advice along with their paint and wallpaper, and then have their preferences put on file for better service the next time they shop.


AMERICAN UNABLE TO LEAVE BEIJING
On bad days, Eugene Wang pulls out from his wallet a photo of his daughter and a newspaper clipping about Terry A. Anderson, the hostage who was released after nearly seven years of captivity in Lebanon.
After all, he says to himself, he has been held here for only two years.
But in the meantime outside China, his father died of a heart attack, his mother-in-law also died, and his daughter is now 5 years old.
Mr.
Wang, a Taiwan-born American citizen, has not been allowed to leave China since July 1990, when two Chinese judges appeared at his hotel room, demanded to see his Chinese visa and then confiscated his passport.


Kati Gaulkin, David Schoenrock
Kati Gaulkin, the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Geoffrey Gaulkin of Weehawken, N.J., was married yesterday in Philadelphia to David Bruce Schoenrock, a son of Lynne F. Johnston of Madison, Conn., and the late Bruce W. Schoenrock.
The Rev.
Wendel W. Meyer performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Schoenrock, 28 years old, graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father is a judge of the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court in Jersey City.


The Mood Turns Darker In East Europe's Drama
THE largely peaceful revolutions that swept Eastern Europe so recently seemed at times like something from a Frank Capra script, with amateur politicians forging their way toward democracy and capitalism.
But in one country after another this year, the hopeful revolutionary spirit of 1989 has been supplanted by darker images of ethnic strife, political instability and repression.
Now it is a time of atomization, particularly in the Balkans, where war in Yugoslavia poses a continuing threat of a broader conflict that could yet draw in Bulgaria, Albania, or Greece.


Let Some Smoke In
Despite his obvious problems of "electability," Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has moved inexorably into position to win the Democratic Presidential nomination.
Republicans have little choice except to renominate George Bush, despite his equally obvious vulnerabilities.
These seemingly inevitable major-party candidates may be the main reason why Ross Perot, until recently an unknown figure in national politics, suddenly looks like a man of destiny to so many voters.


'The Major Rituals of the Home'
Diane Von Furstenberg, who's known for designing clothes, is writing a book about the room where people take them off.
Ms.
Von Furstenberg, whose coffee-table book, "Beds," was published by Bantam last year, is now completing work on a new book, "Baths," which Random House will publish next year.


Suffolk Lawmakers Agree To Raise Sales Tax 1/2%
A sales-tax increase and a proposal to borrow up to $90 million through the sale of bonds were approved late Friday night by the Suffolk County Legislature, handing County Executive Robert Gaffney a partial victory in his battle to close a budget deficit that he said had grown to $110 million.
But Mr.
Gaffney failed to win approval of an emergency measure calling for a 10 percent pay cut for all county employees.
The measure, which would have saved an estimated $20 million over the next six and a half months, was opposed by the Democratic minority in the Legislature.
The proposed pay cut has been the subject of demonstrations by county workers in recent weeks.


Corinne M. Cole, Robert M. Ryan Jr.
Corinne Marie Cole, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth R. Cole Jr. of North Palm Beach, Fla., was married there yesterday to Robert Martin Ryan Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ryan of Gwynedd Valley, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul L. Kindschi, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Lost Tree Chapel.
Mrs.
Ryan and her husband are both 26 years old and graduates of Bucknell University.
She is a preschool teacher at Manhattan Beach Academy, in Manhattan Beach, Calif.
Her father is the president of the Arran Capital Corporation, an investment concern in North Palm Beach.


INSIDE
Sanctions Strain Belgrade
Calls for peace are mingled with calls for vengeance as international sanctions bring the effects of war home to the Serbian capital.
Page 24.
Free Speech, or Just Noise?
In a Federal case, street preachers are challenging a Beaufort, S.C., law against "unseemly noise." Page 26.
Clinton Rankles Jackson
Bill Clinton, speaking to the Rev.
Jess Jackson's Rainbow Coalition, received a cool response after he criticized remarks by a rapper.
Page 30.


A la Carte; Beyond Pizza
VISITORS to the North Fork who whiz along Route 48 in Mattituck do not see even a glimpse of Primavera Pizza and Pasta.
No one just finds a place like this.
Only those determined diners who seek it out have a chance.
But knowledgeable local residents who have heard glowing word-of-mouth reports are flocking to the tiny store-front in the Middle Neck Shopping Center on Cox Neck Road.
From the outside Primavera Pizza and Pasta looks like a thousand other Long Island pizza parlors.
Its window is adorned with handwritten paper signs advertising midweek and by-the-slice pizza specials.
It is very possible to walk in, pick up a pizza and never notice that behind the front room, with the usual ovens and counter, is a little restaurant.


A Two-Mile Move in the Right Direction
STARR BOGGS' has left its cozy quarters in the village of Westhampton Beach and made a two-mile trek to Dune Road to become Starr Boggs' on the Beach.
This East End pacesetter, now in its seventh year, made its name with sharp, caring service and exciting food featuring high-quality local ingredients.
Starr Boggs's new home is in the Dune Deck Hotel.
The beachside restaurant provides panoramic ocean views through huge picture windows.
The room is a dazzler, with comfortable seating, white napery, candlelight and bouquets of roses.


Elizabeth Frank, David McGraw
Walter N. Frank Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I., and Audrey B. Frank of Miami have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Lane Frank and David Durand McGraw, a son of James H. McGraw 3d of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Virginia S. Parker of Delray, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Frank, 26 years old, is an administrative broker at Johnson &amp; Higgins, an insurance brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a founder and the senior partner of Walter N. Frank &amp; Company, a specialist brokerage in New York.
She is a granddaughter of Walter N. Frank of Hanover, N.H., a former chairman of the New York Stock Exchange.


Miss Bischoff, William King
Lesley Clare Bischoff, a daughter of Richard T. Bischoff of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Nancy K. Bischoff of New York, was married yesterday to William Alexander King, a son of William H. King of Higganum, Conn., and Sondra D. King of Middletown, Conn.
The Rev.
Daniel McSheffery performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Augustine Church in North Branford, Conn..
Mrs.
King, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a credit analyst with J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is a retired yacht broker in Fort Lauderdale.
Her mother is the director of medical staff services at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.


Russians Ask, 'What Country Do I Live In?'
A 16-year-old boy from Rubtsovsk, a town set deep in Siberia, recently sent a letter to a newspaper asking a question that is disturbing many Russians as they come to terms with the loss of the Soviet Union.
"I am a citizen of a nonexistent state, and I don't know where I live," Aleksei S. wrote to Komsomolskaya Pravda.
"Is it the Commonwealth of Independent States, or is it the Russian Federated Republic? Is it Siberia, and is it the Sovereign Republic of Altai?"


A Revoltin' Development?
To the Editor:
So Dave Marsh has decided that country music might just be racist  [ "Just What's Being Sold in Country?," May 24 ] .


Cape Town Parliament Working Itself Out of Job
Accustomed to being the focus of white politics for more than a century and a half, South Africa's Parliament has found its influence and relevance eroded by the multiracial negotiations 900 miles away in Johannesburg.
The Convention for a Democratic South Africa deadlocked over details of a new constitution at its last full session in mid-May, and its management committee is working quietly to resolve the impasse.


Rhode Island
To the Editor: "Walking on Rhode Island's Islands" was well done.
In fairness to hikers, however, it should be noted that while Prudence Island may be "a walker's dream" it is also a deer tick's paradise.
One day last summer we came upon a yachtsman who had ventured ashore for a brief hike.
He was covered with the little beasties.
The estuarine sanctuary at the north end of the island and the state park at the south end are posted with warnings of the dangers of deer ticks and Lyme disease.
Prudence Island is an extremely high risk area for Lyme Disease.
Your readers should be warned.
MARY BROWN LAWRENCE Summer Resident, Prudence Island, R.I.
Roger Greene, Assistant to the Director of the State of Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management, replies: Ms.
Lawrence is correct that deer ticks are abundant on Prudence Island.
However, research indicates that there are far fewer deer ticks within the well-mowed trails than in the wooded areas beside the trails.
Therefore, the risk of coming into contact with deer ticks (and Lyme disease) while hiking the Prudence Island Trails is relatively low.
Hikers can get to the most interesting places without ever leaving the mowed trails.


A Curious Mix Of Versailles And Mickey Mouse
When the Walt Disney Company embarked on the ambitious blitz of building that would make it, by the late 1980's, the world's most talked-about corporate patron of architecture, it seemed mainly to be assembling trophies: a Michael Graves building here, a Robert A. M. Stern one there.
The architects were hired to design stand-alone objects, attractions to embellish the company's huge resort property in Orlando, Fla., and its headquarters campus in Burbank, Calif.
For better or worse, these buildings were fitted into existing Disney environments.
But when the time came to plan the $4.5 billion project 20 miles west of Paris that would become Euro Disney Resort, there was no environment to fit into.
Disney bought 5,000 acres of farmland and set out to construct a theme park, an entertainment complex and a cluster of hotels.
And for the first time, it left the job of making a master plan to its collection of celebrated architects: Graves, Stern, Frank Gehry, Stanley Tigerman, Robert Venturi and Antoine Grumbach.


Stephanie Dee Heath, Paul Francis McCarthy
Stephanie Dee Heath, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Heath of Pittsfield, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Francis McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. McCarthy of Ossining, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph C. DiCine performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church in Stockbridge, Mass.


For Auto Workers, Meeting Comes at a Crucial Juncture
With the collapse of the five-month strike at Caterpillar Inc. and plant shutdown notices at the General Motors Corporation still fresh in their memory, delegates head to the United Automobile Workers' convention in San Diego facing more urgently than ever the need to find ways to rejuvenate their union.
With internal union politicking at an ebb, Owen F. Bieber is the overwhelming favorite to be re-elected president for a final three-year term before he reaches mandatory retirement age.
His only major opponent is Jerry Tucker, a longtime foe of modern management systems like those used in Japanese car plants.


Networking; The Lure of Wireless LAN's
The hardest part of putting together any network is not finding useful whiz-bang software but physically linking the computers.
The many means of laying cable are generally expensive and unwieldly (creating a spaghetti factory of unmarked wires under the floor), and even after completion the various network operating systems might not be able to talk to each other.
It's no wonder that network administrators are salivating over the promise of wireless LAN technology.
In a wireless system, a network interface card (NIC) comes equipped with a transmitter/receiver (a miniature FM radio station) that allows it to talk to any other node on the network.
The problem with most wireless systems is that they are slower, in some cases much slower, than wired systems. (Wireless signals tend to "echo" and compensating for that cuts down on transmission speed.) Because wireless systems use radio frequencies for transmission, they are also prone to interference and -- more important to the security minded -- to interception.
Wireless systems are also expensive.
Most wireless NIC's are in the $1,000 range.
Regular interface cards cost less than $300.


No Longer Life Savers, but Life Enhancers
This is shaping up to be, by any criterion, an exceptional year for major exhibitions.
Some of them take place in institutions that are, in effect, long established and permanent fortresses of art.
Examples are "Al-Andalus" coming to the Metropolitan in July, "Henri Matisse" at the Museum of Modern Art in September, "Picasso and Things," now in Philadelphia, and "Amen Hotep," a major show of ancient Egyptian art coming to Cleveland in July.
But just occasionally we come upon an esthetic undertaking that started as an unlikely adventure in an unlikely place.
This is the case of Documenta, in Kassel, Germany, and it is also the case with the Spanish and Vatican pavilions at the Seville Expo, where new deft and successful solutions are offered to the problem of showing major art in the pandemonium of a world's fair.


New Congressional Lines Open New York Doors
In embracing a state court plan for Congressional redistricting over a competing proposal from a Federal court, New York State lawmakers opted to protect more Congressional incumbents.
But with last week's surprise resignation of one incumbent, Representative Raymond J. McGrath, a Long Island Republican, another potential explanation has emerged for why state lawmakers prefer the state plan: the opportunities it provides for state lawmakers.


Davies and Palli Leave 5 Golfers a Shot Behind
Two of the strongest players and longest hitters on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, Laura Davies of England and Anne-Marie Palli of France, shared the lead after two rounds of the ShopRite L.P.G.A.
Classic.
Linda Hunt of Houston, who shared the lead after the first round, fell completely apart on the back nine today, giving away seven shots in the last nine holes and ending the day with 77.


Mountain Bikes At Ski Area
The Sunday River Mountain Bike Park in western Maine, which was the first bike park served by a ski lift in the East, opens for the season on the weekend of June 27-28.
Until this year, the park for mountain bikers at the Sunday River ski area -- it first opened in 1990 -- was operated only on weekends.
Beginning July 4, the park will be open every day through Labor Day and then operate on weekends until Columbus Day.
Mountain biking, which uses bicycles built with sturdier frames and slightly smaller wheels than regular models, has been growing steadily in popularity, said a spokesman for the ski area.
Sunday River, which is near Bethel, has 33 miles of trails, including 8 miles added this year, for bikers. (Park hours are 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.) The routes run over some ski trails and old logging roads as well as paths made specially for bikes, with views of the White Mountains and the Mahoosuc range.
Access to many routes is provided by the North Peak Chairlift, which has bike racks.
Bike trails are marked in ski fashion with symbols indicating beginner, intermediate and expert terrain.


Katrina Grozier, Fernando Laguarda
August wedding plans have been announced for Katrina Grozier and Fernando Laguarda, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raul Laguarda of Sherborn, Mass., by her parents, Gillian Neuffer of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and John Grozier of New York.
Miss Grozier, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University; her fiance graduated cum laude from Harvard.
She received her master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is a vice president of the Citibank Private Bank, in New York.
Her mother is the president of the Sarum Group, a sales and marketing firm in Pound Ridge.
Miss Grozier is also the stepdaughter of Robert Neuffer of Pound Ridge and Ann Grozier of New York.


Louise Stanziale, Kenneth J. Pascal
Louise Marie Stanziale, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stan Stanziale of New Canaan, Conn., was married on Friday to Kenneth John Pascal, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Pascal of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Kevin Royle performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Aloysius church in New Canaan.
Mrs.
Pascal, 32 years old, is a staff consultant for the Personal Systems Division of International Business Machines in Somers, N.Y.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is the director of business development in Purchase, N.Y., for I.B.M.'s international sales division.


Wall of Silence Impedes Inquiry Into a Rowdy Navy Convention
On a warm Saturday night last September, Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d chatted with Navy pilots on a patio outside the Las Vegas Hilton, where military aviators, flush from their victory in the Persian Gulf, were celebrating at a three-day convention.
Just inside, hundreds of officers -- lured by the prospect of free drinks, free food and a chance to share war stories with old buddies -- roamed the third-floor "hospitality suites" rented by aircraft squadrons.
Strippers and scantily clad bartenders worked the 20 suites, where Navy and Marine Corps pilots watched pornographic movies.
Male streakers dashed about, and in one suite, officers goaded female guests to drink from a dispenser shaped like a rhinoceros penis.
The alcohol bill per suite was as much as $7,000 during the three days.


BENEFITS
Musical Theater Party
JUNE 15 -- The annual June benefit for the Lincoln Center Theater's Music Theater Fund will be at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, starting with cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Dinner, dancing and entertainment, featuring excerpts from "The Most Happy Fella" and the upcoming musical "My Favorite Year," will follow.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 362-7600.
Evening for Actors' Fund
JUNE 15 -- The Actors' Fund of America, which has been providing assistance to needy actors for more than a century, will benefit from a black-tie evening at the Waldorf-Astoria.
There will be cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment, including performances by Bernadette Peters and original cast members of the musical "Dreamgirls." Tickets, $500, from (212) 221-7300.
Auction Preview
JUNE 15 -- A preview of a June 17 auction of American furniture, silver and folk and decorative arts will be held at Christie's to celebrate the establishment of the Museum of American Folk Art Gallery Associates, a committee of young adults promoting the museum's programs.
A reception and the preview will start at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 595-9533.
Sulzberger Family Honored
The award will be presented by the Community Service Society of New York, the parent organization of R. S. V. P., at a luncheon from noon to 2 P.M. at the Grand Hyatt.
The event will benefit R. S. V. P. Tickets, $100, from (212) 505-2380.
Cab Calloway in Westchester
JUNE 15 -- The singer and band leader Cab Calloway will join the New Orchestra of Westchester for a benefit concert for the orchestra at 8 P.M. at the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York in Purchase.
There will be cocktails and a buffet at 6:30 P.M., with a nightcap and dancing after the concert.
Tickets, $175; for concert and nightcap alone, $75, and for concert alone, $25, $35 and $50, from (914) 682-3707.
Vacations for the Elderly
JUNE 16 -- The Vacation and Senior Centers Association, which provides homebound elderly people with vacations out of the city, will hold its annual fund-raiser at Christie's from 6 to 8 P.M.
There will be a cocktail reception and a preview of American furniture, silver and folk and decorative arts to be auctioned at Christie's on June 17.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 645-6590.
Celebrity Auction for Lupus
JUNE 16 -- An auction of 32 items, ranging from a racing jacket once worn by Paul Newman to a sketch by Jimmy Stewart of the imaginary character Harvey, will be offered at a reception from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Hudson Theater, 145 West 44th Street.
The auction will benefit the Lupus Foundation.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 685-4118.
Preserving Black Culture
JUNE 16 -- The Studio Museum in Harlem, which preserves the arts and artifacts of black Americans and honors their African origins, will hold its annual black-tie benefit at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers.
CBS News correspondent Ed Bradley will be the host of the event.
Cocktails will start at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 260-1070.
Seeking a Cure
JUNE 16 -- The Greater New York City Chapter of the A. L. S. Association, which raises funds for patient services and research into amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, commonly known as Lou Gehrig's disease, will hold a gourmet benefit with specialities prepared by chefs from several restaurants.
Robin Leach, food writers and others will attend.
Food will be available from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Rihga Royal Hotel, 151 West 54th Street.
Tickets, $110, from (212) 697-1248, or $135 at the door.
Boathouse Party
JUNE 16 -- A fund-raiser will support the programs of the Grosvenor Neighborhood House.
The organization was founded in 1915 to help immigrant families in the midtown Turtle Bay Area, and its programs have since expanded.
From 8 P.M. to midnight, there will be a barbecue party with dancing at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
There will be bus service from 72d Street and Fifth Avenue to the boathouse.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 876-2455.
Hospital's Founders' Night
JUNE 16 -- The Hospital for Joint Diseases will hold its annual founders' benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria.
There will be cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 598-6299.
Anti-Defamation Awards
JUNE 16 -- The finance division of the Anti-Defamation League will hold its annual human-relations award dinner at the Grand Hyatt.
Harvey D. Moskowitz, a member of the management committee of B. D. O. Seidman, an accounting concern, and the late Theodore H. Silbert, who was the chairman of the Sterling National Bank and Trust Company, will be honored.
Cocktails at 5:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 490-2525.
Cocktails, Barbecue, Bingo
JUNE 16 -- The Lenox Hill Neighborhood Association will hold a cocktail party, barbecue and bingo games at the Neighborhood House, 331 East 70th Street.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 685-1095.
Ray Charles Under a Tent
JUNE 16 -- Ray Charles will perform in a concert for the Robin Hood Foundation, which raises funds for several city organizations that help poor people.
The event will occur under a vast tent in Battery Park City at West Street near Vesey Street.
The evening will start with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner, the concert and dancing.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 245-6570.
Harbor Cruise
JUNE 16 -- The American-Italian Foundation for Cancer Research will sponsor a cruise around New York Harbor to raise funds for free mammograms for underprivileged women over age 35.
Boarding of the World Yacht Princess will be at Pier 81, at 42d Street and the Hudson River, at 6:30 P.M.
The cruise, to begin at 7:30 P.M. and return at 11, will feature dancing, a buffet and games of chance.
Tickets, $225, or $150 for sailors under 30 years of age, from (212) 628-9090.
Helping St.
Francis House
JUNE 17 -- St.
Francis House, at 138 West 26th Street, will have a cocktail party from 5 to 7:30 P.M. to raise funds for its AIDS programs and services for homeless people.
Tickets, $25, at the door.
Information: (212) 229-1300.
Matchup at the Seaport
JUNE 17 -- The junior committee of the Volunteer Referral Center, which matches volunteers with nonprofit organizations in Manhattan, will hold a party from 6:30 to 11 P.M. at Bridgewaters at South Street Seaport.
There will be an open bar, light supper and dancing.
Tickets, $65, or $115 for two, from (212) 889-4805, or $75 at the door.
A Real Faux Party
JUNE 17 -- The Isabel O'Neil Foundation's 13th annual auction, dinner and dance will be at Sotheby Parke Bernet.
There will be a cocktail reception at 6 P.M., followed by a black-tie dinner-dance.
Since 1955, the organization has maintained a workshop teaching the simulation of marble, malachite and other decorative materials.
Tickets, $250 for the entire evening, $100 for the cocktail party and auction, from (212) 737-9010.
Party at Performing Arts
JUNE 17 -- The newly renovated High School for the Performing Arts, at 120 West 46th Street, will be the setting for a benefit for Arts Connection, an arts education organization that has its headquarters in the building.
Cocktails will start at 7 P.M., followed by tours of the building, dinner, entertainment by professionals and students, and dancing for guests.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 245-6570.
Manhattan Support for Israel
JUNE 18 -- For more than 40 years, the Manhattan Guild has supported the Chaim Sheba Medical Center in Tel-Hashomer, Israel.
A black-tie benefit for the guild's work will be held at St.
Moritz on the Park, starting with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 888-6767.
Boys and Girls Club
JUNE 18 -- The Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club will raise funds for its summer camp programs with a party, featuring cocktails and dancing, from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M. at the Peninsula Hotel, Fifth Avenue at 55th Street.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 893-8600.
Ballet Party Downtown
JUNE 18 -- The junior council of the American Ballet Theater will hold a black-tie dinner and dance at the New York Academy of Art at 419 Lafayette Street, south of Astor Place.
Cocktails will start at 9 P.M., with dancing until 1 A.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 477-3030.
Cystic Fibrosis Fund-Raiser
JUNE 18 -- Bridgewaters at South Street Seaport will be the setting for a party by the junior committee of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
There will be a buffet dinner, dancing and an open bar starting at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets $50, from (212) 986-8783, or $65 at the door.
Celebrating an Opening
JUNE 18 -- The scheduled September opening of Hazelden's New York Fellowship Club, a halfway house for recovering addicts, at 233 East 17th Street, will be celebrated at a black-tie benefit at the New York Hilton.
Bill Moyers will be the master of ceremonies, and Liza Minnelli will entertain.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Night of Jazz
JUNE 18 -- "An Evening With Friends of Charlie Parker" will feature dozens of jazz figures, including Dizzy Gillespie and Max Roach.
The event will benefit the young mothers and babies program of Veritas, a drug-rehabilitation program.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception and dinner will be followed by jazz, from 8:30 P.M. to 1 A.M.
Tickets, $250, or $30 for the music alone, from (212) 865-9182.


McRae Gets a Reward For Showing Patience
Hal McRae, the Kansas City Royals' manager, was sitting around one day last winter talking about his job and his team, neither of which brought him any enjoyment last season, he said, because the Royals finished next to last.
"I do not want to be a second-division manager," he said.
"I do not want to manage for the sake of managing. If I didn't have the players, I would screw it up somehow to get fired. There wouldn't be enough to keep me there."


Fund Provides Window Into the American Dream
Arthur Aviles travels to major cities throughout the country and Europe as a professional dancer.
But topping his list of memorable trips is the one he took to Perkasie, Pa., when he was six years old.
It marked the first time that Mr.
Aviles, now 29 years old, had ventured out of the housing project where he lived in Queens with his eight brothers and sisters to spend two weeks with a Fresh Air Fund host family.
Coming from the dense streets of Jamaica, he remembers, Perkasie seemed exotic.
The houses looked very big.
Trees framed the streets.
Families had backyards.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SUMMER RAIN By Marguerite Duras. Scribners, $18.


MAKING IT IN THE MAJORS
O.K., let's toss a few titles on the table: "The Maltese Falcon," "Suspicion," "Gaslight," "Mildred Pierce," "The Red Shoes," "Anatomy of a Murder," "Jaws," "Norma Rae." These are only some of the films that received Oscar nominations for best picture, but not for best director.
Was this sexist or biased?
Or did the voters prefer to go with candidates they considered worthier that year?
This might apply also to the absence of Penny Marshall and Barbra Streisand from the directors list for their respective movies.
SHAUN CONSIDINE
New York, N.Y.


2 G.O.P. Leaders Push New State Agenda
BY all accounts, Donald T. DiFrancesco, President of the Senate, and Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, Speaker of the Assembly, are potentially the most powerful political figures in the state.
With Republican majorities in the Senate and Assembly large enough to override a gubernatorial veto, the two Republican leaders are positioned to determine what will become law between now and the end of 1993.
"Right now," Mr.
Haytaian said, "the office of Senate President and the office of the Assembly Speaker are probably more influential than they have ever been."


Sculpture Full of Visual Puns
THE snakes in the illustration on this page writhe not, neither do they hiss, for they are but stiffened hoses with gas pump nozzles for heads.
And they are doing their thing without the help of a snake charmer.
Nevertheless, they are serpents enough to jolt even those who have seen them before.
The assemblage is one of about a dozen in "Willie Cole, See No Evil," the latest in the Newark Museum's Arts New Jersey Series.
A sculptor in his late 30's who lives in Newark, Willie Cole comes trailing a certain amount of glory: his first Manhattan solo just completed at the Brooke Alexander gallery; a show in Chicago and one in Basel, Switzerland; a year as artist in residence at the Studio Museum in Harlem.


Linda Marie White and Mark Garrett Banta
Linda Marie White, a daughter of Thomas White of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Joan C. White, was married yesterday to Mark Garrett Banta, a son of Norma Banta of Fairhaven, N.J., and the late Robert Banta.
The Rev.
George Zabriskie 2d performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Larchmont.


Fire in North New Jersey Clouds Horizon


Making a Difference; Solidarity in Silicon Valley
Stung by the steady exodus of jobs and manufacturing from Silicon Valley, some of the region's biggest companies have come together in an unprecedented coalition aimed at restoring the area's economic vitality.
Joint Venture: Silicon Valley, as the coalition is called, released a preliminary report last week showing that the valley lags the San Francisco Bay Area and the nation as a whole in the creation of new jobs.
High real estate costs and strict land use regulations have for years prompted companies to shift operations out of the valley, an area south of San Francisco that is home to many computer and semiconductor companies.
But it is only recently that executives came to any kind of consensus about the damage these moves have caused.
That helped to get arch competitors to join the coalition, said Thomas Hayes, chairman of the group.


For Students, Steinbeck and Orwell Can't Match Cliffs Notes
To the Editor:
"Shakespeare Then, Shakespeare Now: What They Read in High School" (Education page, May 20), your graphic presentation comparing the required reading of high school students in 1963 and today, ignores what all English teachers know: Though, in the main, the same books are assigned, fewer students read them today than read them before.


Buying Tools a Challenging Task
ACQUIRING a useful assortment of tools can be a challenge for first-time homeowners having no experience in home repair.
Overall, the best advice is not to buy any tools until one has a specific need for them.
A flexible steel tape measure, the kind that retracts into a plastic or metal case about four inches square, is certainly among the most important tools.
And if one obeys the carpenter's golden rule for avoiding mistakes -- that is, measure twice and cut once -- it follows that one will use a tape measure twice as often as virtually any other tool.
A 12- or 16-foot tape is the most practical.
Regardless of length, it should be at least three-quarters of inch wide so that it can be extended several feet without bending.
To get a bonus, choose a tape measure with carpentry information, like nail, screw and lumber sizes, printed on the back.


Adventurous Students Seek a Better Education In a Suburban School
THE six students who live in a two-story white clapboard house near the First Congregational Church in Darien came to the town in the hope of getting a better education than they might have in New York City.
What they are really getting, however, is an education on life.
They are learning history, science and math, but mostly they are learning how to deal with a world in which most people are white.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton at Jackson Meeting: Warmth, and Some Friction
Gov.
Bill Clinton, reaching for a symbol that would demonstrate his desire not to be held captive by special interests, used a conference sponsored by the multiracial Rainbow Coalition to attack statements made by a popular rap artist.
The comments, in which the Arkansas Governor said Sister Souljah, who describes herself as a "raptivist," could be likened to David Duke, rankled the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and many others who attended the conference here today.


Now Archer Battles for Job on Eagles
After rallying the Sacramento Surge to a victory in the World Bowl last weekend, winning the game's most valuable player trophy to go along with the league's regular-season m.v.p. trophy, quarterback David Archer said he would welcome head-to-head competition for a starting job in the National Football League.
Unfortunately for Archer, the Philadelphia Eagles own his N.F.L. rights.
A return to Philadelphia means that Archer will be waging war against a six-headed monster just to get snaps in practice when training camp starts next month.


Getting Close at 37,000 Feet
SIX years ago this Thanksgiving, I flew from Boston to Los Angeles to share the home and the turkey of a man of questionable character.
I did not know it then, of course, but it is not a good idea to get married or begin a journey on a holiday; if things don't work out, you suffer the annual reminders.
A woman I know was divorced four years ago from a man she married on April 15.
She says she could forget him if it weren't for her 1099's.
By reason of temperament and circumstance, I do not get away very much.
I have managed, however, to cultivate the friendship of someone who does.
Arthur, who counsels me, has been almost everywhere.
Name any city and he will tell you how to get there by air, rail or car


Jennifer Wilson, Brian Buttigieg
Jennifer Lynn Wilson, a daughter of Valerie A. Wilson of Bronxville, N.Y., and Robert G. Wilson of Key Biscayne, Fla., was married last evening to Brian Joseph Buttigieg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Buttigieg of Floral Park, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert W. Bedingfield officiated at the Reformed Church in Bronxville.
Mrs.
Wilson-Buttigieg, 24 years old, is a vice president of Valerie Wilson Travel, a New York agency owned by her mother.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Haverford College.
Her father, formerly a general partner of the New York investment banking firm of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, is the chairman and chief executive of Ecologic Waste Services, a landfill renovator in Miami.
Her stepmother is Anne C. Wilson of Key Biscayne.


JUNE 7-13: New Debates; 'Ivan the Terrible'? Or Mistaken Identity?
Who is "Ivan the Terrible?" Doubts about whether John Demjanjuk, a retired auto worker from Cleveland, was the monstrous executioner at the Nazi death camp in Treblinka, Poland, may never be resolved.
But serious questions arising about the case against him have stirred debate over the actions of criminal justice agencies in the United States, where he was stripped of his citizenship, and Israel, where he is awaiting a supreme court ruling on the appeal of his conviction and death sentence.
Mr.
Demjanjuk's supporters accuse the Justice Department of concealing evidence from the files of the former Soviet Union indicating that another man, Ivan Marchenko, last seen alive in 1944, was the Ivan who slashed and beat his victims as he shoved them to the gas chambers.
More than 850,000 Jews died in World War II at the Treblinka camp.


Sports of The Times; Commissioner's Cane Is Now His Sword
MAYBE it's the cane.
Because of his torturous back ailment, Fay Vincent needs to walk with a cane.
Maybe some baseball club owners considered his cane to be a sign of weakness, a sign of a commissioner who would surrender to a palace coup.
Instead, those owners surrendered.


E.M.S. Technician Is Accused of Sexually Abusing a Patient
An Emergency Medical Services ambulance technician was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing a patient as he helped transport her to a Brooklyn hospital on Thursday night, the police said.
The patient, a 23-year-old woman, told the police that the E.M.S. worker touched her breasts and genitals as he assured her he was simply trying to discover why she was suffering from shortness of breath.
When she protested, he said that a complete physical examination was a routine part of his job, the police said.


The Physicians' View When Managed Care Comes to Town
West Virginians like to say they are "independent cusses," which may be why this is one of the few states where health insurers still have little influence over how a physician conducts his or her practice.
But physicians here, like most across the country, are under growing pressure to trade independence for security.
Employers and insurance companies are pressing doctors to join a web of insurer-sponsored medical networks, often called managed-care networks, that try to slow rising health costs by limiting fees and weeding out unnecessary or inappropriate treatments.


Buying Tools a Challenging Task
ACQUIRING a useful assortment of tools can be a challenge for first-time homeowners having no experience in home repair.
Overall, the best advice is not to buy any tools until one has a specific need for them.
A flexible steel tape measure, the kind that retracts into a plastic or metal case about four inches square, is certainly among the most important tools.
And if one obeys the carpenter's golden rule for avoiding mistakes -- that is, measure twice and cut once -- it follows that one will use a tape measure twice as often as virtually any other tool.
A 12- or 16-foot tape is the most practical.
Regardless of length, it should be at least three-quarters of inch wide so that it can be extended several feet without bending.
To get a bonus, choose a tape measure with carpentry information, like nail, screw and lumber sizes, printed on the back.


George Bellows, Iconoclast With a Heart
During the early years of this century, George Bellows thrived on a reputation as one of America's most daring artists.
It's no longer easy to see what was thought to be daring about his work, although it is easy to see why he thrived.
His best works have a great deal of panache.
A major exhibition of more than 60 paintings has just opened at the Whitney Museum of American Art, organized by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth.
The show (on view through Aug. 30) makes clear that Bellows could be a strong, if uneven, painter.
In a picture like the famous "Stag at Sharkey's," from 1909, there's an easygoing virtuosity, a sumptuousness to the handling of paint and an ingratiating sensibility despite the hard-bitten subject.


Sports of The Times; Long March For Three Olympians
MAGIC JOHNSON had better get home quick and say hello to his wife and his baby boy, and start training seriously.
This may not be any emotional cameo appearance for Magic at the 1992 Summer Games.
He may be asked to play major minutes for the United States if Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen and Clyde Drexler suffer from chronic hoop fatigue syndrome.
And why wouldn't they?
No matter what they do today, all three Olympians are going to be back in Oregon in exactly two weeks, playing Cuba, a band of desperados fighting for an Olympic berth and the continuance of three training meals a day outside their impoverished island.


Dr. Harry Eagle Is Dead at 86; Formulated Cell-Growth Medium
Dr.
Harry Eagle, a medical scientist whose many discoveries included a method for growing cells in test tubes that was a breakthrough for biological research, died on Friday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y., where he was admitted three weeks ago.
He was 86 years old and lived in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
He died of cancer, said Arthur Oshins, a spokesman for the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, from which Dr.
Eagle was retired.


Russian Tourism
To the Editor: Celestine Bohlen's article "Russia: Tourism Transformed" (May 17) emphasized the uncertainties and wildly varying costs of travel to the Commonwealth of Independent States but failed to take into account the many sensibly priced tour programs available in the United States market from companies such as ours.
They eliminate uncertainty, provide accommodations at levels from moderate to deluxe and meals at a variety of restaurants outside hotels, sightseeing and airport transfers.


Christine Yep, Charles Chen
Christine Yep, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Yep of Brooklyn, was married yesterday in New York to Charles Chen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fan Li Chen of San Marino, Calif.
The Rev.
Philip Yang, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Silver Palace Restaurant.
Mrs.
Chen, 26 years old, is a marketing coordinator at Teleflora, a flowers-by-wire service in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Tufts University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from New York University.
Her father is a dermatologist in New York and Brooklyn.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review of "Boris Yeltsin: A Political Biography," by Vladimir Solovyov and Elena Klepikova, on May 24 omitted the name of the translator.
He is David Gurevich.


Laura Rodgers, M. J. McCartney
Laura Jeanette Rodgers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Rodgers of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday in New York to Michael John McCartney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. McCartney of Toronto.
Msgr.
George F. Bardes performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church.


Peekskill Shapes an Artists' Community
IT has been nine months since the City Council here cast its lot with Ralph DiBart, the urban planner who proposed making Peekskill an artists' community, and the skeptics are filled with wonderment.
Twenty artists have either moved into downtown studios and rezoned living-and-working lofts or are negotiating leases with landlords eager to have them.
A new artists association has grown from 7 to more than 100, and merchants have turned parts of their shops into art galleries.


Vanbiesbrouck an Unrestricted Free Agent?
The agent for Rangers goalie John Vanbiesbrouck said yesterday that the new collective bargaining agreement between the National Hockey League teams and the Players Association might make Vanbiesbrouck an unrestricted free agent.
If this is true, Vanbiesbrouck can bargain with any team and the Rangers would get no right to match a salary offer and no right to claim players or draft choices as compensation if he changes teams.


A Rare Charmer in Griffin's Clothing
"I'M talking to this guy from Mercedes," my friend said, "and what he says is that one of these days Saab is going to put out a car that looks like something. When that happens, this guy says, the rest of the manufacturers are going to be in real trouble."
My friend was chuckling when he told me, because he worked for Saab, and he knew there was truth to the comment.
A lot of people are pretty sure the Swedish cars are great, but only a certain segment of the population finds the styling sufficiently palatable to go out and buy one.


In Honfleur, the Essence of Normandy
THE good thing about typical Norman towns is that each is different.
True, you'll know you're in Normandy because of damp weather, fresh seafood and an ever-familiar half-timbered architectural look.
And yes, apples are everywhere, usually distilled into cider, pommeau and Calvados.
But beware of suggesting Norman towns are all alike.
The rest of France may be gripped by existentialist worries about its identity in a fast- changing Europe.
But not Normandy.
And certainly not Honfleur.
Sitting at the mouth of the Seine, Honfleur has geography to thank for its character.
Assigned the role of fortress town as far back as the 11th century, it was charged with keeping hostile -- mainly English -- ships from wandering too far up the estuary.
Looking beyond the English Channel, it also saw opportunity.
And, from the 16th century, its mariners were busily exploring Canada, helping to establish the French presence that bequeathed Quebec.
So Honfleur has a history that it need share with no other town.


Carpenter Is A.H.L.'s Top Coach
DOUG CARPENTER a former coach of the Toronto Maple Leafs, has been named the American Hockey League's coach of the year after taking the New Haven Nighthawks to a third-place finish in the league's Northern Division.
The Nighthawks, now known as the Senators, compiled a 39-37-4 record. (AP)


Talking: The Elderly; New Ways And Places To Live
IT is no secret that Americans are living about 30 years longer than they did at the turn of the century.
Nor that there is a prolonged "twilight" period in the lives of many old people when they need help with everyday living.
But that's not all.
"To live in your own home when you get older gets lonesome," said Margaretta Stanton, a 77-year-old retired social worker who used to own a house in Maryland and now lives in a Connecticut community.
"It's difficult if you need repairs."


Ms. Troutman, Paul C. Curnin
Rebecca Louise Troutman, the daughter of Charles R. Troutman of Bethesda, Md., and Joan Goodkind of New Marlboro, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Charles Curnin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Curnin of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Daniel E. Johnson, the bridegroom's uncle, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Lady of the Valley in Sheffield, Mass.
Mrs.
Curnin, 27 years old, graduated from Harvard University and will begin her second year at the Columbia University School of Law in the fall.
Her father is a computer scientist at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in Washington.


A Big Bet for the Godfather of Rap
THE most-watched television show at midnight on Fridays?
In homes with pay-cable stations, it's not the "Tonight" show, "Arsenio Hall" or "Dennis Miller." It's the raucous "Russell Simmons Def Comedy Jam," a Home Box Office showcase for black comedians.
In the half-hour program, mostly young comedians joke about everything from sports to sex and marriage to rap artists, Rodney King and Mike Tyson.
Virtually every joke is unprintable.
The routines are accompanied by a disk jockey scratching rap music in the background and cheered by a youthful studio audience sporting colorful biking pants, Malcolm X baseball caps and mosaic haircuts.


Bush Leaves Rio With Shots At Foreign and U.S. Critics
President Bush left the Earth Summit today firing parting shots at his many critics, saying Americans are "the leaders, not the followers," on environmental issues and will be "pre-eminent" in carrying out accords signed here.
Speaking at a news conference at his seafront hotel, Mr.
Bush dismissed suggestions that his appearance here had not gone well and reserved some of his criticism for domestic rather than global issues.


Showing More Paint Than Patchwork
IN a group of quilts and fabric collages at the Westchester Gallery here, Ann Trusty has combined the fluid colors of a painter with the fabric artist's use of applique and stitching.
The distinctive character of Ms.
Trusty's work lies in her fresh, energetic compositions and apparent freedom in a textile genre not ordinarily conducive to spontaneity.


Eleanor Roosevelt's Private Life
To the Editor:
I would like to express my intense dismay about any attention given to Blanche Wiesen Cook's unsubstantiated theory in her biography that Eleanor Roosevelt may have had bisexual and extramarital affairs (review, April 19).
There is absolutely
no
conclusive evidence to support these charges, and I find them irresponsible.


An Overlooked Audience
To the Editor:
Most owners of motion-picture theaters in the country are overlooking a huge, untapped market: the millions of people who, because of impaired hearing, cannot and do not attend movie houses.


Technology; Helping Polluters Clean Up Their Act
There are thousands of processes and devices that claim to clean up contaminated property, improve air quality or reduce the pollution in lakes, streams and groundwater, with more being invented daily.
Which ones work?
Who guides inventors to the market?
Who helps venture capitalists figure out which to back?
Who helps polluters sort through cleanup options?
Who knows the way through the thicket of regulations, lawsuits and inertia preventing progress?
No one does it all.
What this country needs is Super Technologist, who, alas, is nowhere to be found.
There is, however, the National Environmental Technology Applications Corporation, a four-year-old consulting company housed at the University of Pittsburgh's Applied Research Center here.
Netac, as the nonprofit concern is known, is a stepchild of the Environmental Protection Agency set up to face these challenges.
Its limited progress underscores how daunting they are.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Early June auto sales, millions
6.5
6.25
Tuesday
Housing starts, millions
1.12
1.2
Industrial production, percent
0.5
0.3
Capacity utilization, percent
78.7
78.8
Thursday
Merchandise trade, billions
-$5.8
-$5.0
Friday
Federal Budget, billions
$14.6
-$50
Monday: European Community ministers discuss 1993-1997 budget proposals *
Annual Bank for International Settlements meeting Tuesday: President Bush meets with Russian President Yeltsin Wednesday: Federal Reserve's beige book is released Thursday: Bundesbank council meeting *
Irish referendum on Maastrict Treaty on European unity
(Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


JUNE 7-13: A 212-Page Warning; Japan Gets Tougher In the Trade War
Japan has long been a deft counterpuncher when it comes to trade disputes, using a spirited defense to wear down American negotiators battling its big trade surpluses.
But last week the Ministry of International Trade and Industry served notice that Japan is taking the offensive.
A ministry advisory council issued a blistering attack against American trade practices in a 212-page report that labeled the United States one of the world's most unfair traders.
Many in Washington seemed more stunned than angry that a nation they had grown used to criticizing for its pinched import policies, and which enjoys by far the world's largest trade surplus, would suddenly hurl such accusations.


Bedfellows With Spain, Lisbon Won't Cuddle
Portugal was ostracized by Europe until a bloodless revolution in 1974 brought an end to decades of rightist dictatorship and several African colonial wars.
Since the nation joined the European Community in 1986, it has enjoyed new prosperity and respectability.
Yet among the many changes spawned here by integration with Europe, one has brought more discomfort than pleasure: for the first time in centuries, Portugal has had to come to terms with the fact that Spain is its neighbor.
And it is not entirely happy with the rediscovery.


Devon T. Porter, David Fleming 2d
Devon Townsend Porter and David Wilson Fleming 2d were married in Greenville, Del., yesterday.
The Rev.
William Lane performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Fleming, 29 years old, is a vice president of institutional sales in New York for Capital Management Sciences Inc., a bond portfolio research group in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
The bride is the daughter of Barbara M. Porter and William H. Porter, both of Wilmington, Del.
Her father is an independent real-estate investor in Wilmington.
Her stepmother is Lori L. Porter of Wilmington.


Epson Tournament May Set a Record
BRIDGE has a good claim to two world records in the general area of sports and recreations.
One is for the oldest winner, claimed for Julia Chadwick of England, who won two minor games when she was 98 years old.
The other, more debatable, is for the event with most official participants.
The 1991 Epson World Simultaneous Pairs attracted almost 90,000 players in about 80 countries, playing identical deals with an identical scoring format.
Counting them will be a headache this year, however, since the French organizers have determined on an amoeba-like split.
Instead of one session of play there will be two, next Friday evening and Saturday afternoon, with two distinct sets of prepared deals.
Players may play in either session or both, so it will not be easy to decide how many individuals took part.


Deeper, Deeper Into the Quicksand
For a few moments last night, the noise at Shea Stadium was exactly what Mets management paid to produce and Mets fans were paying to hear.
But those moments are passing quickly in what has already become a frustrating season, as the Pittsburgh Pirates came from behind to beat the Mets, 3-2, on an eighth-inning double by pinch-hitter Orlando Merced.


A Temptation to Resist on Disability Insurance . . . And Skepticism on Low-Load Coverage
To the Editor:
The article on disability insurance points to how consumers may save premium dollars by buying low-load disability income coverage; however, it fails to equate those premium savings to a better value for the buyer.


Athletes Are Dominant In Black Enrollment
It should come as little surprise to anyone who has ever watched a college football or basketball game, but according to a survey by The Chronicle of Higher Education, black students are disproportionately represented among the scholarship athletes at the nation's athletic powerhouses.
According to an article written by Douglas Lederman for The Chronicle's June 17 issue, blacks, who make up only about 12 percent of the nation's population and 6 percent of the college student bodies, account for more than one-fifth of all college athletes, more than two-fifths of the football players and about three-fifths of the men's basketball players at colleges covered by the survey.


Helping Children Become Shutterbugs
JILL KREMENTZ is the Mister Rogers of photography.
She has written and taken pictures for more than two dozen children's books, including "How It Feels to Live With a Physical Disability" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1992) and "Taryn Goes to the Dentist" (Crown, 1986).
And she lectures at elementary schools an average of once a week.
A gifted teacher, she explains to her audiences how she makes her books, and encourages the children (mostly fourth, fifth and sixth graders) to use her simple methods of photography, note-taking, writing, layout and design.
A few weeks after she has appeared at a school, her mailbox is usually filled with small handmade books, results of her inspirational coaching.


Nancy Stratford, John Harlow 2d
Nancy Anne Stratford, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Stratford of Richmond, was married in New York last evening to John Bradford Harlow 2d, the son of J. Bradford Harlow Jr. of Enfield, N.H., and Janet O. Callowhill of Sanford, N.C.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Harlow is a first vice president and an institutional stockbroker at Paine Webber in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received her M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a vitreoretinal surgeon in private practice in Richmond and is an associate clinical professor of ophthalmology there at the Medical College of Virginia.


U.S. Quietly at Work to Oust New Yugoslavia From the U.N.
Here and in capitals around the world, the United States is working quietly to oust the truncated nation that calls itself Yugoslavia from the United Nations.
In April, the federation formed by Serbia and Montenegro, called the Federated Republic of Yugoslavia, declared itself the successor to the Yugoslavia that began to disintegrate last year, and took that country's seat in the General Assembly.


In Their Natural Habitats
Arnold Newman has been practicing the art and business of portrait photography for more than 50 years.
Ambitious and innovative, he set his course in the early 1940's when he created "environmental" portraits, in which he situates his subjects in carefully ordered spaces where each element -- hat, easel or profile -- becomes crucial to the design and meaning of the whole.
ARNOLD NEWMAN'S AMERICANS (National Portrait Gallery/Bulfinch/Little, Brown, cloth, $60; paper, $35) includes duotones of the 100 photographs recently acquired by the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, as well as essays by Mr.
Newman and Alan Fern, the gallery's director.
In his shots of some of this country's leading figures, Mr.
Newman has avoided the studio and photographed his subjects in their own territory, allowing him to convey his sense of the person through his or her environment.
He gives equal weight to the glass chandeliers, heavy desks, marble and other trappings of office; young John F. Kennedy looks vulnerable, framed by the weighty architecture of the Senate Office Building, while Richard M. Nixon and Lyndon B. Johnson seem more aggressively in command.
Scientists, composers and artists are portrayed more sympathetically, often in images echoing their work: the painter Horace Pippin, for example, is shown at the left of a West Chester, Pa., landscape in a photograph that evokes his naive style.
There are only a few women in this pantheon, among them a kindly Eleanor Roosevelt, a voluptuous Marlene Dietrich and a dramatic Martha Graham -- each framed by the kinds of signifying objects that should delight social historians and semioticians.


Yankees Wake Up Late and Enjoy It
Dave Otto retired 12 straight batters, held the Yankees to one run through five innings and made them look anemic.
This was a pitcher who woke up today with a 6.06 earned run average and was making the Yankees look as if they were still snoozing.
Their nightmarish play was on full display at Cleveland Stadium.
But just when their continuing struggles seemed to reach an apex, the daring running of Roberto Kelly and the surprising power of Jim Leyritz thrust the Yankees to three quick runs in the sixth and helped them defeat the Indians, 4-1, today for New York's second victory in 10 games.


Crucial Vote for Israelis, but Few Seem Interested
Through the last 36 years of living and breathing elections since he emigrated to Israel from Spain, Yosef Mosianu never saw a campaign quite as dull as this one.
This has always been a country obsessed with politics, a roiling, fractious place where you could put two people in a room and somehow wind up with three political parties.
To most Israelis, a dull election is an oxymoron.


Wilson Phillips's Plaintive Confessions
If there's anyone who still doesn't know that the age of fun, fun, fun has given way to an era of self-protective caution, Wilson Phillips is here to remind us.
That is the message conveyed by the lyrics and the crisp, childlike harmonies on "Shadows and Light" (SBK 98924; CD and cassette), the second album by the Los Angeles pop trio.
The group's 1990 debut album, which sold five million copies, suggested a friendly alliance between two West Coast pop dynasties. (Chynna Phillips is the daughter of Papa John and Michelle Phillips of the Mamas and the Papas; Carnie and Wendy Wilson are daughters of the Beach Boys' creative mainspring, Brian Wilson.) But "Shadows and Light" exudes the grandiose formality of a corporate merger.


Exploring Kauai's North Shore
Because of a production error, the following information was omitted from an article on Kauai by Leslie Allen in last Sunday's Travel section.
Getting Around
The Kuhio Highway connects North Shore towns with each other and with Kauai's principal airport at Lihue.
A car is essential.


Hertz Raises Rates, Citing Cost of Cars
The Hertz Corporation has raised its daily, weekly and weekend rates by $4 to $5 a day at 17 locations, including New York, Los Angeles Airport, Atlanta, Orlando, Fort Lauderdale and Hawaii.
The action was taken, Hertz said, after the Ford Motor Company announced it would no longer give Hertz or other rental companies cash rebates on the purchase of new cars.
No other major car rental company has announced a rate increase.
A spokesman at Budget Rent A Car Corporation, which also buys from Ford, said it would "remain competitively priced within the rental industry."


The View From: Rye Brook; A 10th Birthday Party for a Vigorous Municipality
NEXT week the village of Rye Brook, Westchester's youngest municipality, is throwing itself a 10th birthday party that any youngster would envy.
There will be rides and games, and, of course, a huge birthday cake.
And this year a special guest will be attending: Rachel Fehr, the first baby born in Rye Brook.
Now also 10 years old, Rachel is the personification of this youthful village, just past its early-childhood years and poised on the threshold of adolescence.


Satellite View; Forest Damage, North and South
FOR years, environmental groups have been trying to get politicians up in the air to take a look at logging in national forests in the Pacific Northwest.
The view from an airplane, they argue, gives a true sense of how much of the publicly owned forests have been cut.
Last week, scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., went them one better.
They released photos of the forests from space.
These pictures, taken from 700 miles above the Earth, show a pattern of clearcutting throughout the entire rain forest of the Northwest that is so extensive that the land looks perforated by a giant blast of buckshot.


Esasky Nears Return to Majors
Two years after a severe case of vertigo drove him out of baseball, NICK ESASKY seems to be back in contention for a major league comeback.
If there is any vestige of the inner-ear ailment that gives victims the sense that they are in motion when they are not, it has not been apparent in Richmond, where Esasky has been making a rehabilitation run with the Braves' Class AAA farm club.


Heavenly Harmonies That Span the Centuries
The Music for which the Hilliard Ensemble of England is best known is limpid and exact: celestial harmonies floating in an acoustical space unencumbered by anything but echo.
The unaccompanied madrigals and motets of the Middle Ages, Renaissance and early Baroque suggest, to modern ears at least, a world of innocence and heavenly purity, far from today's noisy bustle.
And yet all has not been quite so harmonious in the ensemble's own recent history.
Starting from its founding in 1974 as a five-man ensemble, it underwent the gradual personnel shifts common to any successful group.
But in January 1991 Paul Hillier, its longtime leader, formally resigned, having been on leave since the previous autumn.
He is now a professor at the University of California at Davis, where he leads the Theater of Voices -- more a conception of a chorus than a chorus proper, it would seem, since Mr.
Hillier applies the title to different groups of singers in different locations.


Rachel Rawson, Charles Cowap 5th
Rachel Lucile Rawson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ian G. Rawson of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Charles Richardson Cowap 5th, a son of Mildred-Jeanne Stulberg of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and the late Mr.
Cowap 4th.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gail B. King, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ecumenical ceremony at the Heinz Memorial Chapel in Pittsburgh.
Ms.
Rawson, 26 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She graduated magna cum laude from Kenyon College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Columbia University.


French Dispute Ended, Canada Goes Fishing
A quarter-century boundary dispute with France has ended with Canada's winning most of the fishing waters it has claimed off southern Newfoundland.
The decision was welcomed as the first good news in months for the economically battered Atlantic province.
Officials in Ottawa and St.
Johns said that all key areas for cod and other fish, which are critical to the livelihood of the south coast's 80,000 people, are now within the Canadian zone.


Ecology, the Economy and Bush
THE awkward interplay between election-year maneuvering and environmental concerns received plenty of attention last week as President Bush took a hang-tough, us-against-the-world approach toward the Earth Summit.
At the same time, a factor that played a huge role behind the scenes was largely ignored.
That factor was economics.
The Administration demanded and won a weakened version of a treaty on climate change on the grounds that accepting tough new rules to limit carbon dioxide emissions would hurt economic growth.
Similarly, Mr.
Bush said he would not sign the biological diversity treaty, which aims to conserve millions of plant and animal species, because the Administration feared it would damage one of the economy's fastest growing sectors: the biotechnology industry.


Effects of War Come Home to Belgrade
With United Nations sanctions entering their third week today, rising unemployment, soaring inflation and key shortages were bringing the effects of war home to a capital that has long stayed remote from the fighting.
Political activity is mounting steadily with newspapers, even those previously tame toward the Government, publishing articles on calls for the resignation of Slobodan Milosevic, who as President of Serbia has been the prime defender of Serbian interests in all parts of what had been Yugoslavia.


As Times Grow Harder, Cubans Are Grumbling More Freely
For decades, most of this city's residents were extremely wary of contacts with outsiders.
Their anxious glances and the bland sameness of so many of their conversations reflected concern over what might be reported to whom.
But with the bottom falling out of the Cuban economy, discussions with foreigners here have recently become raw, blunt and often plaintive.
Many Cubans are no longer timid in expressing their views, or reaching outside the Communist system's faltering safety net to satisfy their growing needs.


McEnroe Loses In Translation
To the Sports Editor:
What has happened to the John McEnroe we all came to love to hate over the years?
His once vibrant personality and outrageous outbursts during tennis matches made him a force to be reckoned with.
But as a commentator at the French Open this year, McEnroe's monotonous ramblings and boring commentary made one feel as if McEnroe would rather be somewhere else.
And as a longtime fan of tennis, I wished he had been.
BARBARA BLEIWEIS Forest Hills, Queens


Nancy Weinstock, Michael Yecies
Nancy Jane Weinstock, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bennett Weinstock of Philadelphia, was married in New York last evening to Michael Scott Yecies, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerold J. Yecies of Stockton, Calif.
Rabbi David H. Wice officiated at the ceremony at the Pierre.


Making a Difference; A Busy Agenda Gets Busier
One of the duties of a company leader is to get involved outside the company.
John L. Clendenin, chairman and chief executive of the BellSouth Corporation, clearly is dutiful.
He is the national president of the Boy Scouts of America.
He is a trustee of the Conference Board, a business research group.
And he sits on the boards of the Coca-Cola Company and the New York Stock Exchange, among others.
Now, Mr.
Clendenin, as busy as he is, has taken on still one more outside post: chairman of the Committee for Economic Development, a prestigious New York-based business group that looks at economic problems, recommends solutions and tries to get some action.


Ms. Kanter, Mr. Warkow
Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Kanter of Melrose Park, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Kanter, to Adam Warkow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Warkow of Baldwin, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kanter, 30 years old, is an associate marketing manager at Pfizer Inc. in New York.
Mr.
Warkow, 33, is a vice president of Citicorp in Weehawken, N.J.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y. 456,000
29 Hickory Pass  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, dining room, family room, 3-level deck, hot tub, 2.5 acres; taxes $6,862.
Bronxville, N.Y. 659,000
16 Essex Place  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 64-year-old English manor house; sunken living room, library, 3 fireplaces, pantry, 2 patios; taxes $8,847.
Mount Vernon, N.Y. 312,500
30 Rockridge Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 63-year-old English brick; fireplace, den, eat-in kitchen, playroom; taxes $4,734.
Chester, Conn. 210,000
65 Goose Hill Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 110-year-old Victorian farmhouse; pantry, back stairs, 2 barns, 10 acres; taxes $3,003.
Deep River, Conn. 132,000
261 Warsaw Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 8-year-old Cape Cod; w/b stove, private hilltop setting, 1.2 acres; taxes $1,698.
Killingworth, Conn. 218,000
59 Bargate Trail  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, whirlpool tub, 2.1 acres; taxes $4,516.
OTHER AREAS Carle Place, L.I. 217,500
18 Garson Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40- year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Glen Head, L.I. 313,750
76 Viola Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25- year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,100.
South River, N.J. 164,000
20 High Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old ranch; pool, 2-car garage, 2 kitchens; taxes $4,096.


Still Reeling From Gulf War, Jordanians Harden Attitudes
Fifteen months after the end of the Persian Gulf war, attitudes here in the Arab country considered crucial to a Middle East peace settlement are hardening against Israel, the West and moderate Arab nations.
The process is being quickened by Jordan's continuing sympathy for Iraq in the face of international criticism during and after the gulf war; a severe economic crisis stemming largely from the war for which most Jordanians blame fellow Arabs and the West, and Jordan's disputes with Arab nations in the gulf.


Q and A
A City Property-Tax Bill Question: I am very confused about the city's tax assessment policy.
I live in a 25-year-old unrenovated studio apartment with no dishwasher and all of the original fixtures.
I purchased the apartment as part of a condominium conversion plan five years ago and since then have seen ever-increasing city tax bills to the point where I now pay $2,500.
The tax on my one room is higher than on many more valuable homes.
For example, I recently read about a five-bedroom, single-family home in Forest Hills that sold for $500,000.
Its annual tax bill was $2,822.
A condominium apartment, which sold for $150,000, had a tax bill of $1,200 a year.
Can this be correct? . . .
Doris Brown, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
The city's current tax laws result in wide variations in the tax bills of residences of the same value.
Part of the inequity is due to the tax structuring system.


Ms. Armstrong, Craig Kennelly
Catherine Ann Armstrong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter W. Armstrong of Siler City, N.C., was married yesterday in Garden City, L.I., to Craig William Kennelly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Kennelly of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Delaney officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Kennelly, 31 years old, is a vice president of institutional equity sales for Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Company, a New York securities brokerage.
She graduated from Washington University.
Her father, who is retired, was a managing director of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Joan W. Armstrong, also retired, was the sales manager for All American Metal Corporation, a fabricator of partitions in Freeport, L.I.


JUNE 7-13: Intriguing Theories; A Murder in Paris Thins P.L.O. Leadership
The murder of a top security official of the Palestine Liberation Organization in Paris last week further emphasized the void that surrounds the P.L.O. chief, Yasir Arafat.
The P.L.O. says Atef Bseiso was assassinated by the Israeli intelligence service, Mossad; the French police suspect the Palestinian Abu Nidal terrorist group, which murdered Mr.
Bseiso's former boss, Salah Kalef, in January 1991.
A few years earlier, in 1988, Khalil Al Wazir, the number two leader in the P.L.O., was killed by Israeli commandos in Tunis.
Neither Mr.
Wazir nor Mr.
Kalef was replaced.


World Markets; The Latin American Rebound
From riches to rags and back to riches.
That is the uneven road followed by many banks in their lending to Latin American countries.
In the heady days of the 1970's, when banks were flush with deposits from oil-producing countries, lending to Latin America was good business, producing handsome fees and interest payments.
By 1982, when Mexico defaulted on its loans, the business had soured and large banks around the world took big losses.
But in the past few years the pendulum has swung again, as many Latin American economies have strengthened and their stock markets have soared.


Harris Tweed
To the Editor: I read with great interest your article "The Island Home of Harris Tweed" (Jan. 26), particularly having been to the island the past three years with David Dean of Classique Coach Tours, who sometimes uses older buses that accommodate to the narrower island roads.
Each time we paid a visit to Marion Campbell to see a demonstration of weaving on the old style loom.
The island and its people are very special.


Suzette Blum, John Devine
Mr. and Mrs.
John R. H. Blum of Lakeville, Conn., have announced the engagement of Mr.
Blum's daughter Suzette Florence Blum to John Duddy Devine, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Bernard M. Devine of Falmouth, Me.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Blum, 24 years old, is a watercolorist in Lakeville.
She is the daughter also of the late Susanne D. Blum.
She and her fiance graduated from Bowdoin College, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.
Her father, a lawyer, is the Connecticut Commissioner of Agriculture.
He and the bride's stepmother, Jeanne C. Blum, raise cattle in Lakeville.


There's No Substitute for Peas Right Out of the Pod
FRESH peas are one of the delights of early summer.
But like a number of culinary treats, enjoying them requires some work.
They are labor-intensive: they must be shelled.
Some markets sell them already shelled, a convenience to be sure, but at the cost of some flavor.
The peas will be infinitely sweeter if they are purchased in the pod and shelled just before cooking.
There are recipes that suggest frozen peas as a substitute for fresh peas.
Although they may have a similar taste, the texture of fresh peas, cooked until tender, is usually more agreeable and not as mushy as the frozen variety.
As long as fresh peas are available, they will be superior.


Brooklyn Youth Celebrating Graduation Is Shot
An honor student celebrating his upcoming high school graduation was critically wounded yesterday when he was caught in the crossfire of a gun battle near a Brooklyn nightclub, the police said.
The student, 18-year-old Dominique Sylvester of 147 East 87th Street in Canarsie, was shot once in the head when at least three groups of people began firing at one another outside the Rendez Vous club in Flatbush, the police said.


Bulls Just Waiting For the Mopup Duty
With both history and a determined Michael Jordan on their side, the Chicago Bulls returned home today on the brink of winning a second consecutive National Basketball Association championship.
History is on Chicago's side because a 119-106 victory over the Portland Trail Blazers on Friday night gave the Bulls a 3-games-to-2 lead in the four-of-seven final series.
No team has won the title by winning the last two games on the road.
And with Game 6 scheduled for Sunday night in Chicago (Channel 4, 7 P.M.), the Bulls hoped that Game 7, scheduled for Wednesday night in Chicago, would not be necessary.


Debuts and Innovations as Caramoor Opens Summer Festival
CARAMOOR, the leading summer festival in the county, begins its 31-concert season in Katonah on Saturday.
The nine-week schedule will include such innovations as an all-jazz weekend as well as the Caramoor debuts of the conductor Roberto Abbado, the guitarist Eliot Fisk, the soprano Faith Esham, the pianist Peter Basquin, the pop singer Maureen McGovern and the American Brass Quintet.


Buying Tools a Challenging Task
ACQUIRING a useful assortment of tools can be a challenge for first-time homeowners having no experience in home repair.
Overall, the best advice is not to buy any tools until one has a specific need for them.
A flexible steel tape measure, the kind that retracts into a plastic or metal case about four inches square, is certainly among the most important tools.
And if one obeys the carpenter's golden rule for avoiding mistakes -- that is, measure twice and cut once -- it follows that one will use a tape measure twice as often as virtually any other tool.
A 12- or 16-foot tape is the most practical.
Regardless of length, it should be at least three-quarters of inch wide so that it can be extended several feet without bending.
To get a bonus, choose a tape measure with carpentry information, like nail, screw and lumber sizes, printed on the back.


A Star Search in Which All Can Shine
HANSEL AND GRETEL nibbled the witch's gingerbread house, then fell over, drugged.
"Little do they know that I mixed marijuana with my Betty Crocker gingerbread mix," cackled the witch.
The scene was part of a dress rehearsal for "Hansel and Gretel With a Twist" at Old Lyme Middle School, and it drew chuckles from the parents, students and teachers who watched.
Also a hit was another play in rehearsal by students from John Winthrop Junior High School in Deep River, "The Pot Piper." In that, members of the Dirty Rats gang were lured to the F.B.I.
Rehabilitation Center (whose initials they thought represented the Fun Babes Inc. Recreational Cruise).


When Consistency Has Little Meaning
YOUNG up and coming players cannot be counted on to be consistent.
That's not important for them; what counts is the maximum they achieve, not their lows.
They'll straighten those out later.
Ilya Gurevich, a 20-year-old former world junior champion and recipient of a $32,000 1992 Samford Chess Fellowship, scored a grandmaster norm in the Chicago International two months ago and fell to an 11th-place finish in the Saint Martin Open in the French West Indies last month.


Susan Lehman, Trent Carmichael
Mr. and Mrs.
Orin Lehman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Reynolds Lehman to Trent Andrew Carmichael, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Trent L. Carmichael of Palo Alto, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Lehman, 27 years old, is a project manager for Community Housing Developers, a nonprofit real-estate developer in San Jose, Calif.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in public policy from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father is the commissioner of the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.
She also is the daughter of the late Jane Bagley Lehman.
Her stepmother, Wendy Vanderbilt Lehman, is an artist in New York.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Striker Replacement : Vote to cut off a filibuster against a bill that would prohibit employers from permanently replacing striking workers.
Failed, with 55 in favor and 41 opposed (60 votes were needed), June 1.
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
House
1.
Balanced Budget by Statute: Vote on a Democratic leadership plan to deal with the budget issue with an ordinary statute that would require the President to propose balanced budgets and direct Congress to propose budget resolutions that were balanced.
Rejected 220 to 199, June 9.
2.
Jobless Benefits: Vote on passage of a bill that would make sweeping changes in the unemployment insurance system to grant automatically renewable benefits to the long-term jobless.
Approved 261 to 150, June 9.
3.
Balanced Budget/Line Item Veto: Vote on an alternative balanced budget proposal that would limit Federal expenditures to 19 percent of the gross national product and give the President line-item veto power.
Rejected 258 to 178, June 11.
4.
Balanced Budget/Limits on Taxation: Vote on an alternative balanced budget proposal that would add a requirement of a three-fifths vote to raise taxes.
Rejected 227 to 200, June 11.
5.
Balanced Budget/Social Security: Vote on a substitute balanced budget proposal that would have permanently exempted Social Security taxes and payments from the budget, so there would be no opportunity to cut benefits to reduce taxes.
Rejected 327 to 103, June 11.
6.
Balanced Budget Amendment: Vote on passage of a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget.
Failed, with 280 in favor and 153 opposed (9 votes short of the two-thirds required), June 11.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y 10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y 12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y 13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y 14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
2. Downey (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
5. McGrath (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N 10. Schumer (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N 11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 14. Molinari (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y 15. Green (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N 16. Rangel (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N 17. Weiss (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N 18. Serrano (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N 19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N 20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 21. Fish (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y 22. Gilman (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N 23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
Y
N 24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y 25. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
Y 26. Martin (R) . . .
N
A
Y
Y
N
Y 27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y 28. McHugh (D) . . .
N
Y
N
N
N
N 29. Horton (R) . . .
N
N
N
N
N
Y 30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y 32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
N
N
N 34. Houghton (R) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Public &amp; Private; Digging a Divide
One of the dangers of being an opinion columnist is the temptation to preach to the converted.
The end result of that, as readers know well, is a bifurcated audience, often bored.
There are the people who already agree with you, who lean back at the breakfast table and think, "Ah, yes." And there are the ones who don't, who put the paper down and say, disgusted, "What a moron."
This does not enlarge human understanding.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ALL OUR FAULT By Daniel Mornin. Hutchinson/Trafalgar Square, $22.95.


Columbia's Chief Looks to the Future
Michael I. Sovern, the president of Columbia University, announced this month that he would resign, effective next June, to spend more time with his wife, Joan, who is fighting cancer.
Mr.
Sovern's announcement followed a year of turmoil at Columbia in which some faculty members loudly and actively questioned his ability to deal with the university's financial problems and to provide meaningful leadership.
Mr.
Sovern met Friday with Mervyn Rothstein of The New York Times to reflect on his 12 years as Columbia's president and to discuss the university's future.
Following are excerpts of that conversation.


New &amp; Noteworthy
HITLER'S JUSTICE: The Courts of the Third Reich, by Ingo Muller.
Translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider. (Harvard University, $14.95.) The author, a former law professor in Germany, describes how the country's judges sent innocent citizens to death during the Nazi period, then absolved themselves of wrongdoing.
Last year our reviewer, V. R. Berghahn, observed that "Mr. Muller effectively destroys one pious myth to be found in postwar legal literature -- that judges never wavered from the positivistic tradition of German law."
BET THEY'LL MISS US WHEN WE'RE GONE, by Marianne Wiggins. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Ms.
Wiggins, an American author living in London, has set these 13 stories in places throughout Europe and the United States.
Three are autobiographical, including one that relates the author's experiences when she went into hiding with her then husband, Salman Rushdie.
Told in different voices, the stories make up a "brilliantly executed collection," George Garrett said here last year.
"All are, one way or another, about memory, its persistence and failure." Also reissued are Ms.
Wiggins's earlier novels SEPARATE CHECKS (Perennial Library, $7.95) and JOHN DOLLAR (Perennial Library, $10).
In the latter, a group of shipwrecked schoolgirls live out their own version of "Lord of the Flies." In 1989 our reviewer, Michael Gorra, called the book "one of the most disturbing new novels I've read in years," praising "the pitiless and brilliant prose."


Walter Wells Sr., 64, Insurance Executive
Walter Thomas Wells Sr., who was a leading executive in the marine insurance industry, died on Friday at his home in Moraga, Calif.
He was 64 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Making Sure a Woman's Place Is in the House
To the Editor:
To have representative numbers of women and minorities in positions of leadership and power in this country, we will need far more than the five new women in the Senate and 20 in the House of Representatives you project in "Steady Local Gains by Women Fuel More Runs for High Office" (The Week in Review, May 24).
Even doubling the number of women in Congress would leave that body nearly 90 percent male.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
"Until you remove all the combat restrictions on women, you're going to continue to have this problem. If the institution says you're not good enough to fight or doesn't want you to, it's natural for people to think you're inferior." -- COMDR.
ROSEMARY MARINER, Navy pilot, on sexual abuse by male aviators.  [ 34:2 ]


Jennifer O'Brien, Myron Brilliant
Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Stephen O'Brien of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Anne O'Brien to Myron Adam Brilliant, a son of Drs.
Richard and Eleanor Brilliant of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
O'Brien is a graphic designer at Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, a public relations concern in Washington.
She graduated from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father, an economist, is the resident representative of the World Bank in Nairobi, Kenya.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the soprano Eileen Farrell misidentified the university where she taught voice in the mid-1970's.
It was Indiana, not Indiana State.


Star Wars in the Twilight Zone
When the cold war ended, so did the rationale for the bizarre, costly concoction called Star Wars.
But despite the rapidly deflating Soviet threat and despite pressure to save every possible billion, the Strategic Defense Initiative lives on.
When will Congress come to its senses?
For nine years now, ever since Edward Teller wowed Ronald Reagan with fantastic claims for X-ray lasers and other exotic technologies that could vaporize incoming Soviet missiles, America has been transfixed by Star Wars.


The News at Six: TV's Grim Vision
Every day from 4 P.M. to midnight, New York's worst nightmares are beamed to millions of viewers.
From a teen-ager charged with trying to murder the wife of her lover to subway slashers to youths shot while using a squirt gun, television news is often sustained by a daily menu of crime and grief.


Jennifer Zacharia and Andrew McMurray
Jennifer Lynn Zacharia, a daughter of Don Zacharia of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Judy Zacharia, was married last evening to Andrew Russell McMurray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert McMurray of Longmeadow, Mass.
Rabbi Stephen A. Klein officiated at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Christina Zacharia.


ALONG CAME BILL
Norman J. Ornstein's article "Along Came Bill" (May 24) set forth some of the astonishing scenarios that could result from the presence of a strong, third-party candidate in the coming Presidential election.


Cab Calloway: The Loner and the Showman
MOST mornings, he sits in his garden hunched over his version of the morning news, The Daily Racing Form.
The sun glints on the ever-present gold medallion hanging from his neck, inscribed with lines from the song "St. James Infirmary": "Put a $20 gold piece on my watch chain, so the boys'll know that I died standing pat."
As he approaches his 85th birthday, Cab Calloway wears the medallion close to his heart, but like most personal matters in the intensely private life of this renowned jazz musician, the medallion is not open to discussion.
The bandleader offers a quizzical glance to a question about it but says nothing, turning back to study his horses.


Forest Fire Sweeps Through New Jersey Pinelands
A forest fire swept across thousands of acres of dry scrub oak and pine woods in southeastern New Jersey yesterday, forcing the evacuation of a dozen homes in Ocean County.
It was the second major blaze to hit the New Jersey Pinelands this spring.
The fire, which continued to burn out of control late last night, began about noon southwest of exit 74 on the Garden State Parkway and quickly spread north, said Raymond Holmes, a fire warden with the State Forest Fire Service.


Elizabeth Kania P. A. Georgescu
Elizabeth Anne Kania, the daughter of Paul Kania of Roswell, Ga., and Marian Kunetka of Fayetteville, Ark., was married yesterday to P. Andrew Georgescu Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Georgescu of New York.
The Rev.
Katherine W. Warner officiated at the Episcopal ceremony at Enchantment Resort in Sedona, Ariz.
Mrs.
Georgescu, 24 years old, graduated from Cornell College in Mount Vernon, Iowa, as did her husband, who graduated summa cum laude.
Her father is a private contractor in Roswell.
Her mother is a research assistant in the department of anthropology at the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Carlene Kania of Roswell.


Japan Unfolds Through Many Images
Early in "Rising Sun," Michael Crichton's bestselling suspense novel, a Los Angeles police detective is dumbfounded to learn that the Japanese doorman who stands in front of an otherwise ordinary middle-income apartment building is a member of the yakuza, the Japanese mafia.
"You must understand," says the detective's older, more worldly partner, a font of wisdom about all things Japanese.
"There is a shadow world here -- in Los Angeles, in Honolulu, in New York. Most of the time you're never aware of it. We live in our regular American world, walking our American streets, and we never notice that right alongside our world is a second world . . . a shadow world, available only to the Japanese."


Women Bearing Firearms Increasing
JOANNE EISEN of Old Bethpage owns a firearm.
Seven years ago, she was held up in the neighborhood in Brooklyn where she had her office.
Now she carries a gun for security.
"I've been a victim long enough," she said.


Artistic Visions Make a Case For a Troubled Environment
WESTCHESTER artists are again coming to the aid of the environment.
This time, there are 11 of them, mustered by Candace Taubner and Agnes Carbrey at the Art Center here, under the title "Against the Tide: Artists and the Water Cycle."
Christy Rupp leads the way as the best-known of the group by opening the show with works she has displayed elsewhere.


Croquet Is Finding A Place in the Sun At Clubs and Homes
MOVE over polo. Croquet is making a comeback on Long Island.
Croquet courts are sprouting not only at private clubs, but also at elegant East End homes.


Penny Dow, W. M. Armstrong
Penelope Jane Dow and William Mark Armstrong were married yesterday in Siasconset, Mass., on Nantucket Island.
The Rev.
Murray Kenney performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Siasconset Union Chapel.
Ms.
Dow, known as Penny, is an actress and is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Miriam C. and Peter B. Dow of Buffalo.
Her mother teaches English in Nichols School, a private high school in Buffalo.
Her father is a director of teacher training and curriculum development at the Buffalo Museum of Science.


Mindy Averbuch and Ronn Davids
Mindy Beth Averbuch, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Aaron Averbuch of Champaign, Ill., was married yesterday in Ocho Rios, Jamaica, to Ronn Steven Davids, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Stanley Davids of New York.
The bridegroom's father performed the ceremony at the Ciboney Resort Hotel.
Mrs.
Davids, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in Jewish education from Hebrew Union College.
She is the education director of Temple Beth Torah in Melville, L.I.
Her father is an investigator for the United States Army Construction Engineering Research Laboratory in Champaign.
Her mother, Trudy Averbuch, is secretary of the Tepper Electric Supply Company in Champaign.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  PACT AT EARTH SUMMIT


Sink the Belgrano!
ONE HUNDRED DAYS
The Memoirs of the Falklands Battle Group Commander.
By Adm.
Sandy Woodward with Patrick Robinson.
Foreword by Margaret Thatcher.
Illustrated. 360 pp.
Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press. $24.95.


Boston Islands
To the Editor: "Boston's Island Retreats" by Brian Hayes (May 3) was especially interesting to me as a descendant of an early commander of the fortification built on Castle Island in 1635.
The fort was the principal defense installation in Boston Harbor before and during the Revolutionary War and was named Fort Independence by President John Adams on a visit to it in 1799.
The present structure, built in the 1830's, was used during the Civil War as a training ground and as a mine and torpedo station in the Spanish-American War.
While the existing causeway and parking areas were constructed in 1925, the original causeway connecting it to the mainland was erected in 1891.
MARTIN CLAPP Wellfleet, Mass.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article last Sunday about Kauai, Hawaii, omitted a listing of wildlife refuges, accommodations and restaurants.
The information is printed today on page 25.


Thatcher Visits Falklands on 10th Anniversary of War with Argentina


Belinda Johnson, Calvin L. Palmer
Belinda Louise Johnson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Johnson of Jamaica, Queens, was married yesterday to Calvin Lee Palmer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roynol Palmer of Smithfield, Va.
Representative Floyd H. Flake, the Queens Democrat who is an African Methodist Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Allen A.M.E.
Church in Jamaica.
Mrs.
Palmer, 35 years old, is a vice president of the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from Howard University, from which she also received a J.D. degree.


Zaire Reopens Old Wound: Lumumba's Death
One of the most traumatic episodes from Zaire's past, the mysterious death of its first Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba, has emerged once again to torment the nation.
As a leader of the Pan-Africanist Movement in the 1950's, and one of the first to demand the Congo's independence from Belgium, Mr.
Lumumba remains a hero and a martyr for many here.


Miss Butcher, Matthew Baird 2d
Elizabeth Anne Butcher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
McBee Butcher of Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married there yesterday to Matthew Baird 2d, the son of Charles H. Baird of Laverock, Pa., and Mary D. Roberts of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Timothy Dobbins performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer.
Mrs.
Baird, 26 years old, is studying to be an actress in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is chairman and chief executive of Butcher &amp; Singer, the Philadelphia investment banking division of Wheat First Securities.


NEGOTIATORS IN RIO AGREE TO INCREASE AID TO THIRD WORLD
Less than 24 hours before the end of the Earth Summit, North and South finally compromised today on principles that encourage richer countries to increase aid to the third world, clearing the way for formal approval of the global cleanup plan that is the centerpiece of the conference.
After 13 days of negotiations, third-world countries finally abandoned their campaign to extract a specific commitment from the industrialized world to nearly double aid to poorer countries by the year 2000.
The money would help guarantee that the third world's development is environmentally sound.
The compromise, worked out in a small group and approved in an informal general session this evening, will be formally adopted on Sunday.
Accepting U.S.
Position
Under the compromise, instead of pressing their demands for precise commitments of money, the third-world countries accepted that the United States was unwilling to be bound by a longstanding United Nations goal of raising aid levels to 0.7 percent of a country's economic output and that Britain, Japan, Germany and several other big aid donors refuse to commit themselves to that target by any particular date.


Elizabeth Rebetz, John MacKinnon Jr.
Elizabeth Hope Rebetz, the daughter of Sandra Rebetz of Rye, N.Y., and the late Ronald F. Rebetz, was married yesterday in Rye to John Daniel MacKinnon Jr., a son of Kathleen MacKinnon of Quincy, Mass., and the late Mr.
MacKinnon.
The Rev.
Lawrence Inzeo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
MacKinnon, 27 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is a research manager at Cahner's Publishing Company, a trade-magazine publisher in Newton, Mass.
Her father was the president of the Nitron Chemical Corporation, an agricultural-commodities corporation in Greenwich, Conn.


Life Beyond the Subway Is Subject to Its Own Disruptions
Even on the best days, Danita Woodley's trip to work oppresses her.
She leaves her house in St.
Albans, Queens each morning, towing her toddler son, and rides a bus to Jamaica Center, where she catches the J train to her son's baby sitter in Brooklyn and then to work at Public School 290 in East New York.
An hour and a half -- and any number of possibilities for delay.


Ms. Eliasson, Dr. Stephanson
Under Secretary General and Mrs.
Jan Eliasson of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anna Charlotte Eliasson, to Dr.
Anders Stephanson, a son of Torsten and Inger Stephanson of Gothenburg, Sweden.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Eliasson, 23 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father, a former representative of Sweden to the United Nations, is the organization's Under Secretary General for humanitarian affairs.
Her mother, Kerstin Eliasson, is a science-policy consultant to the Swedish Government in New York.


Currency; A Bit of Bright In Gold Prices
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
126.70
126.85
140.75
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5770
1.5915
1.7949
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1901
1.1920
1.1432
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8515
1.8320
1.6329
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$342.50
$338.40
$366.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


POSTINGS: F.D.R. Jr.'s Homestead; An Upscale Project Upstate
Most developers are adapting to the rigors of the recession by building smaller, less expensive houses.
But the developers of Dalton Farm, a residential community in Beekman, N.Y., are taking a different tack.
On their 560-acre tract, the former homestead of Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr., the late son of the 32d President who served as a United States Representative from New York, they have begun building a more upscale section, an 18-home enclave called Pondwood.
Dalton Farm opened in 1988 with plans for 162 modest town houses and 378 one-family homes.
So far, 51 of the one-family houses and 48 town houses have been built.


Lynda Holland, J. E. Przedpelski
Lynda Taylor Holland, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Holland of Brookside, N.J., was married yesterday to John Edward Przedpelski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tadeusz A. Przedpelski of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens.
The Rev.
Thomas E. Robinson performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Mendham, N.J.
Mrs.
Przedpelski, 28 years old, is the marketing communications manager for the Cortex Corporation, a computer software company in Waltham, Mass.
She graduated from Furman University.
Her father is a vice president of J. P. Morgan Investment Management Inc., in New York.


Echoes of Prohibition; 20 Years of War on Drugs, and No Victory Yet
STANDING on a bleak corner in the South Bronx littered with old heroin syringes and empty crack vials, it is hard to imagine that the United States has poured nearly $70 billion into fighting drugs in the last 20 years.
"I look at the message coming out of Washington that we're winning the war on drugs and I don't know what city they're talking about," New York's Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, said in a recent interview.
"It's certainly not New York City."


Vienna in Bidding War for an Agency of Peace
Not even many Austrians know that the first woman to win the Noble Peace Prize was a Viennese aristocrat, Baroness Bertha von Suttner, who received the award in 1905 for her book "Lay Down Your Arms."
Her advice was not heeded and World War I broke out nine years later.


Karen Strong, Steven Fossel
Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Strong of Shelburne, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Beaumont Strong, to Steven Lee Fossel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jon S. Fossel of Waccabuc, N.Y.
A summer 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Strong, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College, as did her fiance.
She has a master's degree in business administration from Rutgers University.
Her father is the executive vice president of the Howard Bank in Burlington, Vt.


Irene Hewitt Conway, Daniel Coleman
Mr. and Mrs.
Hewitt A. Conway of Palm Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Irene Hewitt Conway to Daniel Thomas Le Vert Coleman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Daniel Coleman of Crestwood, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Conway is an editorial manager at Standard &amp; Poor's, the credit rating agency in New York.
She graduated from Manhattanville College.
Her father is of counsel to Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon, a law firm in West Palm Beach, and is the author of the Estate Tax Spreadsheet, a computer-software program.
Her mother, Jeanne L. Conway, is the director of Employee Assistance Program at ITT Corporation, in New York.
Miss Conway's paternal grandfather, the late Judge Albert Conway, was the Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals.


Rhode Island
To the Editor: My wife and I were delighted with the article about the islands of Narragansett Bay.
We have been summer visitors to Jamestown Island since 1950.
The section on Jamestown described Beavertail Light and the state park surrounding it very well.
There is another state park on the island, the one at Fort Wetherill, that is unusually beautiful and interesting in its own way.
The park is on the eastern coast of the island just across the bay from Newport and has a number of paths for hiking and sites for picnics.
A small inlet on the ocean side of the island draws scuba divers from several surrounding states.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bay Shore 171,000
58 Johnson Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, family room, 1-car attached garage;, taxes $5,200.
Carle Place 217,500
18 Garson Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40- year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Glen Head 313,750
76 Viola Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25- year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,100.
Head of the Harbor 1.3 million
15 Emmet Drive  10-bedroom, 6-bath, 84-year-old colonial; library, 14 fireplaces, servants' quarters, elevator, inground pool, tennis court, 4 acres; taxes $20,000.
Islip 407,500
182 East Bayberry Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, greenhouse, 100 feet of bulkheading; taxes $8,900.
Williston Park 185,000
10 Capitol Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, den, porch; taxes $3,000.
OTHER AREAS Mount Vernon, N.Y. 312,500
30 Rockridge Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 63-year-old English brick; fireplace, den, eat-in kitchen, playroom; taxes $4,734.
Chester, Conn. 210,000
65 Goose Hill Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 110-year-old Victorian farmhouse; pantry, back stairs, 2 barns, 10 acres; taxes $3,003.
South River, L.I. 164,000
20 High Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old ranch; pool, 2-car garage, 2 kitchens; taxes $4,096.


2 Kidnappings Ignite Fears in Mexico
Joaquin Vargas Guajardo was leaving home one night last month when his car was suddenly boxed in by four others.
Men with automatic weapons got out of them and took Mr.
Vargas away.
When the kidnappers made contact with the family of Mr.
Vargas, a Mexican businessman in his early 40's, they said his freedom would cost $50 million.
Officials said the kidnappers were apparently convinced that the family could pay by newspaper reports that the Vargases were likely to bid several hundred million dollars for a television station being sold off by the Government.


'Joseph' and a Coat of Many Colors
EVEN when "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" is over, it isn't over.
If one wishes to be spared the details of a popular musical's journey from a 15-minute cantata commissioned for a prestigious London junior school boys choir in 1968 to a full-length Broadway show in 1982, say simply that, before and after Broadway, there have been lots and lots of versions, in concert, on television, in other schools and on other stages.
And it looks as if the first of the Tim Rice-Andrew Lloyd Webber forays into pop opera, earlier than "Jesus Christ Superstar" and "Evita," is still evolving.


Update; Lingering Anger Over Eating Club Case
A 13-year legal battle over whether private eating clubs at Princeton University can exclude women has been settled.
But the anger continues.
Tiger Inn issued a statement accusing Sally Frank, who challenged the club's generations-old men-only membership policy when she was an undergraduate in the 1970's, of "politically correct fascism." The case continued in state and Federal courts until 10 days ago, when Tiger Inn dropped a Federal lawsuit it had filed.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
IMPORTING THE WORK ETHIC
RUSTY LEAVER has no problem keeping the Amish down on the farm after they've seen the Hamptons.
"It's not like we go shopping at Saks," he said.


Conversations/Warren Zimmermann; Haunted by What the U.S. Didn't Do in Yugoslavia
THOUSANDS of Serbian artillery shells raining death and destruction on Sarajevo.
United Nations relief convoys attacked by irregulars.
The ancient port of Dubrovnik under fire again.
More than 15,000 killed and more than 1.2 million made homeless by 11 months of war.
No end in sight.
These are scenes Warren Zimmermann left behind when he was recalled by the Bush Administration in mid-May from his post as United States Ambassador to Yugoslavia.
The withdrawal of the Ambassador was an act of protest against the Serbian leadership for its aggression against the newly independent republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Focus: Port Aransas, Tex.; Resolution Trust Suit Tests Condo Rules
THE power of the Resolution Trust Corporation to sell condominium units without regard to the condominium association's rules is being tested in a suit in Dallas.
The case involves one unit in this small fishing village on an island in the Gulf of Mexico, just off the coast of Corpus Christi.
A condominium association here has resisted the corporation's efforts to sell the unit through its low- to moderate-income Affordable Housing Disposition Program.
The R.T.C. has responded with a suit.


Perspectives: Windows in Historic Districts; New Guidelines Spur Replacement Work
FOR Vincent Iavarone, happiness was a new set of windows.
He replaced 12 worn-out old double-hung steel windows last February in his apartment at 785 Park Avenue, at 73d Street, with a set of aluminium windows.
No more leaks.
No more wind whistling through the living room.
"My wife is ecstatic," said Mr.
Iavarone, a shopping-center consultant who is chairman of the co-op's building committee.


Make the Penalty Fit the Foul
To the Sports Editor:
I read with much agreement Ira Berkow's "The Hurting of Patrick Ewing, and Others," (The Times, May 18), on the rising level of aggressive contact in basketball.
I think the game can be brought back to finesse, speed and cleverness by adjusting the rules.
By using a penalty/advantage (cost/benefit) formula, the penalty for a deliberate, flagrant, etc., foul would come to far outweigh the advantage gained by preventing the basket.
The current flagrant foul rule addresses this, but it doesn't work.
Players will risk that penalty to prevent points for a defensive advantage.


Melissa Weiss, Barry Bausano
Melissa Lyn Weiss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Weiss of West Hartford, Conn., was married last evening in Hartford to Michael Barry Bausano, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Dominic J. Bausano of West Bloomfield, Mich.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer officiated at the Hartford Club.
Mrs.
Bausano, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a J.D. from Boston College.
Her father is a urologist in Hartford.


Thousands of Groups Press Movement Against Abortion
Virtually unknown beyond Brooklyn, the Helpers of God's Precious Infants, who marched yesterday with John Cardinal O'Connor against a Manhattan abortion clinic, is one of thousands of groups, large and small, around the country loosely forming what is known as the pro-life movement.
Many organizations, like Helpers, are local groups led by members of the Roman Catholic clergy, but there are also Episcopalian, Lutheran, Southern Baptist, Presbyterian and Evangelical and ecumenical anti-abortion groups.
In addition, a broad range of grassroots and professional organizations has also taken up the issue, including Pro-Life Nurses, Athletes for Life and Veterinarians for Life.
They span the ideological spectrum from the small radical Roman Catholic group, Lambs of Christ, to the conservative Concerned Women for America, to the new, progressive Professional Women's Network.


Science Fiction
I was sure I was going to hate SNOW CRASH (Bantam Spectra, cloth, $22; paper, $10), a novel by Neal Stephenson, when I learned that its protagonist was named Hiro Protagonist and that his business card identified him as "Last of the freelance hackers. Greatest sword fighter in the world." Mr.
Stephenson, a writer new to science fiction, is obviously well versed in the subgenre known as cyberpunk, which posits a computerized near-future dominated by amoral high-tech corporations.
Cyberpunk has been around long enough (at least since William Gibson's "Neuromancer" was published in 1984) to have developed its own narrative formulas and stylistic short cuts: the wisecracking, nonconformist computer hacker who punches code and faces with equal ease has become as much of a cliche as the mad scientists and intrepid rocket jockeys of earlier eras.
So I assumed that Mr.
Stephenson was either riding the new cliche for all it was worth or offering up a 440-page pastiche of a literary form that has been flirting with self-parody since its inception.
To my surprise, Hiro Protagonist (who has chosen his own name, of course) turns out to be entertaining company, and Mr.
Stephenson turns out to be an engaging guide to an onrushing tomorrow that is as farcical as it is horrific.
Hiro's adventures in the Metaverse, a permanent virtual reality that he helped to program but that has taken on a life (and death) of its own, are brilliantly realized, as are his parallel adventures in the real world, where everything, including the Federal Government and the Mafia, is franchised.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 14, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
20
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
4
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
3
3
MAN OF MY DREAMS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A Victorian beauty inadvertently wins the nobleman she had aspired to marry.
4
3
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman who, upon regaining consciousness in a hospital, recalls the horrors that brought her there.
5
2
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
6
20
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $6.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
7
30
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists in England, Ireland and America.
8
8
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
9
3
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $5.99.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
10
3
WOMAN WITHOUT A PAST, by Phyllis A. Whitney. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A Long Island woman journeys to South Carolina to solve the mystery of her birth and heritage.
11
9
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
12
7
ASPEN GOLD, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $5.99.) A woman from Colorado faces a choice: fame in Hollywood or love with an old flame.
13
8
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of perpetrators of an insurance scam.
14
3
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $5.99.) A war in Africa sometime in the future involves Cuba and the United States.
15 *
1
DARKNESS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A family moves back to a Florida town, where something evil awaits.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
8
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
3
4
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series.
4
56
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
5
4
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
6
48
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
449
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
8
19
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
9
1
ROSS PEROT: IN HIS OWN WORDS, by Tony Chiu. (Warner, $4.99.) A compilation of statements about himself and his beliefs by the Texas billionaire who seeks the Presidency.
10 *
129
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
11 *
14
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
44
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
8
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what various people have learned about life.
3
92
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
73
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
12
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Why There's No Methadone for Crack
IF science came up with a drug that did for crack addicts what methadone does for heroin users, the police would be delighted.
"Fewer people would die," said Detective Jose A. Gonzalez, who spent nine years under cover and now trains New York narcotics detectives.
"It'd be another crutch, but a good crutch if it's used right."


Harris Admits Cocaine Use
DANNY HARRIS, the world's second-ranked 400-meter hurdler last year, made it official yesterday: He admitted that he used cocaine and agreed to accept a four-year suspension while seeking drug treatment.
Although it had become known in the track and field circles that Harris had faced suspension for drug use, track officials, who do not comment on drug cases until they are resolved, had provided no details, and it was not until yesterday that the facts emerged.


Female Sailors Talk of Slow but Certain Change
There are many risks for a sailor at sea with the United States Navy, and some of them have nothing to do with lacerating storms or enemy missiles.
Take, for example, walking down the hall.
On Navy ships, when a woman on duty walks into the male berth she is supposed to announce herself -- "female on board" -- and correct conduct should follow.
It doesn't always work out that way.


Leigh E. Harris, John A. Hay
Leigh Elliott Harris, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Don V. Harris Jr. of Washington, was married yesterday to John Alexander Hay, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond A. Hay of Dallas.
The Rev.
Stuart A. Kenworthy performed the episcopal ceremony at Christ Church, Georgetown, in Washington.
Mrs.
Hay is a teacher at the Lab School of Washington, a private school for learning-disabled children.
She graduated from Wheelock College and has a master's degree in education from American University.
Her father is a retired partner in residence at Covington &amp; Burling, a Washington law firm.


A Grim Wasteland on News at Six
Another night, another nightmare.
The teen-age killer gives way to the subway slasher.
The mob slaying segues into a spot on kids with guns.
The face of a weeping mother dissolves into a close-up of a blood-stained shirt.
House fires become "raging infernos." Traffic snarls.
Kids fall out of windows.
Babies die in random shootings.
Manhunts are commonplace.


Elisabeth Polikoff, Peter J. Doyle
Elisabeth Polikoff and Peter James Doyle were married in New York yesterday.
The Rev.
James Doyle, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at St.
Paul's Interfaith Chapel at Columbia University.
Mrs.
Doyle, 30 years old, is an early-childhood group therapist at the Childhood Development Center of the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Jean L. Troubh and Benet Polikoff Jr., both of New York.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
The bride's stepfather, Raymond S. Troubh, is an independent financial consultant and investment banker in New York.
Her stepmother, Florence D. Polikoff of New York, who is retired, was the educational director of the Karen Horney Therapeutic Nursery in New York.
The bride's grandfather, Henry Loeb, is a former chairman of the New School for Social Research in New York.


Mean
IN the maelstrom of urban style, toughness counts.
You don't have to live in South Central Los Angeles to feel that the outside world is treacherous and the environment deadly -- that to look bad is good.
Men are rolling up their T-shirts, cutting the sleeves off their Levi's jackets, putting on construction boots and wearing their pants or shorts slung low on the hips.
Is it any accident that Stanley Kowalski is back on Broadway?


Rhode Island
To the Editor: The otherwise informative article on Rhode Island's islands ("Walking on Rhode Island's Islands," May 10) rightly praises Sachuest Point and its wildlife refuge, but devotes only one sentence to the extraordinary Norman Bird Sanctuary.
There are few places anywhere where more varied landscapes and ecosystems are closer together than at the Norman Sanctuary.


BEST SELLERS: June 14, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
112
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
2
1
5
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) From New York schoolgirl to doyenne of a French chateau: the life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
3
3
2
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
4
2
4
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers secrets from the past and a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
5
5
14
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
6
8
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
7
7
9
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
8
8
8
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
9
14
5
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Four decades in the lives of the motley residents of the 19th-century Washington Territory.
10
13
3
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
11 *
11
3
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
12
10
7
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $18.95.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
13
12
18
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry. (LP)
14
9
15
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer try to take possession of Nebraska. (LP)
15
24
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
3
20
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
3
7
30
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
4
4
8
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
5
2
2
CHIEF, by Daryl F. Gates with Diane K. Shah. (Bantam, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who has headed the Los Angeles Police Department since 1978.
6
11
6
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) An economist considers the upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
7
5
3
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
8
12
6
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
9 *
8
7
TWO NATIONS, by Andrew Hacker. (Scribners, $24.95.) A political scientist discusses the way racism affects American life.
10 *
15
2
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Dow Jones-Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.
11
6
4
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
12
9
2
RACE, by Studs Terkel. (New Press, $24.95.) Conversations with blacks and whites about "the American obsession."
13
13
13
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
14
14
5
PLAYING IN THE DARK, by Toni Morrison. (Harvard University, $14.95.) The novelist-critic's call for literary scholarship that will bring the black experience to the attention of all Americans.
15
28
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
17
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
2
2
8
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
3
3
28
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
4
4
28
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
8
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) How to cope with an addiction to carbohydrate-rich food.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG: The Words That Remade America, by Garry Wills. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A brilliant study of the greatest of all political speeches concludes that these were no simple remarks at the dedication of a cemetery but great art, perhaps more influential than the Declaration of Independence.
SUMMER MEDITATIONS, by Vaclav Havel. (Knopf, $20.) Czechoslovakia's President and best-known author reflects on politics and finds that it's not power that matters but goodness.
CHANGING FORTUNES: The World's Money and the Threat to American Leadership, by Paul A. Volcker and Toyoo Gyohten. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) In talks given at Princeton, the authors, former top American and Japanese finance officials, trade tales from the international monetary front.
ECOCIDE IN THE USSR: Health and Nature Under Siege, by Murray Feshbach and Alfred Friendly Jr. (Basic Books, $24.) A tour of doleful terrain -- the environmental and public-health disasters that accompanied 74 years of Communist misrule.
FORESTS: The Shadow of Civilization, by Robert Pogue Harrison. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) An absorbing, sometimes eloquent exploration of the forest in the Western imagination.
THE TRUELOVE, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $19.95.) In the 15th installment of their intertwined careers, Jack Aubrey, Royal Navy captain, and Stephen Maturin, ship's surgeon and agent of espionage, must cope with live women on their warship as they strive to smite the upstart Bonaparte and his misguided allies.
THE EASY WAY OUT, by Stephen McCauley. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) An engaging novel of bet hedging, loss cutting and white lying in a cast of self-deluding but fundamentally decent characters.


SURGICAL INJURIES LEAD TO NEW RULE
Surgeons who rushed to use a new technique to remove gallbladders without adequate training have botched many procedures, New York State health officials and surgical experts say.
Since August 1990, at least seven patients have died and 185 others have suffered serious or life-threatening complications from the procedure, laparoscopic gallbladder surgery, at 99 of the state's 242 hospitals, the State Health Department said.
Complications are currently being reported to the department at the rate of three or four each week.


Zoning
To the Editor:
"The Quest for a New Zoning Plan" on April 12 takes no position regarding the best way to simplify the present zoning law.
In eliciting comments from zoning experts, including the Planning Commission, the article implies that one overall correction is far better than a piecemeal solution.


Making Sure a Woman's Place Is in the House; A New Familiar Order
To the Editor:
Your May 18 article on Hillary Clinton quotes Roger Stone, a Republican consultant, asserting that "Hillary Clinton is exceedingly polarizing."
"There's a certain familiar order of things," Mr.
Stone contends, "and the notion of a coequal couple in the White House is a little offensive to men and women."


For Besieged Sarajevo, Even Anger Is Fickle
Beyond the blasted precincts of Bascarsija, the old Muslim quarter of this dying city, dawn was rising over the Romanija Mountains.
For a while, the rose-colored hue cresting the mountain tops provided relief from the miseries of life in Sarajevo.
But for one group of militiamen finishing up an overnight guard shift today, the focus quickly shifted back to matters of life and death.
The last cigarette of the night had been smoked, the last drop drained from the brandy bottle, and it was time for hard talk.


The Women's Gym Team Remains Suspended in Air
After three hours of intense work today, 13 women completed the optional round of competition, and the top six qualified for the United States Women's Olympic gymnastics team.
Well, sort of.


Curmudgeonly Critics
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to Jeffery Paine's review of John W. Aldridge's "Talents and Technicians" (May 10), in which Mr.
Paine faults Mr.
Aldridge for failing to know his material -- contemporary fiction.


The Senate Was Their Jury
GRAND INQUESTS
The Historic Impeachments of Justice Samuel Chase and President Andrew Johnson.
By William H. Rehnquist.
Illustrated. 303 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


'Joseph' and a Coat of Many Colors
EVEN when "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" is over, it isn't over.
If one wishes to be spared the details of a popular musical's journey from a 15-minute cantata commissioned for a prestigious London school boys choir in 1968 to a full-length Broadway show in 1982, say simply that, before and after Broadway, there have been lots and lots of versions, in concert, on television, in other schools and on other stages.
And it looks as if the first of the Tim Rice-Andrew Lloyd Webber forays into pop opera, earlier than "Jesus Christ Superstar" and "Evita," is still evolving.


Newport-to-Bermuda Ordeal Still Has Its Attractions
The trend in yachting these days is to build fast, lightweight sailboats that compete in day races around inshore buoys.
But the allure of going to sea, of matching wits with the open ocean as well as your opponents, still has its followers.
And for sailors on the East Coast, this is their year.
Their attention is likely to be drawn to the 38th Newport to Bermuda Race, a biennial competition, which is scheduled to begin at 1 P.M.
Friday off Newport, R.I.
There is no other offshore race in the United States that so combines the difficulty of distance sailing with the demands of beating yachts with full crews.


Troll Road


Topics of The Times; The Vietnam War, Continued
Just when Washington seems ready to acknowledge that the Vietnam War is over, Hanoi is cruelly stirring its ghosts.
Last month Doan Thanh Liem was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment for anti-Socialist activity.
The case against him grew out of his efforts to attract Western businesses to Vietnam, in conjunction with Michael Morrow, an American who has long worked for reconciliation with Hanoi.


Karin Siegfried, David Treadwell 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Siegfried of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karin Elisabeth Siegfried to David Rogers Treadwell 3d, a son of David R. Treadwell Jr. of Boxboro, Mass., and Carol A. Ritter of Lutherville, Md.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Siegfried, 22 years old, is an account coordinator for the public relations agency of McKnight &amp; Company in Seattle.
She and her fiance graduated from Princeton University, he cum laude.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.


Lynn Patricia Sullivan, Geof Bartz
Lynn Patricia Sullivan and Geof Bartz were married yesterday in Southampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Randolph Becker, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Southampton Bath and Tennis Club.
Ms.
Sullivan, who is 34 years old and keeping her name, is the general manager of Maysles Films, a documentary-film production company in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Sullivan of New York.
Her father was a lawyer in New York.


Job Is Difficult But Pays Well In Hong Kong
When Christopher Patten was named Governor of this British colony, the British tabloid press -- and even the more staid newspapers -- gleefully detailed his impressive pay and perquisites.
As Governor of Hong Kong, Mr.
Patten, a former Member of Parliament, will receive a tax free salary of $273,000 -- larger than the British Prime Minister's -- and be chauffeured about in a Rolls-Royce that bears a crown instead of a license plate.
He will have a 90-foot yacht, a weekend villa, and a household staff of 56.
The Governor's household will cost close to $1.5 million dollars a year.


Shanahan Gets Multiyear Deal With Blues
BRENDAN SHANAHAN, a left wing who joined the St.
Louis Blues as a free agent before last season, was signed yesterday by the team to a multiyear contract.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed but news reports in St.
Louis said it was worth $3.5 million over three years.
Shanahan signed with the Blues as a free agent July 24, 1991, after playing four seasons with the Devils.
In 361 career games he has 121 goals and 162 assists.


French Organist Offers Recital in New Britain
IN 1975 a serious auto accident ended the performing career of the great French organist Maurice Durufle, but his equally distinguished musician-wife, following extensive surgery, was gradually able to return to the concert scene.
Marie-Madeleine Durufle gave her first American recitals in 1989, after a 15-year absence; now, having recently completed her tenure as artist in residence at North Texas State University, she has embarked on a 15-city American tour.
One of those stops will be in Connecticut at 4 P.M. today in the South Congregational Church in New Britain, where she will play her late husband's "Prelude and Fugue on the Name of Alain," along with a Vivaldi Concerto, arranged by Bach, and other works of Franck, Dupre, Vierne and Tournemire.
An offering replaces an admission fee, and for a modest charge, listeners may stay for the church's annual Strawberry Festival.
Information: 223-3691.


Topics of The Times; Viva Alto Adige!
Amid all the bad news about resurgent ethnic nationalism, Italy and Austria have moved to heal an old irredentist quarrel.
On Thursday, Austria formally acknowledged that Italy had fully carried out a package of measures to protect the rights of a German-speaking minority in Alto Adige, a region in northern Italy known to Austrians as South Tyrol.
This example of mutual tolerance could hardly be more timely.
For years German-speakers in northern Italy have agitated, sometimes violently, for greater autonomy.
Austria wisely chose to engage Italy diplomatically in behalf of a people who were once citizens of the old Austrian empire.


Making a Difference; Hewlett's Big Move To Go Small
The Hewlett-Packard Company has long been known for its technical leadership in many diverse fields -- computers, medical equipment, electronic instruments -- but disk drives were not one of them, despite the company's 22 years in that business.
That changed last week, when Hewlett-Packard introduced the world's smallest hard disk: a 1.3-inch model that can store up to 21.4 megabytes of information, the equivalent of 14,389 typed pages.
Despite the company's low profile in the drive business, "there was a lot of experience and a lot of technology behind us," said Bruce F. Spenner, general manager of Hewlett-Packard's disk memory division in Boise, Idaho.


Set in Hollywood
To the Editor:
In her very brief review of my novel "The Miraculous Day of Amalia Gomez" (In Short, May 10), Karen Brailsford manages to make a serious factual error.
She refers to my "graphic descriptions of the hellish underbelly of East Los Angeles." Although my novel includes some background scenes of East Los Angeles in years past, the setting is, importantly, Hollywood today, its "hellish underbelly" of poverty.


Take Time To Listen To the Flowers
I FELL ACROSS A PASSAGE IN George Eliot's "Daniel Deronda" a few days ago.
It is not really about music but speaks to people who hear a lot of it.
Young Deronda is looking with apprehension at his uninteresting future, and Eliot writes:
"He dreaded, as if it were a dwelling-place of lost souls, that dead anatomy of culture which turns the universe into a mere ceaseless answer to queries, and knows not everything, but everything else about everything -- as if one should be ignorant of nothing concerning the scent of violets except the scent itself for which one had no nostril."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about sports bars misidentified the manager of the Sports Page in White Plains.
He is Steve Sheik.


Dan Quayle Steps Front and (Right of) Center
FOR months and years, he was all but invisible to the public, unless he made some foolish mistake.
He was dismissed as a political cipher.
People laughed at him in the spiteful way people laugh at the class geek.
But the wheel of electoral fortune has turned, and suddenly Vice President Dan Quayle is at the center of things.
Like it or not, he has found ways to impress his views more sharply on the public consciousness than any other candidate for top office this year -- certainly far more vividly than the man he works for, George Bush, whose somnambulant behavior and cloudy message have given his Vice President the chance to grab the spotlight.


The Basketball Insulted Karate
To the Sports Editor:
As a professional certified coach of Chinese Wushu (martial arts) and Tai Jai Quan, I was greatly offended by the use of Dave Anderson's term, "Karateball" ("Karateball Just Isn't Basketball," The Times, May 13) to describe the Knicks-Bulls series.


Making a Difference; Biting the Bullet in Alcala de Henares
It was not the type of call that Avon likes to make.
Last week, the cosmetics company said it had tapped its manufacturing plant in Alcala de Henares, Spain, for closure, to remove some of the excess production capacity in its European operations.
The move will put 140 employees out of work in Spain, where Avon Products Inc. has operated for more than 27 years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Platform; BROWN IS VOWING A FIGHT ON ISSUES
His campaign for the Presidency over, Edmund G. Brown Jr. threatened today to disrupt the plans of Democratic leaders for unity behind the party's platform.
Mr.
Brown, his ruddy complexion reflecting days spent in the sun and not on campaign planes, went before the platform drafting subcommittee this afternoon to insist that the party take strong stands behind disputed positions on economic policy, foreign affairs, labor law and other matters.


The Ghosts on Main Street
LET THE DEAD BURY THEIR DEAD
And Other Stories.
By Randall Kenan. 334 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.


For This Movie Producer, Violence Pays
Joel Silver paces the floor of his elegant office on the Warner Brothers lot, speaking animatedly about the action movies that have made him one of the most successful, feared and controversial producers in town.
His latest blockbuster, "Lethal Weapon 3," has grossed more than $100 million, and the total is climbing.
"Movies should be like a roller coaster," he shouts.
"You go in, practically lock yourself in the seat, and it's down, up, down, up. It's not dangerous, but it's
fun
. It's a formula. That's the key. That's the core of these movies."


Broadway Intersects With 7th Ave.
NAME: Mercedes Ellington.
IDENTITY: Dancer and choreographer.
PERSONAL: Granddaughter of Duke Ellington; daughter of Mercer Ellington, leader of the Duke Ellington Orchestra.


The Gluttonous Grande Dame of the Garden
A LADYBUG landed on the window the other day.
Little did the speck of a creature know that it was being observed from inside the house.
An intimate look at this insect provided an opportunity to watch its morning ablutions, which included cleaning off its tiny legs and mouthparts.
Then just as quickly the ladybug lifted its wings to make an escape flight, never to be seen again.
This small insect is one of the most familiar and the one children popularized with the nursery poem:


An Invested Interest in His Team
The businessman who will become new boss of the Mariners invested more than time and energy in a successful effort to keep the franchise in Seattle.
He also spent a chunk of his retirement money.
JOHN ELLIS, chairman of Puget Sound Power &amp; Light, who will become the club's chief executive, increased his personal stake in the team from $10,000 to $250,000, The Seattle Post-Intelligencer reported yesterday.
Ellis declined to say how much he has invested.
But he said he had to tap his retirement fund because "I'm not a wealthy guy."


Wall Street; A Long, Hard Warrants Dispute
A sleekly furnished, blond-wood courtroom in Wilmington, Del., was the scene last Wednesday of the latest skirmish in what may be the longest-running battle ever waged over the rights of warrant holders.
The public investors in question owned warrants issued by the Wickes Companies in the years before 1988, when that diversified manufacturing company was taken private by WCI Holdings, a vehicle jointly owned by Blackstone Capital Partners and Wasserstein Perella Partners.
The argument last week was over a mix-up that occurred during the conversion of those expiring warrants in February.
Lawyers for the warrant holders argued that the mix-up revealed sinister motives to damage their clients further, while defending lawyers for WCI insisted it was a simple mistake that has been corrected.


Richard Boehm, 57; Created Book Tours To Promote Authors
Richard Boehm, who created the author's book tour that has become a fixture of sales promotion in the publishing industry, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old.
He died of a massive coronary attack, said Michael Mace, a friend and colleague.


Mary J. Maher, Timothy Higgins
Mary Jane Maher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Maher Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Timothy Michael Higgins, a son of Rose Higgins of Glen Rock, N.J., and the late Robert W. Higgins.
The Rev.
James F. Keenan performed the ceremony at Epiphany Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Higgins, 26 years old, is an elementary-school teacher at the Epiphany School.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president in New York of Citicorp North America.
Her mother, Jeanne Maher, is the guidance secretary at Norman Thomas High School in New York.


Meaghan Crone, C. M. Ramsden
Meaghan Crone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter S. Crone of Charleston, S.C., was married yesterday in Barrington, R.I., to Christopher McLean Ramsden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Ramsden of Barrington.
The Rev.
Joseph Dye performed the ceremony at the Barrington Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Ramsden, 27 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Buffalo Railroad Equipment Corporation in Charleston.


POSTINGS: Marketing Co-ops; 2-for-1 Sale -- With a Hitch
The "two for one" special, a time-tested bait for buyers, is an option offered by a real estate investment group in an effort to sell 100 of the 800 or so co-op apartments it owns throughout the city.
But with this giveaway, buyers won't be getting something for nothing.
The sellers, based in London, are offering anyone who buys one of 50 vacant apartments a second, tenanted, apartment free.
The hitch, not mentioned in a news release, is that none of the tenants of the free units pay rent that covers the monthly maintenance charges.


Mutual Funds; Selling Beyond the English Speakers
Mutual fund prospectuses sometimes seem to be written in Chinese.
If yours does, you may have picked it up at the Dreyfus Corporation's investment center in San Francisco, where the company's Worldwide Dollar Money Market Fund prospectus is available in Mandarin.
The Dreyfus prospectus is part of an effort by the mutual fund industry to reach out to non-English-speaking investors.


Corrections
A picture in Styles of The Times on May 31 with a report about the marriage of Jennifer Peyton Ware and Stephen Ellis carried an erroneous credit.
The photographer was Dick Luria.


A Good Week For the Roses
A salute to Louis Malle, a dance in the Bronx and applause at Carnegie Hall.


JUNE 7-13: Supreme Court; New Hearing Ordered In Abortion Clinic Case
When the Bush Administration joined forces before the Supreme Court last summer with the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue, a rather technical and obscure case gained high political visibility.
The question was whether Federal judges have authority, under a Reconstruction-era civil rights law passed to protect blacks against the Ku Klux Klan, to keep anti-abortion protesters from blocking access to abortion clinics.
The Administration joined the anti-abortion group, which has sponsored many such protests, in urging the Justices to answer no.
While another summer of protests at abortion clinics appears to be heating up, the Court last week surprised almost everyone by deferring a decision, which had been expected this month, and ordering new arguments next fall.
The Justices gave no reason in the terse announcement issued eight months after the initial arguments.
The bench for the new argument will presumably include Justice Clarence Thomas, who was not on the Court when the case was first argued and so could not participate.
That does not necessarily mean, however, that the Court was locked in a straightforward 4-to-4 stalemate in a case that presents several complex issues of statutory interpretation.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Apr. 92
Mar. 92
Apr. 91
Nation
$ 102,700
$ 104,000
$ 100,500
Northeast
142,700
145,500
143,400
Midwest
80,700
81,100
77,900
South
91,600
91,800
88,100
West
141,400
143,700
155,800
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.79
8.84
9.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.99
6.00
7.31
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.65
8.69
9.61
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.77
5.78
7.25
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.67
8.74
9.61
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.76
5.78
7.07
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.90
8.92
10.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.49
6.43
7.75
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.27
4.27
6.30
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.26
8.14
9.24
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Kathleen Leonard and Brian Murray
Kathleen Leonard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Leonard of Metuchen, N.J., was married yesterday to Brian Murray, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wendell Murray of Maplewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Andrea Greenwood, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Kent Manor Inn on Kent Island, Md.


Rich Nations Offer Money, But Small Ones Raise Issues
RIO DE JANEIRO, June 13 --
In the parade of world leaders speaking at the Earth Summit, the voices of the great powers won the greatest attention, largely because of the dollar signs nestled in their texts.
But it was the smaller nations that often cast diplomacy aside to raise troubling questions about overpopulation, the flow of aid, and the inequity between rich and poor.


Cardinal O'Connor Leads Anti-Abortion March


Mutual Funds; With the Electric Bill, a New Offer
The mutual fund business has been so profitable in recent years that all types of consumer companies have tried to grab a share -- with mixed success.
The latest venture, by Dominion Resources Inc., is a utility mutual fund, begun in May, to be marketed to customers of its Virginia Power Company subsidiary.
Virginia Power's experiment as a fund sponsor will no doubt be closely watched by other utilities and by fund leaders worried about losing market share to outsiders.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Allendale 160,000
11 Crescent Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old bungalow; porch, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,945.
Livingston 239,900
51 Glendale Avenue 4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old bi-level; 1-car garage, family room, skylights, c/a; taxes $4,450.
Millburn 251,250
52 Undercliff Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, 2-car garage, deck, family room; taxes $4,070.
South River 164,000
20 High Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old ranch; pool, 2-car garage, 2 kitchens; taxes $4,096.
Spotswood 160,000
11 Cameo Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; fireplace, playroom, den, 2-car garage; taxes $2,221.
West Orange 180,500
47 Underwood Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, family room, 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $6,241.
OTHER AREAS Mount Vernon, N.Y. 312,500
30 Rockridge Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 63-year-old English brick; fireplace, formal dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, playroom; taxes $4,734.
Chester, Conn. 210,000
65 Goose Hill Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 110-year-old Victorian farmhouse; pantry, back stairs, 2 barns, 10 acres; taxes $3,003.
Head of the Harbor 1.3 million
15 Emmet Drive  10-bedroom, 6-bath, 84-year-old colonial; library, 14 fireplaces, servants' quarters, elevator, inground pool, tennis court, 4 acres; taxes $20,000.


Love Me, Love My Lyrics
IT was a marriage made in Brill Building heaven, even if neither Paul Simon nor Edie Brickell (who were wed on Long Island late last month) got their songwriting training at New York's former palace of hits.
Lyrically, the newlyweds' paths crossed as far back as 1986, when Ms.
Brickell, then the lead singer with the New Bohemians, wrote "What I Am," which became her group's signature when its debut album was released in 1988. (For all the caffe latte and torn turtlenecks implicit in the name of the recently disbanded group, Ms. Brickell, 25 years old, is a writer of ballads who shares Mr. Simon's fondness for suburban minutiae. She memorialized dead dogs buried in the backyard; he did the same for Kodachrome prom shots.)


Making Sure a Woman's Place Is in the House; Many Hillary Clintons
To the Editor:
I was disturbed by "Hillary Clinton as Aspiring First Lady: Role Model, or a 'Hall Monitor' Type?" (news article, May 18).
By perpetuating the either/or myth about women -- they can be successful in their careers or good homemakers -- you miss an opportunity to address the real fact that many women are both.


Floyd Is a Spry, Young Senior
RAYMOND FLOYD, who won the Doral Classic in March, is pushing 50.
But he won't have to worry about keeping up with youngsters like 32-year-old FRED COUPLES anymore.
Floyd, who is fourth on the 1992 money list, with $626,324, has his eye on cashing some more first-place checks.


Update; Connecticut Mayor Receives Jail Term for Taking Payoffs
The former Mayor of Waterbury, who spent most of his six years in office seeking bribes and boasting he was too clever to get caught, was sentenced to nine years in prison last week.
In April, Joseph J. Santopietro, 34 years old, was convicted of taking $125,000 in payoffs from developers in the late 1980's and using thousands of dollars in Federal grant money to go on junkets and to pay for limousine trips and even a massage.


POSTINGS: Fall Opening; 71 Units for the Elderly Poor
The Subotnick Family House, a 9-story, 71-unit home for the low-income elderly, is being built on 78th Street off Bay Parkway in Brooklyn, next to the Jewish Community House of Bensonhurst, and will open this fall.
"Five years ago an assessment showed a need for senior housing in the area," explained Joel B. Karpp, executive director of the community house, "but there was no space."


Russians Staging Music Festival
Travelers who are in Moscow on July 4 will be able to hear a solo concert by the tenor Jose Carreras that will open an international cultural festival in Red Square.
Carreras will also appear at a concert on July 8 during the eight-day event, called "Red Square Invites," along with a cast of international opera stars including Leo Nucci, Shirley Verrett and Margaret Price.


Tackling a Mix of Art and Business
MUCH has been written about the hard times facing arts organizations, but too often a struggling dance, music or theater group believes it must suffer in silence or lose its support.
That, said Robert N. Sellar of the International Business Machines Corporation, is why two years ago I.B.M. and the Manhattan-based Arts and Business Council undertook a far-reaching analysis of the current climate for arts groups in the New York City area.
The study revealed a "quiet crisis" that could dramatically change the way millions of Americans experience the arts, said Mr.
Sellar, the community relations manager for the northeast area of I.B.M. in the United States.


Love Lives


WHITE SEPARATISTS MARCH IN ALABAMA
Under gray, threatening skies and the watchful gaze of hundreds of law-enforcement officers in riot gear, about 60 white separatist skinheads and Klansmen marched through downtown today and held a rally at the city's Confederate monument.
Bill Riccio, a 34-year-old commander in the National Aryan Front, said the rally and march were designed to call attention to the fact that "Alabama has been designated as a white homeland."


If You're Thinking of Living in: The East Village
LAST month, after eight years uptown, Lisa Russell moved to the East Village.
"It's funkier, and a lot more fun," said Ms.
Russell, a People magazine writer.
"Most of my life was happening here anyway -- there are more cafes, bars, movies."
In a Manhattan sobered by recession and social ills, those in search of a counterculture life style may find its last vestiges here.
Rents are high, but food is cheap.
And the multicultural mix includes a handful of anarchists serving as guilty conscience to a neighborhood seeking, privately, at least, to improve its qualtity of life without betraying its history of social consciousness.
They hold mini-demonstrations and Friday night speakouts.


Denise Reeves, Thorneycroft Findley
Denise Edena Reeves, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eden C. Reeves Sr. of Hempstead, L.I., was married yesterday to Thorneycroft Lindsey Findley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. H. Findley Sr., of Monrovia, Liberia.
The Rev.
Clinton C. Boone officiated at the Union Baptist Church in Hempstead.
Mrs.
Findley, 24 years old, is an associate internal auditor at The New York Times Company in New York.
She graduated from Adelphi University.
Her father is a financial administrator at the United Nations in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Her mother, Letitia A. Reeves, is a teller supervisor at the Fleet Bank in Mineola, L.I.


There's No Substitute for Peas Right Out of the Pod
FRESH peas are one of the delights of early summer.
But like a number of culinary treats, enjoying them requires some work.
They are labor-intensive: they must be shelled.
Some markets sell them already shelled, a convenience to be sure, but at the cost of some flavor.
The peas will be infinitely sweeter if they are purchased in the pod and shelled just before cooking.
There are recipes that suggest frozen peas as a substitute for fresh peas.
Although they may have a similar taste, the texture of fresh peas, cooked until tender, is usually more agreeable and not as mushy as the frozen variety.
As long as fresh peas are available, they will be superior.


Noted With Pleasure
The Talking Cure
If we are to repair our democratic institutions, William Greider suggests, the first thing we must do is to learn to talk to one another again.
This is from "Who Will Tell the People: The Betrayal of American Democracy" (Simon &amp; Schuster).


Jocks Around the Clock
Dancing at a disco is no longer the only way to get some exercise at 4 A.M.
World Gym, the ultra-hip health club on Lafayette Street in Manhattan, is planning to open a branch on the Upper West Side that will be open around the clock.
The gym, at 1926 Broadway, across from Lincoln Center, is to open in early July.
"It's 24 hours, five days a week; we are closing Friday and Saturday night," said Karen Wong, the manager of the new club.
"By chance, Capital Cities/ABC is a block away. We've gotten a huge response from them because they work around the clock. I don't know if we'll have aerobics classes at 2 in the morning, but the rest of the place will be open."


The Queen of Hearts
YOU'RE not likely to hear her order her staff to "banish the black, burn the blue, bury the beige." This, after all, is not Kay Thompson playing fashion editor in "Funny Face." This is Barbara D. Tober, and the only time she thinks pink is when she opens a packet of Sweet 'n Low.
Her prime color concern is wedding white, which befits the woman who is editor in chief of Bride's and Your New Home magazine (until last winter, simply plain old Bride's).
"There is no subject you can name, nothing you can show me, that I can't tell you where it will fit in the new magazine," Mrs.
Tober, her voice full of conviction and pride, said the other afternoon.
Her friendly challenge was made to a visitor to her roomy corner office on the sixth floor of the Conde Nast building on Madison Avenue.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
RIDICULOUS THEATRE: SCOURGE OF HUMAN FOLLY The Essays and Opinions of Charles Ludlam.
Edited by Steven Samuels.
Theatre Communications Group, cloth, $24.95; paper, $14.95.


Tokyo on Zero Dollars a Day
THE JAPANESE CHRONICLES
By Nicolas Bouvier.
Translated by Anne Dickerson.
Illustrated. 222 pp.
San Francisco: Mercury House.


Barbara Kruger: Cover Girl
Media junkies around town have been buzzing over the sudden flurry of magazine covers by Barbara Kruger.
First came Ms. in January, then Esquire in May, then Newsweek and The New Republic earlier this month -- all done in the artist's signature style, featuring provocative slogans etched in bold white letters on red banners, plastered over ambiguous black-and-white photographs.
The covers have sparked a rush of commentary -- not all of it favorable.
Charles Trueheart, writing in the Style section of The Washington Post, described the recent spate of Kruger covers as a "primitive and doggedly obnoxious graphic-design craze."


Perotspeak
The most urgent linguistic problem of the campaign for President of Henry Ross Perot is what to call his supporters.
The suffix
-ites
is the most familiar combining form, as
McGovernites
and
Nixonites
discovered in 1972; however, we have no
Bushites
-- personal followers of the President are more often called
Bushies
, on the analogy of
Yalies
and
preppies
-- and we don't hear often of
Clintonites
, or even
Clintonians
. (If the Democratic contender is elected, we'll hear a lot about
Clintonomics
.)


Old-Timers or Heroes, but Forever Mets
As 30 years of Mets passed before him, the thought occurred to Frank Cashen, the chief operating officer of the Mets, that it's best that the occasion bringing them together is no longer called Old-Timers' Night.
It's Heroes of Baseball Night.
Cashen considers this a good thing because he brought many of these people to New York.
If they are old-timers, what would that make him?
"I'd much rather be a hero," Cashen said.


From Suits of Silk to Seersucker, Cordero Still Wins
Angel Cordero Jr. rode down the homestretch at Belmont Park one more time yesterday to put a ceremonial and sentimental close to his career as a jockey after 32 years, 38,685 rides and 7,077 victories.
Then he changed from green-and-white jockey silks into a business suit and, with a sense of timing to match his sense of history, saddled the first winner in his new career as a trainer.


Why the Yanks Don't Make It Over There
A message to American anglophiles, particularly those who write plays: no matter how much you love Britain and the British theater, chances are good that the British won't like your work.
With increasing regularity in recent years, hit American plays are encountering resitance from critics and the public on this side of the Atlantic, buffeted by the belief that too much American writing is spineless, fey and obsessed with the domestic. (American musicals are another matter in a city whose major summer opening is the premiere of "Grand Hotel.")


The 90's Newest Uniform
The sartorial armor of the 90's has to be the double-breasted suit: not the traditional Savile Row double-breasted suit, punctiliously fitted, but a slouchy new jacket with long, wide lapels that dip low to the bottom button.
After decades of uncorralled fashion freedom, here's an image that exudes self-confidence and success.
This revival of the double-breasted classic signals a new age of conformity in men's clothes unknown since the gray flannel era of the 1950's.


Connecticut Investigating Accounting Firm's Role in Colonial Realty Collapse
The state Attorney General is investigating accusations that Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, one of the nation's largest accounting firms, helped cheat investors in the Colonial Realty Company, once Connecticut's biggest real-estate concern and now bankrupt.
The accusations were reported in articles in The Hartford Courant and forwarded to the State Board of Accountancy by lawyers for 4,000 investors who are suing Colonial and its accountants, lawyers and bankers for alleged fraud.


Buyers' Market
DESIGNERS CAN DESIGN.
THE PRESS CAN rave or rant.
But it is retailers who turn fashion into reality.
During the five show-packed days in April when New York designers and manufacturers present their fall collections, Seventh Avenue vibrates with tension and anticipation.
Prestige -- and, in some cases, economic survival -- is on the line.
More than ever, in these difficult times, designers depend on retailers to get their messages across.
And it is the retail executives' decisions -- and commitments of impressive sums of money -- that determine what will actually become available.


Andrea Fribush, Mitchell Feldman
Dr. and Mrs.
Ellis Fribush of Pittsfield, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Andrea Joyce Fribush to Dr.
Mitchell Jay Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Feldman of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Dr.
Fribush, 28 years old, is a resident in internal medicine at University Hospital in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received her M.D. from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is the cardiologist and practices internal medicine at Pittsfield Medical Associates Inc., a private medical practice in Pittsfield.
He is also the group's president.
Her mother, Joanna Fribush, is a member of the adjunct chemistry faculty at North Adams State College.


Tough Times In Foreign Jails
WHEN Malaysia began executing foreigners for certain narcotics offenses less than a decade ago, a diplomat in Kuala Lumpur told me a chilling story: One of the first foreigners to be hanged for drug trafficking was a naive young Australian, who apparently had been led to believe that if you fly first class your luggage is not inspected at customs.
All over the world, not only in countries where the narcotics laws are stiff and sentences severe, consular officials must deal with a depressing array of legal problems involving innocents, or not-so-innocents abroad.
In many if not most cases, local laws bar diplomats from giving substantial assistance to foreigners who get arrested, whatever the alleged offense.


Killers in the Mist: TV Nature Shows Grow Nastier
AMERICANS used to watch nature on television as presented by the likes of Walt Disney, who showed wildlife as cute and cartoonish, or Marlin Perkins, who went mano-a-paw with lions as a latter-day white hunter, minus the blood and gore.
Today viewers increasingly see nature in the raw, as more channels offer natural history films that reveal more of animals doing what comes naturally.
And what comes naturally includes large doses of violence and sex: lions eating their cubs; killer whales flailing their prey; hogs mating with close-up camera angles that leave nothing to the imagination.


Data Bank/June 14, 1992


Resolution Trust Suit Tests Condo Rules
The power of the Resolution Trust Corporation to sell condominium units without regard to the condominium association's rules is being tested in a suit in Dallas.
The case involves one unit in this small fishing village on an island in the Gulf of Mexico, just off the coast of Corpus Christi.
A condominium association here has resisted the corporation's efforts to sell the unit through its low- to moderate-income Affordable Housing Disposition Program.
The R.T.C. has responded with a suit.


Summer Season Prospect: 'A Good Mix'
FOR a change, Shakespeare's three witches, "withered midnight hags," are comely and youthful.
Carol Channing is to sing "Orestes's Funeral March," her first Broadway audition number.


Colin Cameron, 65, Hawaiian Who Led Pineapple Company
Colin Campbell Cameron, a descendant of missionaries to Hawaii who became a major resort developer and pineapple industry executive, died on Friday while swimming near his home in Spreckelsville on Maui.
He was 65 years old.
He was found unconscious in the ocean, and rescue workers said the apparent cause of death was a heart attack.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Real Estate section last Sunday with an article about Japanese investors in Manhattan misstated the current occupancy of an office building constructed by Mitsui Fudosan at 461 Fifth Avenue.
It is 97 percent leased, not 80 percent.


Immigrants Don't Take Jobs of the Poor
To the Editor:
On behalf of the New York State Task Force on New Americans, I take issue with "The Riots: Underclass vs. Immigrants" (Op-Ed, May 15) by Edward N. Luttwak of the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Mr.
Luttwak scapegoats immigrant communities in Los Angeles for the disorders that followed the verdict in favor of the four police officers who beat the motorist Rodney King.


Barbara Mather, John C. Cobb
Barbara Anne Mather and John Cleveland Cobb were married yesterday at the Prince George, Winyah, Episcopal Church in Georgetown, S.C.
The Rev.
Herman Hollerith 4th officiated.
Ms.
Mather Cobb, 31 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Wellesley College.
She received a master's degree in English from Rutgers University, where she is a doctoral student.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Mather of Ship Bottom, N.J.


Capra and the Common Man
To the Editor:
Judging from "Frank Capra: The Catastrophe of Success," by Joseph McBride, and the review by Barry Gewen (May 3), Frank Capra was guilty of two sins.
The lesser of the two was that he outlived his creativity.
This is not uncommon in the arts.
No less a light than Wordsworth wrote his best poetry before the age of 40.
Capra's greater sin by far, however, was that he disillusioned his liberal admirers by daring not to be one of them.


As Thousands Cheered
Stars were greeted, achievers were hailed and the worthy were helped.


All About/Camping; The Irresistible Call of the Not-So-Wild
At Yogi Bear's Jellystone Park campground in Luray, Va., an outdoor cooking pavilion is transformed into a dance floor most Saturday nights, where teen-agers bump and grind to the latest Top 40 hits.
Hayrides and cartoons are offered for the younger set, and Yogi himself is often on hand to press the flesh.
Half a dozen miles away, in Shenandoah National Park, it's another kind of camping experience.
Back-country campers hike deep into the wilderness where they eat side-by-side with white-tail deer and hope Yogi's real-life brethren don't pay them a visit when they turn in for the night.


Traffic Alert
Eighth Avenue between 15th and 18th streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. today for the Chelsea Eighth Avenue festival.


For the Right, TV Is Half the Battle
Marlon Riggs, a 35-year-old film maker, now has the unenviable distinction of having come under fierce attack from both sides of the right wing that have made television a primary target.
They are the religious right, which pounces on sexual permissiveness, a favorite target being any program that casts gay men or women in a less-than-diabolical light, and the political right, which levels charges of left-wing bias and elitism.
And one man's encounters with them are perhaps indicative of the larger spectacle of a quite serious turf war now being waged for nothing less than the whole of American popular culture.
Last year, Mr.
Riggs's documentary "Tongues Untied," a personal essay about being black and gay, a minority within a minority, was shown on "P.O.V.," a PBS series featuring independently produced films with strong viewpoints.
The film unleashed a storm of outrage in powerful right-wing circles, not least in the offices of both Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition.
The latter went to the trouble of putting together, for circulation in Congress and other power mills, a seven-minute tape of scenes from the film, which, out of context, thoroughly distorted Mr.
Riggs's intentions.


Topics of The Times; Politics, Distilled
How long does it take to distill political science down to the dimensions of a button or a bumper strip?
About a year, to judge by current evidence.
Last summer the Kettering Foundation published "Citizens and Politics: A View From Main Street," which reported painfully and painstakingly on the frustration and even anger felt by citizens about the political system.
E.
J.
Dionne Jr. developed similar themes in detail in his book "Why Americans Hate Politics."


Corrections
An article on May 10 about Alexandria, Va., misidentified a creek near which the city was founded.
A reader's letter, dated May 21, points out that it is Hunting Creek.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Rich Nations Offer Money, But Small Ones Raise Issues
RIO DE JANEIRO, June 13 --
In the parade of world leaders speaking at the Earth Summit, the voices of the great powers won the greatest attention, largely because of the dollar signs nestled in their texts.
But it was the smaller nations that often cast diplomacy aside to raise troubling questions about overpopulation, the flow of aid, and the inequity between rich and poor.


Mary Elizabeth Garrison and Sanjit Shah
Mary Elizabeth Garrison, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Garrison of Albion, Mich., was married yesterday in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., to Sanjit Shah, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shashi K. Shah of Rego Park, Queens.
Pundit Ram Patwardhan and the Rev.
Joel Gibson performed the joint Hindu-Episcopal ceremony at the Riverview, a restaurant.


Iowa State Players Under Investigation
Accepting expensive athletic clothing from an acquaintance could get three Iowa State basketball players in trouble with the National Collegiate Athletic Association, but the possible N.C.A.A. rules violation could be the least of the troubles facing guards RON BAYLESS and JUSTUS THIGPEN and forward HOWARD EATON.
According to the police in West Des Moines, the players' benefactor paid for the goods with stolen checks during a shopping spree on April 13, and if it is determined that the players knew the checks were stolen they will face criminal charges.


Corrections
A picture in Styles of The Times on May 31 with a report about the marriage of Jennifer Peyton Ware and Stephen Ellis carried an erroneous credit.
The photographer was Dick Luria.


The Gluttonous Grande Dame of the Garden
A LADYBUG landed on the window the other day.
Little did the speck of a creature know that it was being observed from inside the house.
An intimate look at this insect provided an opportunity to watch its morning ablutions, which included cleaning off its tiny legs and mouthparts.
Then just as quickly the ladybug lifted its wings to make an escape flight, never to be seen again.
This small insect is one of the most familiar and the one children popularized with the nursery poem:


Kassie Cundey, David Means Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Haigh Cundey of Essex Fells, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Lyn Cundey, to David Hammond Means Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Means of New Canaan, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Cundey, who is known as Kassie, is an account executive in advertising sales for YM magazine in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a stockbroker at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York.
Her mother, Katherine Cundey is a postdoctoral research associate at Rockefeller University.


Lessons of Rio: A New Prominence and an Effective Blandness
The Earth Summit, history's largest gathering of world leaders, is winding up after a fractious 12 days of diplomatic free-for-all among 178 nations.
A few clear lessons may already be emerging from the fracas.
One is the new-found prominence of the environment as an international issue, bidding to rank with economics and national security.


Children's Books
GRACE
By Jill Paton Walsh. 256 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $16. (Ages 10 and up)


Diaper Daze
The big diaper companies are adding to the chaos of having a baby.
Last week the Procter &amp; Gamble Company said it would begin selling a diaper twice as absorbent as its current model.
"This is a major invention," said Edwin L. Artzt, chairman of P.&amp;G.


Tech Notes; Putting Voters In Touch
With municipalities spending millions on new voting machines, one manufacturer has come up with a way to use the equipment more often than the few times a year elections are held.
Electronic Voting Systems Inc., a New York company, has built a voting machine from an I.B.M.
PS/2 personal computer.
The machine operates like any other I.B.M. personal computer but is also programmed to display a ballot on its screen.
On Election Day, the keyboard can be put away and voters register their choices by touching the computer screen, which is similar to the screens of automated bank teller machines.


New Michael Meets the Old Michael
Michael Jackson will confront his childhood self in a new commercial for Pepsi.
With the help of computer imaging, Mr.
Jackson, 33 years old, will be accompanied on the piano by a much younger and different-looking version of himself, according to a source who was involved in the project.
The effect could be quite shocking, considering the changes Mr.
Jackson has made to his appearance. .
In addition to having cosmetic surgery, Mr.
Jackson has apparently attempted to lighten the color of his skin.


Margaret Langan, Evan Ladouceur
Margaret Ann Langan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Langan of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Evan D. Ladouceur, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis F. Ladouceur of Flushing, Queens.
The Rev.
Stephen G. Kendrick officiated at the Universalist Church of West Hartford.
Ms.
Langan, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from Boston College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is to begin in August as an investment banker at Dillon, Read &amp; Company Inc. in New York.


Reeling Blazers Face Chicago Home Crowd
There will be an obligatory sixth game in the National Basketball Association finals, but why?
Even though the Portland Trail Blazers talked about the potential for a comeback after losing, 119-106, Friday night, it seems as improbable as stopping Michael Jordan.


Abroad at Home; Weakness And Shame
There are times in history when the government of a great country, confronted by evil, responds so weakly that its policy shames the nation.
So it was when Neville Chamberlain yielded to Hitler at Munich.
George Bush reached that point last week in his policy toward what was Yugoslavia.
As Serbian forces rained incendiary shells on the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, and its 400,000 blockaded residents faced starvation, the American President turned his back.
His weakness is our shame.


English Gardens
To the Editor: Readers of "Seeing Private English Gardens" (Travel Advisory, April 26) will be happy to know that the directory "Gardens of England and Wales: A Guide to Over 2,800 Gardens, the Majority of Which Are Not Normally Open to the Public" has a United States distributor.
It can be ordered for $10, plus $2.50 shipping from Green Shade, Box 547, Cape Neddick, Me. 03902-0547, telephone or fax (207) 363-6787.
We noticed this because we had just reviewed the book for the Reference Books Bulletin published in the American Library Association Booklist.
SANDY WHITELEY Editor, Reference Books Bulletin Chicago


At Work; New Questions About Arbitration
Like an investor who signs on with a broker, employees of stock and commodities exchanges and the National Association of Securities Dealers must agree to submit any grievances to an arbitration panel.
In both cases, the panel is typically dominated by people with industry ties, and people filing complaints have long grumbled that the process is stacked against them.
Now, with a rise in awareness of sexual harassment since the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas controversy last fall and with the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, an increase in the number of harassment and discrimination grievances is widely expected.
Critics say such cases are particularly inappropriate for the arbitration process.
Employment discrimination "is a complex area of law," said Richard M. Gelb, a securities litigator in Boston.
"Industry arbitrators know the industry, but they have no expertise in the area of employment discrimination. You're asking management to judge itself."


For Ballet Theater, Putting on a Good Show Is All
As American Ballet Theater enters its final week at the Metropolitan Opera House, it is clear that the season is ending on a very different note than expected.
Last month, halfway into this engagement, Jane Hermann announced that she did not wish to renew her contract as the company's director, a title she shares with Oliver Smith.
Any appraisal of Ballet Theater cannot ignore this development.
But neither should the season's performances and productions be neglected: Ms.
Hermann's imprint has been felt more strongly than ever during her three-year tenure.
The dancing this year reached a new peak, and the premieres were provocative, if not first-rate.


Special Tours On 3 Continents
The prices for the following special interest trips are for one person, based on double occupancy.
A 19-day tour of New Zealand that will focus on private and public gardens during spring down under is scheduled to begin Oct. 29 with Dr.
Helen Henke, an American gardening writer and broadcaster, as tour leader.
Both North and South Islands are on the itinerary, which includes a rhododendron festival, botanic gardens and national parks and displays of roses, magnolias and orchids.
After arrival in Auckland, the tour group will stay in hotels in Rotorua, Wellington, Christchurch, Mount Cook and other towns and for one night on farms in the Waikato region.
The cost of $3,685 includes round-trip air fare from the West Coast, accommodations, most meals, sightseeing, garden visits and tour bus.
Information: New Zealand Central Reservations Office, (800) 351-2323 or, in California, (800) 351-2317.


Running Away From Home
One dry July when I was 10 years old, I took it into my head to go to Niagara Falls.
The day was hot and I was restless, my usual passive-escape paths having been cut off as punishment for my having chanced upon and read a book called "Harem Nights." My mother, who was busy perusing a religious tract at the time, an activity that filled the better part of her hours, nodded goodbye absent-mindedly, and I took the Sea Beach train from Kings Highway in Bensonhurst to the Greyhound depot; 11 hours later I was there.
I rang the doorbell of the pen pal I had in mind to visit.
I had neglected to tell her I was coming.
No one answered.
Not surprised by this turn of events -- my life had not prepared me to rest assured in the efficacy of endeavor -- I turned around and came back home.


Results Plus
TENNIS Stich Gets By John McEnroe The defending Wimbledon champion, Michael Stich of Germany, beat John McEnroe, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3), yesterday to move into the final of the Continental Grass Court Championships in Rosmalen, the Netherlands.
He will play Jonathan Stark, a 22-year-old from Medford, Ore., who advanced to his first ATP Tour championship match with a 6-4, 7-6 (7-4) upset over eighth-seeded Michiel Schapers of the Netherlands. (AP) Edberg Loses to 81st-Ranked Player: Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan, ranked No. 81 in the world, stunned top-seeded and second-ranked Stefan Edberg, 1-6, 7-6 (8-6), 10-8, to reach the final of the Queen's Club grass-court tournament in London.
Matsuoka saved six match points -- two in the tie breaker and four at 5-6 in the third set -- en route to the biggest victory of his six-year career.
In the final, Matsuoka will meet Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, who beat Brad Gilbert, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4. (AP) Shriver Falls to Schultz: Brenda Schultz of the Netherlands, the sixth-seeded player, defeated No. 7 Pam Shriver, 6-4, 7-6 (9-7), in the semifinals of the grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England.
Unseeded Jenny Byrne of Australia cruised to a 6-3, 6-1 victory over 10th-seeded Jo Durie of Britain. (AP) GOLF Forsman Remains Steady in St.
Jude Dan Forsman continued his steady play in the third round of the $1.1 million St.
Jude Classic yesterday, shaving three more strokes off par for a round of 68 and a one-shot lead in Memphis.
One shot off Forsman's 15-under score of 198 through 54 holes were hot-shooting Mike Sullivan, Jay Haas, Rick Fehr and Jim McGovern.
Sullivan, who matched the course record with a nine-under 62, and Haas, who had a 64, kept the pressure on Forsman throughout the round.
Fehr shot 66 and McGovern 67. (AP) Snead Leads Seniors: J. C. Snead retained his five-shot lead at the Senior Players Championship after shooting an even-par 72 in the third round at Dearborn, Mich.
Dave Stockton and Bob Charles were his nearest challengers at the T.P.C. of Michigan, a 6,976-yard course on the outskirts of Detroit.
Stockton shot a 70 and Charles had a 72 for a three-round total of 208.
Snead, seeking his first victory in three years on the Senior circuit, was a record 13-under at the halfway point in the tournament. (AP) DRAGON-BOAT RACING U.S.
Teams Win Opening Heats The United States men's and women's dragon-boat teams won their opening heats as the 17th annual Hong Kong International Dragon Boat Festival got under way yesterday along the Tsimshatsui waterfront of Victoria Harbour.
Twenty-nine nations are competing this year in the Hong Kong races, which serve as the world championships for these 40-foot-long, one-ton teak boats.
Up to 20 paddlers and a steerer propel the craft.
The United States men's team beat five other teams to advance to today's semifinals.
The American team, which trains in Philadelphia, had the slowest qualifying time of the four heats, 2 minutes 38.46 seconds.
The United States women's team, from San Diego, won its five-boat heat in the second-fastest time of the day for the women, 2 minutes 49.76 seconds, to advance directly to today's final.
ROWING Harvard and Boston University Repeat Harvard won its sixth men's national collegiate rowing championship yesterday with a driving finish to nose out Dartmouth on Harsha Lake in East Fork State Park, 30 miles east of Cincinnati.
The Boston University women's crew successfully defended its title.
Harvard finished the 2,000-meter race in a course-record time of 5:33.97, beating its own mark of 5:35.09 set in 1987.
Next were Dartmouth, 5:34.28; Pennsylvania, the defending champion, 5:37.91; Cornell, 5:41.03; Navy, 5:41.61; Princeton, 5:52.57; and Washington, 5:55.78.
The Boston University women finished a boat length and three seats ahead of Cornell in 6:28.70. (AP) BOXING Wamba Keeps Cruiserweight Title Anclet Wamba, a 28-year-old from France, retained his World Boxing Council cruiserweight title by stopping Andrei Rudenko of Russia in the fifth round of a scheduled 12-round fight last night in Paris.
Rudenko (10-2-1), 21, was seeking to become the first Russian boxer to hold a professional world title.
Wamba, a native of Congo, is 28-1. (AP) BOWLING Ferraro Is Best in Active West Dave Ferraro won his eighth Professional Bowlers Association title, beating David Traber, 217-202, yesterday in the championship round of the $125,000 Active West Open in Riverside, Calif.
Ferraro collected the $18,000 winner's share, increasing his earnings this year to $110,175. (AP) SOCCER Australia Edges U.S.
Team  Warren Spink's header with 5 minutes 28 seconds remaining lifted Australia to a 1-0 victory over the United States national team in Orlando, Fla., last night.
The United States was without six players who last week helped tie Italy for the U.S.
Cup championship.
Three of the six have returned to their respective European teams. (AP)


Washington Journal; Monument to Jewish Culture Makes a Comeback
With its boarded-up windows and weed-infested yard, the abandoned stone building on lower 16th Street in downtown Washington looks more like a forgotten mausoleum than a monument to the capital's once-thriving Jewish community.
But members of a new generation of young Jews, who are replacing the thousands of an older generation who fled to the suburbs, hope to change that.
They plan not merely to give the old Jewish community center a facelift but to restore it to its role as a social and cultural focal point for Washington's Jews.


JUNE 7-13: Threat Withdrawn; Los Angeles Police Chief Makes His Departure Official
It took a riot and the resulting national disgrace for the Los Angeles Police Department, but when even longtime political supporters stood up to Chief Daryl F. Gates last week, he filed his retirement papers, backing off from a threat to stay on in his job.
Since the videotaped police beating of Rodney G. King in March 1991, Chief Gates had defied attempts by Mayor Tom Bradley and other political leaders to remove him, even after they named his successor, Willie L. Williams.
A week ago he suddenly said, "I'll retire when I want to retire," a statement he later characterized as "bluffing."


Two Musicians on the Lam in 'Sugar'
IT takes a masterful director and choreographer to transform a disposable musical into an engaging one.
That is just the trick Thommie Walsh has worked with "Sugar" at the Westchester Broadway Theater here.
Of course, it is tempting to overrate a musical comedy in the traditional Broadway mold if only because it represents a bygone era.
There was no shortage of American musicals when "Sugar" cropped up 20 years ago, and one's appreciation of it tends to be more retrospective than realistic.


Q and A
Religious Hostelries in Paris
Q.
Are there convents or monasteries in Paris where visitors can stay cheaply? -- Virginia Ginty, Bayside, Queens
A.
There are a number of convents and monasteries in or near Paris that accept guests who wish to take part in a religious retreat -- prayer and counseling, dining with the religious community, perhaps periods of silence -- rather than merely wanting inexpensive lodging.
However, a few religious organizations (in France this almost always means Catholic) around Paris operate guesthouses, called foyers or accueils.
A list of of religious organizations that offer guesthouses and retreats throughout France can be found in the Guide St.-Christophe.
It is available for 100 francs (about $19), from Association St.-Christophe, 277 Rue St.
Jacques, 75005 Paris, France.


City Official Quits Work For President
Saying he "felt morally compelled," Borough President Guy V. Molinari of Staten Island has resigned from the Bush-Quayle re-election campaign to protest what he called the Justice Department's refusal to look at new evidence in the case of an immigration officer convicted of civil-rights violations.
"It's not because of my lack of affection for George Bush, but for some of his appointees," Mr.
Molinari, a former Republican congressman, said yesterday.


Classic M*A*S*H*, $9,995
Here's the real thing: the same basic design, with modifications, as the original Army Jeep.
The 1992 Jeep Wrangler 4WD is basic -- don't expect power steering or even AM/FM for the price.
Manhattan Jeep-Eagle's price makes it the only 1992 four-wheel-drive convertible around for under $10,000.
Young first-time buyers love it, and you do still get sportiness, practicality and high spirits.


Streetscapes: The Empire State Building; A Red Reprise for a '31 Wonder
In the biggest window replacement ever authorized by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, more than 6,300 new windows are going into New York's tallest landmark, the Empire State Building.
The new glass and frames give the 1931 building an airy, fresh appearance.
The frames are also are a bit of a surprise because they are red, an unexpected contrast with the gray and silver skyscraper.
An additional surprise is that research has shown that the original window frames were that color.


Trying to Preserve an Inner-City Parish
ST.
JOHN'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH here celebrates its 145th anniversary this year, but as is the case in many urban parishes across New Jersey, its long-term survival is uncertain.
The migration to the suburbs, waning church attendance and costly maintenance have led to the closing of inner-city churches throughout the state.
The Rev.
Katrina Martha Swanson, who has been at St.
John's for 13 years, feels the pressure.
In an interview, she spoke of the difficulties and rewards of ministering to her congregation, the impact of the recession and unemployment on her parishioners and her concern that urban churches are being sacrificed to the interests of suburban churches.


Amy Haig, James Wagner
Amy Dame Buckingham Haig, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Armen C. Haig of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to James Peter Wisloh Wagner, the son of Frank Wagner and Gay Wagner, both of Northport, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Bishop performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Wagner, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon and president of the medical board at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y., where her mother, Dr.
Johanna R. Haig, is an anesthesiologist.


The Executive Computer; Not Ready for Windows or OS/2? Here Are Training Wheels
Windows is wildly popular and OS/2 is technically impressive, but Norton Desktop for DOS may turn out to be the most important new software of the year for the average PC user.
Norton Desktop for DOS allows owners of older machines to reap many of the ease-of-use advantages of Microsoft Windows without having to spend lots of money on more powerful hardware and software.


THE GUIDE
DISABLED PEOPLE'S RIGHTS
"Lifetime Commitment: A Portrait of Karen Thompson" will be shown on Friday at 8 P.M. at the Educational Center for the Arts, 55 Audubon Street, New Haven.
Proceeds from the suggested donation of $5 will be used to add more information to a 33-minute documentary on a lesbian's battle to win care of her disabled partner.


Off Camera, a Decathlon Rivalry
Up there on the television screen, in living color, they seem like actors.
Both are blessed with terrific looks, wondrous physiques, an abundance of athletic talent and the kind of presence that would make a New York advertising agent spin in his loafers for a second peek.
But they are not actors.
It's Dan and Dave.
You've seen them, perhaps even asked yourself, as the commercials suggest: Who is the world's greatest athlete?


Nirvana-bes Awaiting Fame's Call
The annual new music seminar is a carnival for cynics, a meat market, a vent for self-righteousness, an orgy of backslapping.
It's also a glimmer of hope for unknowns, a glimpse at professional secrets and a whiff of invigorating anarchy.
This year, the paradoxes should get sharper because the scent of big money is in the air.
If someone could copyright the phrase "the next Nirvana" before the seminar starts on Wednesday, the owner could rake in a lot of nickels.
The 13th yearly seminar, which runs through next Sunday, will offer panel discussions and exhibits by day and a surfeit of club and concert performances by night.
It is simultaneously a music-business convention and an educational event, open to anyone who can pay $215 (the college radio-staff rate) to $380 at the last minute.


Fast Track


SALSA NOVA
Salsa has entered its Salad Days.
For a millennium, salsa was a Mexican staple, a pounded or pureed substance made of peppers or tomatoes or both, something between a sauce and a condiment, used either way.
But now it has been reborn into a wide variety of ethnic permutations, full of youthful freshness, whimsy and verve.
The change came slowly.
After generations of obscurity on grocery shelves north of the border, last year salsa outsold ketchup in the United States.
Even as it became the king of American condiments, salsa was changing.
It was taking in seasonings from India, Asia and the Mediterranean.
It was opening its ranks to cucumbers, onions, mangoes and sweet corn.
Nearly
everything
seemed to have salsa potential.
And the stuff kept getting chunkier. (It happens to the best of kings.)


Watergate's Shadow Lies Across the Land
THIS week marks the 20th anniversary of the most famous botched burglary in history, an event that led to furious debate and then provided the last national occasion of general satisfaction with the government and the system.
But in the 18 years since President Richard M. Nixon resigned after revelations of the Watergate burglary cover-up and a vast array of political crimes, the national watchword that "the system worked" has been succeeded largely by a dissatisfied aftertaste with the consequences of Watergate and the steps taken in reaction to it.


More Than Water Can Be Shallow
To the Sports Editor:
The profile on Olympic swim team member Nelson Diebel ("The Good, Bad and Ugly All Rolled Into One," The Times, May 27) is an interesting but disappointing piece about a shallow young man who is the product of a public that all too often places athletes, regardless of their true values and character, on some kind of pedestal.
It is questionable as to whether Diebel is a "productive member of society," as he has yet to function in the real world.


Stories in Stone Along the Lower Seine
DURING the final stretch of its 482-mile course from Burgundy to the English Channel, the Seine meanders extravagantly, abandoning any vestige of the rigor it displays in its stately passage through Paris.
Twisting like a coiled snake through the fertile countryside between the capital and the coast, the river has carved out escarpments as dramatic as the Palisades.
It is this landscape of wooded inland cliffs and looping river bends that stands at the heart of Normandy and provides the backdrop to the magnificent castles and abbeys of the area.
The Seine carried the Normans inland.
They arrived, in the ninth century, as Viking barbarians from Denmark, Norway and Iceland bent on little more than plunder.
Journeying from the Channel in groups of about 60 men aboard their 75-foot drakkars, they displayed a ruthlessness and cunning that quickly subjugated the area.
The steep river escarpments provided ideal natural fortifications.
By 911, their position was so entrenched that the French King, Charles III, was forced into a treaty ceding the land around the mouth of the Seine and what is now the city of Rouen to the Northmen.
Thus was created the Duchy of Normandy under its first Duke, Rollo.


Impact of Zoning Is Pretested on Computers
INTANGIBLE yet three-dimensional, a vast new model of New York City is being construct-ed building by building, byte by byte, in the Envi-ronmental Simulation Center at the New School for Social Research.
Although the center has been open only five months, it is already being used in an unusual joint effort by some long-time antagonists.
The Real Estate Board of New York, the Civitas organization, the American Institute of Architects and the city's Department of Planning -- not all of whom are accustomed to working cooperatively -- are exploring whether the future of the Upper East Side can be plotted and debated electronically before it takes irrevocable form in steel and concrete.


Japanese Debate Sending Troops Overseas


Designers Deserve The Spotlight, Too
To the Editor:
How thrilling it was to find not one but two friends nominated for Tony Awards this season.
Having worked with Susan Stroman and Faith Prince on as many shows, it's great to see them get the recognition they deserve.


A New Hotel Is a Symbol of Hope for Beirut
Five years after the Commodore Hotel here was ransacked, looted and bombed by gunmen, work started recently on rebuilding it.
The crunch of heavy machinery echoed through the area as workers started to tear down the old shell-pocked seven-story structure, once a safe haven and mainstay for journalists covering the Lebanese civil war.


Biding Time in the Secretarial Pool
Jill McCorkle used to compare writing to singing in the shower: "something I'd do for personal satisfaction, but never as a career," she explained in a telephone interview from Framingham, Mass., where she was staying during a publicity tour for her new book, "Crash Diet." Ms.
McCorkle, who is from Lumberton, N.C., began to take her craft more seriously after graduating from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, where she took a job as a secretary in the medical school.
"I knew if a position to teach writing became available I'd get a chance at it," she said.
"My former professors were still around."
The clerical pool changed Ms.
McCorkle's life: it enabled her to enter academia (she has taught creative writing at both her alma mater and Tufts, and she will do so at Harvard in the fall), it introduced her to her husband (then a medical student) and it gave her time to write.
"Crash Diet," her fifth book, is her first short-story collection.


Letters Recalling A Sad Past
THE Stamps column of March 22, on philatelic aspects of Nazi anti-Semitism, attracted a great deal of reader mail.
One note solved a mystery, several chronicled other hatreds, another offered hope.
The column described decrees that required Jews in Nazi Germany to use the names Sara or Israel so that they would be recognizable, thus making it easier to round up Jews for deportation to death camps.


'GRAY'S ANATOMY'
Beware the physician who does not wish his patient to have a second opinion.
Beware of the doctor who fails to explain, in terms understandable to the patient, the patient's problem and the risks and benefits of further observation or treatment.
Spalding Gray used good judgment when he sought another opinion.


Pressure Beats Out Pleasure for Krabbe
Katrin Krabbe had hoped for a respite today.
She had hoped that familiar surroundings, banner-waving friends and unimposing opposition would make her return to the track considerably more pleasurable than the last four months have been.
Instead, Krabbe discovered that, even in her hometown, there is no running away from her recent past or her problems.


There's No Substitute for Peas Right Out of the Pod
FRESH peas are one of the delights of early summer.
But like a number of culinary treats, enjoying them requires some work.
They are labor-intensive: they must be shelled.
Some markets sell them already shelled, a convenience to be sure, but at the cost of some flavor.
The peas will be infinitely sweeter if they are purchased in the pod and shelled just before cooking.
There are recipes that suggest frozen peas as a substitute for fresh peas.
Although they may have a similar taste, the texture of fresh peas, cooked until tender, is usually more agreeable and not as mushy as the frozen variety.
As long as fresh peas are available, they will be superior.


The Gluttonous Grande Dame of the Garden
A LADYBUG landed on the window the other day.
Little did the speck of a creature know that it was being observed from inside the house.
An intimate look at this insect provided an opportunity to watch its morning ablutions, which included cleaning off its tiny legs and mouthparts.
Then just as quickly the ladybug lifted its wings to make an escape flight, never to be seen again.
This small insect is one of the most familiar and the one children popularized with the nursery poem:


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
JOSEPH E. JOHNSTON A Civil War Biography. By Craig L. Symonds. Norton, $29.95.


Alexandra Curran, Peter H. Jennison
Mary Anna Abberley of New Canaan, Conn., and D. Edward Curran of Villanova, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra John Curran, to Peter Howard Jennison, a son of Philip D. Jennison of New York and Elizabeth H. McLane of London.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Curran, 30 years old, is an art director at Jan Krukowski &amp; Company, a promotional and graphics design company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.


Wall Street; African Development Bank Gets Mixed Ratings
The credit markets should be hearing about the African Development Bank in the weeks ahead -- some good news, some not so good.
Some of the not-so-good hit last week, when Fitch Investors Service put the bank's yen-denominated subordinated bonds on alert, "with negative implication."
Fitch cited competing capital demands in "the post-Communist era." The senior bonds issued by the institution, a regional version of the World Bank, carry a triple-A rating from Standard &amp; Poor's, and its subordinated debt has a double-AA rating from Moody's, Duff &amp; Phelps and -- so far -- Fitch.


Cheated Pet Owners May Run Cemetery
An agreement has been struck that may allow pet owners defrauded by a Long Island pet cemetery to take over the cemetery and run it as a nonprofit corporation.
On Friday, the owners of the Long Island Pet Cemetery in the Suffolk County village of Middle Island signed a stipulation in which they agreed to end efforts to contest seizure of the cemetery by Federal authorities.


The Gluttonous Grande Dame of the Garden
A LADYBUG landed on the window the other day.
Little did the speck of a creature know that it was being observed from inside the house.
An intimate look at this insect provided an opportunity to watch its morning ablutions, which included cleaning off its tiny legs and mouthparts.
Then just as quickly the ladybug lifted its wings to make an escape flight, never to be seen again.
This small insect is one of the most familiar and the one children popularized with the nursery poem:


Spain Aims for a Competitive Edge in a Unified Europe
Spain has had ample reason to boast that it is the most pro-European of European nations.
After all, since this country joined the European Community in 1986, huge dollops of capital from abroad have swiftly transformed it from a forgotten economic backwater into a new land of opportunity.
What's even more appealing is that this happened painlessly.
Community development assistance was more than matched by new foreign investment in both factories and the stock market, while protectionist barriers kept outside competition at bay.
And the economy promptly began growing by close to 5 percent a year.


Miss Wardenburg, Mr. Fosburgh
Elizabeth Blair Wardenburg, the daughter of Frederic A. C. Wardenburg 4th of Seattle and Mrs.
Walter S. Rowland of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday in Greenville, Del., to James Henry Edmondson Fosburgh, a son of Liza Fosburgh of Cherry Plain, N.Y., and the late Pieter W. Fosburgh.
The Rev.
Adam Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred.
Mrs.
Fosburgh, 28 years old, is a third-year medical student at Yale University.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is a family social worker in Seattle.
Her stepfather is the assistant general counsel of Hercules Inc., the aerospace and chemical manufacturing company, in Wilmington.


The Executive Life; And No One Mentions The Many Mosquitoes
Slaving away in the shining towers of commerce, trapped in tailored suits and ties, in stockings and silk blouses, lurk the souls of summer campers.
It should be noted, in all fairness, that these business people do not necessarily spend office hours reliving their carefree youth, but the slightest inquiry is rewarded with vivid, often musical, memories.
"Greylock Camp under skies so blue," warbled James Gordon, a Houston businessman who spent three years at Greylock Camp for Boys in Massachusetts in the late 50's.
In 1989, Mr.
Gordon was part of a family group that sold its jewelry business to the Zale Corporation for $312 million.
But never mind Zale; Mr.
Gordon is far more interested in explaining how the Red and Gray Teams competed in the Greylock Olympics.
"Now that was a big thing," he said.


O'Connor Leads March On Abortion
Taking his anti-abortion stance to the streets, John Cardinal O'Connor yesterday led 2,500 marchers down Lexington Avenue, speaking only the words of the rosary or singing hymns, while about 800 abortion-rights demonstrators noisily followed, waving signs and shouting "Shame, shame!"
Cardinal O'Connor, once of the most influential Catholic leaders in the nation, was barely visible in the knot of police and security guards that surrounded him as the crowd made its way to an abortion clinic on East 30th Street.
He said at a Mass before the march that the police had received a telephoned death threat against him the night before.


Transplant Learns Los Angeles the Hard Way
Michael Horowicz, a transplanted New York television news producer who joined KCBS-TV in Hollywood in 1990, says he "left New York for some peace and quiet." He and his wife, Jane Velez-Mitchell, a former news anchor for WCBS-TV in New York, settled in to life in the comparatively slow lane.
Then, in the wake of the Rodney G. King verdict last month, came the riots.


A Temptation to Resist on Disability Insurance . . .
To the Editor:
"Saving on Disability Insurance" (May 24) raises several important issues concerning the purchase of "low-load" disability insurance.
But the article failed to address a crucial pitfall.


Cuomo Tries to Mend Frayed Relations to L.I.
As the great engines of government began to throttle down in the far-off State Capitol, there was Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, in a beige rain hat and white paper booties, stalking blobs of renegade oil on a drizzly, storm damaged Long Island beach.
"We can use more people to pick up the blobs," Mr.
Cuomo declared, surveying what turned out to be modest pollution on a three-mile stretch of beach.
As he walked, he offered an extemporaneous discourse on the legal definition of erosion, culled from a long-remembered legal brief.


In the Big City, A Little Pond And a Big Bullfrog
WHEN the nights are hot in Brooklyn and the bullfrog in Clinton Hill feels lonely, he cries out from his pond for a mate.
Actually, it's Ken Druse's pond, but the mail-order bullfrog doesn't know that.
He just sings manfully, hopefully, all night long. (Lonely bull frogs get so loud that a neighbor down the street drained her pond. Mr. Druse would never do such a thing.)
"I love my pond," Mr. Druse said rather wistfully. "I wish I'd made it bigger."


Capra and the Common Man
To the Editor:
Your review of Joseph McBride's biography of Frank Capra makes much of Capra's decline in the 1950's and 60's.
However, it should be noted that Frank Capra's contemporaries suffered similar fates: Leo McCarey, Gregory La Cava, Frank Borzage, King Vidor, George Stevens and Mitchell Leisen, to varying degrees, were all victims of the demise of the old Hollywood studio system and perhaps creative burnout.


Perotlogia
To the Editor:
In "Perotxysms" (editorial, June 9), your effort to remove the prospect of future plays on the name Perot by covering the full spectrum of possibilities, you neglect to include one that may epitomize Ross Perot's strategy for restructuring a large, profligate democracy badly in need of repair: perotstroika.
JONATHAN W. LYON Kew Gardens Hills, Queens, June 9, 1992


POSTINGS: Bridgehampton Track; A Speedway on the Block
After a turbulent decade with an uncertain future, the 518-acre Bridgehampton Race Circuit speedway is to go on the auction block Tuesday.
The 2.85-mile track is on Millstone Road, not far from Little Peconic Bay, on the East End of Long Island.
Sotheby's International Realty, which is to conduct the auction, estimated the value of the parcel at between $3.5 million and $5 million.
"I think it is a very real possibility that the track will remain open," said Stuart N. Siegel, president and managing director of Sotheby's realty subsidiary.
"Another feasible solution is to put in a golf course." The property could be subdivided into 114 residential lots and an application has been submitted to Southampton Town.
But Mr.
Siegel said that was done more to help buyers assess potential value than to prescribe a course of development.


Benilde Little, Clifford Virgin 3d
Benilde Elease Little, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Little of Newark, was married yesterday to Clifford Anderson Virgin 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford Virgin Jr., of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The Rev.
Eugene Lowe Jr., an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Park Savoy Restaurant in Florham Park, N.J.
The bride, 33 years old, is the senior editor of arts and entertainment for Essence magazine in New York.
She graduated from Howard University.
Her father is a retired materials coordinator for General Motors in Linden, N.J.
Her mother, Clara Little, is on the board of trustees of the Newark Health Center and is a commissioner of the rent-control board there.


Miss Colburn, Mr. Hunnewell
Clarissa Haffner Colburn, the daughter of Mrs.
I.
W.
Colburn of Manchester, Mass., and the late Mr.
Colburn, was married yesterday to Walter Hunnewell Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hunnewell of Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Frederick Phinney performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Beverly Farms, Mass.
Mrs.
Hunnewell, 31 years old, is a consultant at Cambridge Associates in Boston, financial consultants to nonprofit groups.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her late father was an architect in Chicago.


Business Diary/June 7-12
COMPANIES In the Failure to Balance the Budget, Who Gains? Who Loses?


This Does Not Compute, Cry Fans
After four grueling days of trials, the United States Olympic boxing team is beginning to take shape.
Eric Griffin, the light flyweight from New Orleans; Sergio Reyes, a bantamweight from Fort Worth, Tex., and Danell Nicholson, a heavyweight from Chicago, were three of six fighters who assured themselves today of spots in the Olympic boxoffs in Phoenix on June 27 and 28.


Couple's Swing: The Big Easy
If Fred Couples wins the 92d United States Open, which begins Thursday at Pebble Beach in California, he will be be completing one of the greatest sustained 12 months of golf in the last 30 years: He would have two major championships, seven North American victories over all, and a run of top-six finishes equal to the most consistent years of Palmer, Nicklaus, Miller and Watson.
But no matter what happens at Pebble, Couples, like every significant player, has already contributed the identifying emblem of his swing, a hitting style that will be remembered as raw, electrifying and elegant all at the same time.


New Kremlin Team Raises Questions on Yeltsin's Aim
The introduction of a tough troika of former Soviet industrial managers into Boris N. Yeltsin's Government in the past two weeks has stirred a new round of speculation about the Russian President's true intentions.
Mr.
Yeltsin has argued that the managers, all with solid track records both in industry and in reform politics, were needed to bring a critical economic sector into the Government as it moves toward the complex next stage of privatization and conversion.


Ellen Lederman, Thomas LeFevre
Drs.
Susan and Peter Lederman of New Providence, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ellen Louise Lederman, to Thomas John LeFevre, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald R. LeFevre of Westminster, Vt.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lederman, 27 years old, is an investment analyst at the International Finance Corporation in Prague.
She graduated summa cum laude from Cornell University and received a master's degree in management from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a master's in public affairs from Princeton University.
Her mother is a professor of public administration and the director of the Master of Public Administration program at Kean College of New Jersey in Union.
Her father is a corporate vice president at Roy F. Weston Inc., an environmental engineering consulting concern in Edison, N.J.


Chasing Bugs in the Electronic Village
I COULDN'T WAIT TO BUY MICROSOFT WORD for Windows -- rumored to be the new Cuisinart, Mack truck and Swiss Army knife of word-processing software, full-featured, powerful and, for a writer, the ultimate time-saving device.
I was writing a long book, and I wanted the best.
One day in January 1990, I finally got to tear open a software box bigger than some computers, and out it came.
The world's pre-eminent software manufacturer had spent roughly as long developing this word processor as the Manhattan Project had spent cooking up the atomic bomb, but secrecy had not been quite as airtight.
For more than a year, Microsoft had been leaking juicy tidbits to its waiting army of trade journalists, computer consultants and corporate purchasers.
Word for Windows (a.k.a. Winword or WfW) would be Wysiwyg (the standard acronym for What You See Is What You Get) -- that is, it would display page layouts and typefaces with high fidelity to the final printed product.
It would let users work with nine documents on the screen at once.
It would have a macro language -- a way to spend hours writing mini-programs to streamline all those little chores that can suck up milliseconds of a writer's time.


Solution to Wasteful Lawsuits Becomes a Problem
A FEDERAL procedural rule intended to stamp out groundless lawsuits and frivolous legal arguments has become in practice a weapon wielded most frequently against lawyers for plaintiffs in civil rights and discrimination cases.
This week the procedure, known as Rule 11, will be re-examined for the first time in a decade by a rulemaking committee of the policy arm of the Federal judiciary.
But many lawyers believe the outcome will not alleviate the situation for plaintiffs and their lawyers, against whom, studies have shown, Rule 11 has been invoked more often than against defendants and their lawyers.
In 1983, changes to Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure made it easier for judges to impose heavy sanctions on offending lawyers.
They eliminated a "pure-heart, empty-head" defense that permitted lawyers to avoid sanctions by asserting that they had not inquired into the merits of their case.
The changes were intended to punish lawyers who filed claims not for the purpose of redressing their clients' injuries, but to use the system to harass enemies through costly lawsuits, endless motions and fact-finding fishing expeditions.


Commercial Property: Downtown Brooklyn; Planning Strategies for a New Retail Environment
WHEN Alan Frisher decided to expand his health-food store last year, in the middle of a recession, people wondered if he might have overdosed on his own vitamins.
"Everyone thought I was crazy," he said, "But I thought if any area is going to come out of the recession, it will be downtown Brooklyn." He based his optimism on the explosion of new commerical development in the area in the last few years.


China Looks to Party Of Crown Princes
To the Editor:
The Chinese are not without a degree of delight in watching Deng Xiaoping's children grow in power ("As Deng Ages, China Watches His Children," news article, May 28), if only because the younger Dengs all favor more rapid change.
It's an open secret that the Chinese leader's closest advisers are his own children and they exert considerable influence on his thinking.


Members Only
ON Saturday morning in Bridgehampton, L.I., John E. Toffolon, like a lot of executives in America, is playing golf.
Dressed in a white tennis shirt and khaki shorts, not the plaids and pastels that distinguish traditional golf havens and perplex the rest of the world, he addresses the ball on the first tee at the new Atlantic Golf Club.
Mr.
Toffolon strikes a serious pose, seems to visualize a lesson and swings.
Unfortunately, it's a crummy shot, and he utters one of the many expletives often heard on a golf course.
Mr.
Toffolon, who was the chief financial officer of the First Boston Corporation and is now forming his own investment banking firm, freely admits that he is obsessed with golf, and he is, to be fair, a respectable player, especially considering he has only been at it for three years. (Most of the time, he's a low 90's kind of guy. He'll
say
he shot an 89, but you know how it is.)


One Man's Passion for the Ceramics of Korea
Over a thousand years, Korean potters mastered the subtlety of celadon, the expressiveness of stoneware and the dynamic graphics possible on porcelain.
Virtually unknown to Americans until recently, these appealing idiosyncrasies are revealed in "Korean Ceramics From the Ataka Collection," an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, through July 19.
The show's 114 vessels, produced from the 12th to the 19th centuries, range in style from the refined to the rough.
Working from Chinese precedents, Korean ceramists simplified the shapes, thinned the glazes and decorated their versions with bolder images.


Buying Tools a Challenging Task
ACQUIRING a useful assortment of tools can be a challenge for first-time homeowners having no experience in home repair.
Overall, the best advice is not to buy any tools until one has a specific need for them.
A flexible steel tape measure, the kind that retracts into a plastic or metal case about four inches square, is certainly among the most important tools.
And if one obeys the carpenter's golden rule for avoiding mistakes -- that is, measure twice and cut once -- it follows that one will use a tape measure twice as often as virtually any other tool.
A 12- or 16-foot tape is the most practical.
Regardless of length, it should be at least three-quarters of inch wide so that it can be extended several feet without bending.
To get a bonus, choose a tape measure with carpentry information, like nail, screw and lumber sizes, printed on the back.


Prune, Pinch
Finish pruning lilacs and spring flowering trees.
Remove any dead or diseased wood from dogwood trees.
Do not prune summer or fall flowering shrubs, because blooms will be lost.
Set mower three inches high, water lawn an inch a week (including rain) and don't fertilize until fall.


There's No Substitute for Peas Right Out of the Pod
FRESH peas are one of the delights of early summer.
But like a number of culinary treats, enjoying them requires some work.
They are labor-intensive: they must be shelled.
Some markets sell them already shelled, a convenience to be sure, but at the cost of some flavor.
The peas will be infinitely sweeter if they are purchased in the pod and shelled just before cooking.
There are recipes that suggest frozen peas as a substitute for fresh peas.
Although they may have a similar taste, the texture of fresh peas, cooked until tender, is usually more agreeable and not as mushy as the frozen variety.
As long as fresh peas are available, they will be superior.


Report Says Energy Dept. Collects Information on Some Americans
The inspector general of the Energy Department says that the agency routinely disseminates "intelligence information" on United States citizens and hired a Government contractor to take photographs of protesters at a nuclear testing site in Nevada.
In a report issued this week, the inspector general, John C. Layton, said the department "routinely retains and disseminates" intelligence information on United States citizens without getting approval from the Attorney General.
Federal agencies are supposed to get such approval before collecting intelligence on United States citizens or groups composed mainly of American citizens.


Wild Youth, Angry Police, and Shots in Newark
There was, perhaps, a certain inevitability to it all.
For months, the police in this troubled industrial city chafed at legal restraints that kept them from controlling youths who, mostly for fun, stole about 40 cars a night, screaming through darkened streets doing "doughnuts" at deserted intersections and ramming police cruisers to explode their air bags.
Hampered by restraints prohibiting them from high-speed chases and prevented, because most of the thieves are juveniles, from imposing strict penalties on those caught, the police seethed in frustration.


Psst! House For Sale
Looking for the perfect place to discuss stock tips this summer?
The Southampton, L.I., home of Edward R. Downe Jr. has been on the market for more than a month.
Mr.
Downe is the socially connected businessman who was charged with insider trading and pleaded guilty June 4 to two related criminal charges.
The house, on 3.1 acres on Ox Pasture Road in the estate section of the village, includes a tennis court and a pool house.
It is listed with Sotheby's International Realty in Southampton.
The asking price is $3.5 million.


THE 1992 CAPMAIGN: Voters; Words on Bush's Lips in '88 Now Stick in Voters' Craw
Fed up with politics and politicians, many Americans have seized on one catch phrase as a symbol of their disgust, repeating it over and over like a sarcastic mantra, "Read my lips: No new taxes."
In interviews with hundreds of voters around the country in the last five months, the slogan, which was the bedrock of George Bush's 1988 campaign for President, was uttered time and again by voters angered not so much that their taxes had increased as by their belief that Mr.
Bush had lied to them, breaking not a routine promise but a sacred compact.


New Congressional District Joins Queens to the County
WESTCHESTER has lost the distinction it shared with only a few counties of having at least one Congressional district entirely within its boundaries.
It happened last week when Albany lawmakers created an oddly shaped replacement for the 20th District, a new 18th that extends south from Westchester into central Queens.
Following a narrow corridor sometimes only a block wide through the east Bronx and northern Queens, the new district comes to rest in neighborhoods that seem to have ethnic, racial and political variations similar to those cut from the Westchester seat held since 1988 by Representative Nita M. Lowey, a Democrat.


Oh Look, Kids! Torture and Slug-Eating!
Universal Studios is considering bringing a modern-day circus sideshow to perform at Halloween at its theme park in Florida.
"The group," said Lars Sorensen, manager of the Jim Rose Circus sideshow, "is simply people who have learned to do very interesting things with their bodies."
Very
interesting.


West Side Is Jeep Country
THE name comes from "General Purpose Vehicle," shortened to "GP" and then to "jeep." Designed for the Army in World War II, it caught on with civilians after the war.
No one ever polished a Jeep.
You bought it as Army surplus and left itout to rust.
But now Jeeps are showing up in places Sergeant Bilko never went: the mall, the suburban train station, the parking lot at the beach.


Caroline Tell, Aaron Falk
Caroline Nelson Tell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Tell Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married on June 6 at her parent's home to Aaron David Falk, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel Falk of Washington.
The Rev.
Forrester Church performed the Unitarian ceremony.
Mrs.
Falk, 27 years old, is a film researcher at the National Geographic Society in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a senior vice president of Texaco Inc. in White Plains.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
ANTICS!
An Alphabetical Anthology.
Written and illustrated by Cathi Hepworth.
Putnam. $14.95. (Ages 4 and up) There are ants in every word of this alphabet, some obvious, others hidden, all amusingly illustrated.
The
ant
ique auntie knits on the porch, the Sherlock Holmes and Watson types are observ
ant
insects, and so on. A little girl's t
ant
rum is a winner.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Behind Two Issues, Outlines of Perot Presidency Emerge
He has been scorned by his rivals as the Stealth Candidate, swooping into the lead in the Presidential race despite -- or because of -- his views' being virtually unknown.
Yet while details remain almost nonexistent, the outlines of Ross Perot's vision for a Presidency are coming into view.
In interviews he has granted since he began flirting with a possible campaign, Mr.
Perot has sketched out a set of principles that form the bedrock of his candidacy.
As a successful business executive, Mr.
Perot holds views that amount to a starkly pro-business platform, one that could easily be adopted by a Republican or by a Democrat like Paul E. Tsongas, the Massachusetts Democrat whom Mr.
Perot admires.


SURFACING
RETAIL --
Spike's Joint:
Boutiques featuring Spike Lee sportswear, at Macy's.
BEAUTY --
Climate-sensitive shampoos:
0degrees/45degreesF, 45degrees/75degreesF and 75Fdegrees-and-above replace "dry," "normal" and "oily."


Boat &amp; Breakfast In Newport
Visitors to Newport, R.I., this summer can opt for overnight accommodations not only near the harbor but also in it.
Two boat and breakfast services offer sleeping quarters on sailboats and powerboats as well as trawlers and -- in one case -- a Chinese junk, all complete with amenities including private head and shower.
Some will even provide (for an extra fee) a cruise the following day.
Boats, ranging from a 28-foot Sabre to a 70-foot motor yacht are either dockside or easily accessible by a marina launch.
Sometimes, boat owners will lend out a dinghy, too.
Breakfasts are standard Continental fare unless the occasion calls for more.


Dangerous Connections
Beth Nugent didn't start writing fiction until after she graduated from college.
She was working at a publishing house in Manhattan when she decided to enroll in the University of Iowa writing program.
"I think I just wanted to get out of New York," she recalled in a telephone interview from her home in Evanston, Ill.
Ms.
Nugent, who is 37 years old, described "City of Boys," her first collection of short stories, as a book "about people who are isolated." Paradoxically, the protagonists are often portrayed in family settings because "that's where they become the most acutely aware of their isolation."


Vote for Privacy
To the Sports Editor:
Regarding "Tagliabue Waffles on Lisa Olson File," by Timothy S. Smith (The Times, May 31):


Christian Hewitt, Thomas Whitford
Christian Hewitt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Hewitt of Winchester, Mass., was married yesterday in New York to Thomas Caleb Whitford, the son of Pamela Sutton of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Timothy Keller performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Church of the Ascension.
Mrs.
Whitford, 25 years old, is the assistant director of the Campus Crusade for Christ at Columbia University.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a director of Hagler, Mastrovita &amp; Hewitt, a money-management firm in Boston.


Reaching for the Stars: Nashville Fair Celebrates the Fans of Country Music
At 6:30 in the morning last Tuesday, Shelby Francisco, a recent high school graduate, was standing in line at the Tennessee State Fair Grounds to meet his idol, the country music star Garth Brooks.
He was joined in this sweaty endeavor by hundreds and hundreds of other fans.
What happened was worse than gridlock.
It was was Garth-lock.
By 10 A.M., the humidity was as thick as a jar of Charlie Daniels's peach preserves (on sale for $5.99 in Nashville).
But Mr.
Francisco was patiently waiting to ask Mr.
Brooks, a fellow Oklahoman, to autograph the top of his red high school graduation cap.
"Garth's music got me through high school," he said.
"So I wanted him to sign this."


Beth Lopez, Thomas Roche
Karen Elizabeth Lopez, the daughter of Otto B. Lopez of New York and Karen L. Redus of Orlando, Fla., was married in New York yesterday to Thomas Francis Roche, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Roche of Collingdale, Pa.
The Rev.
Stephen P. Bauman officiated at Christ Church United Methodist.
Mrs.
Roche, who is 25 years old and is known as Beth, graduated from Connecticut College and is a third-year student at Brooklyn Law School.
Her father formerly was a senior vice president and the director of securities clearance at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her stepmother, Jo Willa G. Lopez, is a vice president of, and private banking counsel to, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The bride's stepfather, Bruce A. Redus, is a project manager in Orlando for the Guardian Companies, a real-estate developer.


Ms. Hensel, Craig Beardsley
Ann-Elizabeth McKay Hensel, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Hensel of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Craig Russell Beardsley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sterling L. Beardsley of Harrington Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Keith Jones performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Beardsley, 29 years old, is a special-events and training coordinator at Lehman Brothers in New York.
A graduate of New York University, she is a former member of the United States national figure skating team.
Her father is a professor of physics at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark.


Report Says Home Operators Misused Funds Meant to Feed Mentally Ill
While hundreds of mentally ill residents were being poorly fed and compelled to live in dilapidated, unsafe and unsanitary conditions, the operators of a group home in Far Rockaway, Queens, misappropriated $4 million in public money for their personal use, state authorities say.
Instead of upgrading care at the Hi-Li Manor Home for the Aged, its managers in the last seven years funneled $4 million into investments, interest-free loans, excessive salaries for themselves and relatives, car purchases, tuition payments for relatives and insurance payments on homes, jewelry and furs, according to a state oversight agency.


Diana Pizzuti and Robert Iovino
GETTING married at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, which stays open to the public during weddings, is one way to learn what it is like to be a celebrity.
When two New York City police officers, Capt.
Diana Pizzuti and Lieut.
Robert Iovino, were married there last Sunday, they attracted almost as much attention as a street appearance by Madonna.


Romance, Si!
"Ole!" shouted Mort Janklow, dressed like a Spanish brigand, all in black.
Last Tuesday was a pancultural night at El Teddy's in TriBeCa, where Upper East Siders went south to attend the pre-wedding party Barry and CeCe Kieselstein-Cord were giving for the Channel 4 reporter Perri Peltz, who is marrying Eric Ruttenberg this week.


Fishing Trophy Seized by Customs
IN Ernest Hemingway's novel "The Old Man and the Sea," the hero lost his fish to the sharks.
Dr.
David Bregman of Tenafly caught a giant fish, too -- a 9 1/2-foot-long, 246 1/2-pound blue marlin -- and won a trophy for it.
He got to eat some of the fish, but a few days later he lost the trophy to United States Customs agents.
The agents were waiting when Dr.
Bregman, the 51-year-old chief of surgery at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center in Madison, sailed into Key West, Fla., last month.
They seized the top-prize trophy he had won at the 42d annual Ernest Hemingway International Billfish Classic Tournament in Havana.


Tricky Attempts to Balance Esthetics and Politics
The picture, a four-footlong panorama of a stand of young birches, is in the best tradition of picturesque landscape photography, with slender trees arranged in staggered rows across the frame, their gleaming white trunks surrounded by clusters of pale green leaves and yellow grass.
At first glance, the photograph, by Skeet McAuley, seems to be innocuously decorative, the sort of picture usually found in dentists' waiting rooms.
But the title, "Alaska Pipeline," gives the joke away: lurking behind the trees, where the sky should be, is a mammoth metal tube on stilts that runs the width of the frame.
Included in "Between Home and Heaven: Contemporary American Landscape Photography," a sprawling exhibition at the National Museum of American Art through June 28 (and traveling to Pittsburgh, New Orleans, Albany, Cleveland and Virginia Beach), Mr.
McAuley's droll picture exemplifies a new attitude among photographers concerned with depicting the land.
Responding both to the traditions of landscape photography and the growing complexity of environmental issues, these photographers find themselves engaged in a tricky attempt to balance the sometimes competing demands of esthetics and politics.


Jack Russell Terrier
WHAT IT IS: A breed of terrier developed in England in the 19th century by an eccentric fox-hunting clergyman.
Closely related to both the smooth fox terrier (the dog on the old RCA label) and the wire fox terrier (Asta in "The Thin Man").
The Jack Russell is predominantly white and hence immediately distinguishable from its quarry, which it otherwise resembles in size and shape.
Why?
So it can negotiate the fox's terrain, then confront it in its den.
A good terrier never kills (and rarely lays a paw on) a fox.
Simply wouldn't be sporting.
WHAT IT ISN'T: A Cavalier King Charles spaniel, a particularly effete-looking dog that in 1985 President Reagan surprised his wife, Nancy, with one of and that, along with finger bowls and Galanos dresses, came to epitomize the imperial 80's.
The Jack Russell, a working dog in its native England with no particular connection to aristocracy and with as much of a taste for barn rats as for foxes, seems infinitely better suited to the anti-expectation, let's-get-that-tuffet-up-to-the-attic 90's.


MAKING IT IN THE MAJORS
I've worked as a featured player in films for many famous directors over the last 21 years, but never has one called me directly ("Making It in the Majors," by Peggy Orenstein, May 24).
That job was delegated to assistants.
However, Penny Marshall, who was busily directing "Awakenings," would call me, an extra in the film, and say, "This is Penny, can you work tomorrow?"


An Italian Restaurant That's Aged Well
WHEN we first visited Da Pietro in Westport in 1988, we found it very good indeed.
Unlike all too many restaurants, it has improved with age.
For one thing, desserts were negligible then; now they are skillful creations that provide the proper exclamation point to the meal.
While the menu hasn't changed dramatically, the culinary skills seem ever more authoritative.
Sauces and combinations work as never before.
The simple, minuscule storefront looks the same: white-washed walls hung with tapestry banners; a floral-printed, comfortable banquette along one wall; ladderback chairs with cushions to match the banquette; a gleaming copper bain-marie with a fresh flower display in a partition separating kitchen from dining space.


The Jazz Festival Revisits Itself
When the JVC Jazz Festival rolls into town, as it does this Friday, it usually sets critics off in a head-scratching flurry: what, they wonder, is the state of jazz, expecting the festival to produce some answers.
Because it's the largest American jazz festival and takes place in a city where jazz is a substantial part of the cultural scene, it has signficance.
And it can provide some answers.
If we believe what this year's festival is telling us, the jazz world has become lackluster.
The order of the day is the tribute, the re-creation and the just plain dusty -- a bad sign.


Miss Markham, M. C. McLanahan
Elizabeth Anne Markham, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford M. Markham of Falls Church, Va., was married yesterday to Morgan Clarke McLanahan, a son of Martha B. McLanahan of New York and the late Duer McLanahan.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
McLanahan is a public-information assistant at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is an associate department chairman and an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the Georgetown University School of Medicine in Washington.


Here's to an Agency for Military Conversion
To the Editor:
In a letter on the Forum page on May 24, Seth Bodner argues that Washington is not "helpless" to cope with decayed and riotous cities because we can and should switch from building warships to producing civilian transport.
This is sound as far as it goes -- namely not far enough.
What we need is a comprehensive and integrated plan for military conversion to operate through a new agency like the Reconstruction Finance Corporation of New Deal days.


In Defense of the Old Warnaco
To the Editor:
As a longtime president and chairman of Warnaco, I read with interest the article on Linda Wachner ("Fashion Avenue's $100 Million Woman," May 17).
I believe that the statement that she took over a "sleepy, flabby maker of lingerie and men's sportswear, badly in need of an overhaul" is extremely inaccurate.


Capra and the Common Man
To the Editor:
Frank Capra's politics may come as a surprise to many who have naively viewed the heroes of his pictures as simple folks with hearts of gold.
Get with it.
The "hero" of Capra's movie "You Can't Take It With You" is the superrich business tycoon played by Edward Arnold, considerably revised from the character in the stage version.
And late in his life Capra voted for Richard Nixon.
He said so.
Maybe what this country and our inner cities need right now is an "enlightened plutocrat" like Longfellow Deeds.
Republicans, please take note.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 30  MANHATTAN  Chelsea 365,000
161 West 15th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, remodeled kitchen, 12 1/2-ft. vaulted-ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $863, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate/Kingman Associates)  Gramercy Park 925,000
34 Gramercy Park East  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, dining area, den, 2 fireplaces, original moldings and details, 4 exposures, Gramercy Park view; maintenace $2,862, 38% tax-deductible (Broker: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Greenwich Village 295,000
50 West 9th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $695, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher &amp; Co.)  Upper East Side 645,000
1075 Park Avenue (88th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, maid's room, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $1,625, 39% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn Weigner Real Estate)  West Village 920,000
85 Perry Street  (Bleecker Street Gardens)  One-family, 4-story, Federal-style town house built in 1880; 4 bedrooms, 3 baths, library, den, dining room, 8 fireplaces, wide-plank pine floors, terrace, common gardens, 21- by 58-ft. lot; taxes $7,300 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  BRONX  Allerton Avenue Area 235,000
2717 Cruger Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining area in each unit; playroom, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,914 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Eastchester 160,000  3347 Kingsland Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 255,000
590 East Second Street  4-family, semi-attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; full basement, 3-car garage, 25- by 125-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  Sheepshead Bay 205,000
2295 East 26th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, dinette, new front porch, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18.5- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Jacob Gold Real Estate)  Windsor Terrace 262,500
474 16th Street  2-family brownstone; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, study in other; 1 bath in each; rear deck, 16- by 100-ft. lot taxes $1,035 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS Bayside 167,000
1 Bay Club Drive  (Bay Club)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft condo in a 9-year-old building; dining room, terrace, health club; common charge $365, taxes $2,500 (Broker: Agranoff Real Estate)  Forest Hills 174,000
89-24 70th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, wood-frame house; dining room, full basement, private driveway, 24- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Dix Realty)  STATEN ISLAND Bay Terrace 155,000
5 Ovis Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, semi-attached wood-frame house; dining area, Florida room, fireplace, finished basement, 24- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Great Kills 225,000
182 Hillside Terrace  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, colonial; dining room, family room, fireplace, 60- by 132-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)


N.F.L. Is Dusting Off Its Shield For Another Free Agency Battle
While major league baseball and the National Basketball Association have reached a tenuous peace with athletes seeking free agency, the National Football League has waged a stubborn battle to preserve a system that it maintains is vital to its existence and that players believe reduces them to well-paid chattel.
Through 20 years of legal skirmishes and union negotiations, the N.F.L. has developed a Teflon-like coating on the issue, appearing impervious to unrestricted free agency in any form.
The latest challenge to N.F.L. policies that restrict the movement of players from team to team is Freeman McNeil v. the National Football League, a case set to begin in Federal District Court in Minneapolis on Tuesday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the Reagan and Bush Administrations' policy of conciliation toward Iraq referred incorrectly to a State Department document recommending technology transfers to Iraq despite the objections of the Commerce and Defense Departments.
The same document, not a different one, also warned of Iraq's growing power and aggressiveness.


Incinerators See Shortages of Trash
THE superintendent of the Windham Energy Recovery Facility, Thota S. Naidu, expected 38,000 tons of trash to burn in the incinerator last year.
He got 31,000.
"I think I know where it went, but I can't say," said Mr.
Naidu, who several weeks ago met with officials from the nine northeastern towns under contract to the incinerator, warning them that they must meet their tonnage obligations.
"Let's just say it went to the place where they could get rid of it cheapest." At the Windham incinerator, the disposal fee is $86 a ton, and that fee will increase to $98.75 on July 1 because of operating costs.
There are landfills in Rhode Island, on the other hand, charging $30 a ton.
It was only five years ago that a garbage barge from Islip, N.Y., went on its famous odyssey because it could find no place to unload.
Today, the seven regional mass-burn centers in Connecticut find themselves competing for trash.
Rebellion appears to be stirring in those towns that are locked into contracts requiring them to pay twice as much or more than what their neighbors are paying to get rid of trash.
"Six years ago I saw this coming," said Donald E. Burdick, the First Selectman of Griswold, which is wrangling with the regional authority over where its trash should go.
"I said garbage was going to be like education, the cost was going to go out of control, and it has."


'GRAY'S ANATOMY'
Spalding Gray's "Gray's Anatomy" (May 17) had me laughing so hard I was crying.
But I couldn't help wonder: if Gray could survive the sweat-lodge ceremony, couldn't he also endure the operation, rather than risk going blind in one eye?
PAULA REENS
Wilton, Conn.


Cynthia Ceresney, Jonathan Cohen
Mr. and Mrs.
Ian Ceresney of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Leigh Ceresney, to Jonathan Evan Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin O. Cohen of Tappan, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ceresney and Mr.
Cohen, both 25 years old, graduated from Columbia University, she magna cum laude and he summa cum laude.
They were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a medical student at New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Herzfeld &amp; Rubin.


Preachers Take Shouting Match With City to Court
A nine-month dispute between a band of zealous street preachers and the city fathers of Beaufort, S.C., became a Federal case this week.
The court is being asked to find a balance between the rights of the preachers to proclaim their message loudly without fear of arrest and the rights of merchants and shoppers to be spared shouted predictions of the apocalypse on the street corners of downtown Beaufort (pronounced BEW-fort).


Diplomatic Notebook; The Odd Art of Summitry Without a Cold War
PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN and President Bush will hold their first full-scale summit meeting this week in a weird twilight moment of Russian-American relations -- a moment when the two countries have stopped being enemies but aren't quite allies yet.
Consider a few recent scenes from the relationship:
It is last Tuesday, and Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, has just spent two days in Washington trying to explain to the Bush Administration why the Russian military is reluctant to give up all of its SS-18 intercontinental ballistic missiles, as Washington was demanding in the latest nuclear arms reduction talks.
Mr.
Kozyrev's discomfort shows as he leaves a meeting with President Bush at the White House.
After all, his country is asking Washington for billions in economic assistance, but his military wants to keep its most advanced nuclear missiles.
Mr.
Kozyrev somewhat sheepishly explains to American reporters on the White House driveway: "I want to make one thing absolutely clear: We do not need those arms and we are not going to use them against the United States."


Will Somebody Please Borrow A Little Money?
If nobody goes shopping, is it really a recovery?
That is the question that economists may soon have to confront.
The early 1992 burst of consumer spending has faded, and American consumers are reaching for their wallets not to spend but to pay off debts.
"There is a worrisome trend toward prudence," said James Grant, editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Hometown; Perot Isn't Necessarily Texarkana's Favorite Son
In Washington, the possibility of a President Ross Perot has a lot of people in something approaching a tizzy.
There has been excited, sometimes fearful, talk of big things: the death of the two-party system, the end of representative democracy, the triumph of a Perotian revolution sweeping all before it in a tsunami of voter rage.
But the tizzies and tides of Washington seem far, far away on a summery day in the place where Mr.
Perot was born and raised.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A NIGHT FOR ANGELS
The Phoenix Theater, Westchester's Equity company at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase, will hold a benefit for itself this evening at Texaco headquarters in White Plains.
A Night for Angels, referring to members of the audience who have paid $200 a ticket, begins at 5:30 with cocktails, an array of hors d'oeuvres and dancing to the music of Vincent Giordano's Nighthawks Orchestra.


Jamaica Open At Rose Hall
The golf course at the Wyndham Rose Hall Resort, which occupies land on the 18th-century Rose Hall sugar plantation near Montego Bay, Jamiaca, has been designated as the new home of the Jamaica Open championship by the Jamaica Golf Association.
The 1992 Open, scheduled for Oct. 26 to 31, will offer its largest purse ever, $125,000.
The course is noted for its seaside front nine holes and a back nine that climbs hundreds of feet into the mountains.


Nancy Elaine Warhaftig, Michael F. Glynn
Nancy Elaine Warhaftig, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Warhaftig of Wayne, N.J., was married there last night to Michael Frederic Glynn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Glynn of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi James Gibson performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Tikvah.


4 Weeks After Protests for Democracy, Anguish Grows Over Missing Thais
The Thai Government says 159 people are still missing.
Private groups say the true figure is more than 700.
Whatever the number, there is still no answer to the mystery of why so many Thais remain listed as missing nearly four weeks after they took to the streets of Bangkok to demand the establishment of democracy in Thailand.
They disappeared in the middle of a violent crackdown on their protests by Government soldiers armed with automatic weapons.


For Gay High-School Seniors, Nightmare Is Almost Over
For as long as he can remember, school days have meant long hours filled with dirty looks, catcalls and half-whispered epithets -- all aimed at him.
"Spooky" and "weird" were nicknames by sixth grade.
Jokes about his voice and walk followed.
So by the time he was 10 years old, this Staten Island teen-ager began what he now calls "the cover-up." At first that meant trying to play sports he had no interest in.
Later came girlfriends he wasn't attracted to, lies about his whereabouts, even an attempt at suicide to avoid ridicule.


Corrections
An article on May 17 about Rio de Janeiro misstated the date of Brazil's Independence Day.
A reader's letter, dated May 26, points out that it is Sept. 7; Republic Day is Nov. 15.


In the Chips, Literally
To the Editor
Jon Pareles's essay on the proposed Audio Home Recording Act  [ "Grabbing for Royalties in the Digital Age," April 12 ]  made a good case.
Unfortunately, it addressed only a small percentage of the problem.


Chicago and University Share Outlook, Graduates Are Told
The relationship between the University of Chicago and its city was extolled yesterday at the university's 100th commencement ceremonies.
"It's no mistake that the Chicago school of economics grew up here, with its emphasis on open enterprise," David Bevington, a professor of humanities at the university, said in his address.


On Sunday; Treatments, Both Mental And Political
Seven nonprofit agencies in Suffolk County run 15 mental-health clinics that treat the area's poorest and most disturbed residents.
Many are like Mary Lesch, who was an incoherent bag lady living in a cellar when she first walked into her local clinic.
The clinics are a critical means of maintaining order in suburbia, a therapeutic counterpart to the town police.
Staff members monitor clients' medication, provide low-cost counseling, assist in finding housing.
Suburban downtowns would be far less inviting without the local clinic.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PRISONER OF LOVE By Jean Genet. Wesleyan/University Press of New England, $24.95.


Mr. Quayle's Lectures, and Leadership
No one disagrees with the values that Vice President Dan Quayle posits for the nation.
Of course two devoted parents are better than one; of course children need to learn right from wrong; of course adolescent pregnancy extracts painful, perilous costs.
Then why is the Vice President railing about a so-called "cultural elite" that, he claims, opposes those values?
That's election-year politics, a straw man.
The question is not, "What are the right values?" It's whether or not Vice President Quayle, and his Administration, have a plan to help poor, broken and desperate families live by the values he rightly cherishes.


Nanette Glickman, Neal Shipley
Nanette Glickman, the daughter of Judge Herbert S. Glickman of West Orange, N.J., and Babette Bergner of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Neal Shipley, the son of Dr.
Thorne Shipley of Miami and Linda Cahill of New York.
Rabbi Donald Rossoff performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Shipley, 28 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and is a freelance writer of film scripts in New York.
Her father is a judge of the Superior Court of New Jersey, in Newark.
Her mother is the president of Written Communications Consultants, an educational consulting firm in Morristown.


Symbol of Cuba Sparking Battle In a Florida City
Amid the bars, T-shirt emporiums, souvenir stands and pornography shops that line Duval Street, the main downtown street of this cluttered resort town, the San Carlos Patriotic and Educational Institute easily stands apart.
Dignified, elegant and glowing from a just-completed $3 million restoration, the building is a monument to Key West's past, one of the few still standing.
Founded in 1871 by Cuban tobacco workers in Key West's cigar factories who had helped establish the city, the San Carlos Institute is to Cubans what Independence Hall is to Americans.
It was from the veranda of the institute 100 years ago that an exiled Jose Marti began the Cuban revolution that led to the end of Spanish rule and insured Key West a place of honor in the history textbooks read by generations of Cuban schoolchildren.
Today it sponsors concerts, lectures and exhibitions of Cuban art that honor figures like Carlos Manuel de Cespedes, who led a revolt in 1868 that nearly brought independence from Spain.
The institute is also planning to open a library and to offer classes in English, Spanish and history.


HomeCall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jays' Guzman Continues His Mastery Over Red Sox
Blue Jays 6, Red Sox 2
TORONTO, June 14 (AP) -- John Olerud drove in three runs with a bases-loaded double in the sixth inning today to give the Toronto Blue Jays a 6-2 victory over the Boston Red Sox and a split of their four-game series.
Juan Guzman (8-1) allowed two runs on six hits over six innings.
He struck out seven and walked four to improve to 18-4 over the last two seasons.
Duane Ward allowed one hit over the final three innings and earned his seventh save.


Pulitzer Winner Is Poet Laureate
Mona Van Duyn, a writer admired for her intelligence and wit, was named poet laureate of the United States today.
Her breadth can be seen in her latest collection, "Letters From a Father and Other Poems" (Atheneum), which presents images both of shared joy and the last decline of her aged parents, and in an observation of hers that might have sprung from Ogden Nash:


Pack of Aches and Pains
A week into the Coast to Coast Bicycle Classic, some part of every bodyis hurting.
The most common complaint is what cyclists euphemistically call "butt pain." This is a blanket term for aches in several spots plus the adult equivalent of diaper rash.


Review/Television; Letting Fundamentalists Tell Their Own Stories
Everyone knows that religious fundamentalism is on the upsurge around the globe, but exactly what the term signifies is less clear.
It is applied to movements that are distinguished as much by their differences as by their similarities.
So welcome to "The Glory and the Power: Fundamentalisms Observed," an enlightening three-part PBS series on aspects of fundamentalism in the United States, Israel and Egypt.
The first part, "Fighting Back," tonight at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, concentrates on Bob Jones University in South Carolina, which has been called the West Point of fundamentalism.
This family enterprise -- run by Dr.
Bob Jones Jr. and Dr.
Bob Jones 3d, son and grandson of the founder -- holds fast to values that have lately become a subject of impassioned contention in national politics and some amusement on late-night television.


Virginia Moseley, Thomas Nides
Virginia Carpenter Moseley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Moseley of Hamilton, Mass.,was married yesterday to Thomas Richard Nides, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold R. Nides of Duluth, Minn.
Dr.
James D. Ford, the chaplain of the United State House of Representatives, officiated at the ecumenical ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Moseley, who is 30 years old and keeping her name, is a producer for CBS News in Washington.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman of the Sterling Suffolk Racecourse Limited Partnership in Boston, which operates the Suffolk Downs race track.


Diane Schetky, Edward Keenan
Dr.
Diane Heiskell Schetky, the daughter of Andrew Heiskell of New York and Cornelia Chapin of Hilton Head, S.C., was married yesterday in Rockport, Me., to Edward Thomas Keenan of Lincolnville, Me., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Keenan of West Palm Beach, Fla.
Kenneth Barnes, a notary, performed the ceremony at the Vesper Hill Chapel.
Mrs.
Keenan, who is 52 years old, is a psychiatrist in Rockport.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received her M.D. from Case Western Reserve University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman and chief executive of Time Inc.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Clinton Campaign to Divide Its Ad Work
Borrowing a model that has worked so well for Republican candidates, Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign has decided to recruit Madison Avenue executives to create positive, thematic advertising and to assign the negative or shorter-range commercials to specialists in political advertising.
Among the commercial advertisers the Clinton organization is recruiting is Donny Deutsch, creative director of Deustch Inc. in New York and creator of the advertising for the Ikea home-furnishing stores.


Hallwood Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 29


Computer Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Questions Arise on Steinbrenner Decision
Commissioner Fay Vincent had planned to announce today that George Steinbrenner could return to active duty with the Yankees next season.
But Vincent said yesterday that "something came up" involving Steinbrenner's return, and it appeared likely that he would delay his announcement.
In an interview yesterday, Vincent declined to specify what came up or to confirm that he would actually put off revealing his decision.
But his remarks come at a time when several present and former Yankee employees say they believe there are abundant signs that Steinbrenner had violated his agreement with Vincent by communicating with club officials over the last 22 months.
They say they are ready to talk about it.


How Columbia Weathers the Economic Storm; Meanwhile, at Yale
To the Editor:
Benno Schmidt Jr., departing as president of Yale University to lead the new Edison Project (front page, May 26), leaves behind a campus that has become a national symbol for the financial problems plaguing higher education in this country.
Mr.
Schmidt's two surprisingly different ventures -- leading an established Ivy League institution and forming a revolutionary private school system -- have in common his approach to education.
At Yale, he stressed fiscal order through fund raising and budgetary restructuring.
At Whittle Communications, he seeks strengthened secondary education through competition and choice.


From Deep in the Soviet Files, Facts, Footnotes, Even (Maybe) Real History
Like other post-totalitarian societies before it, Russia has fallen heir to a vast trove of secrets from a fallen dictatorship, a legacy as intriguing and instructive as it is deeply troubling.
Almost daily the dark secrets trickle out: a plea from the censors that they need new equipment to monitor the modems and faxes of foreign correspondents, an order from the Central Committee to arm Palestinian terrorists or to send money to the Polish Communist Party as recently as October 1990.


Value Merchants reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet
New York State Theater
Two luminous visions of George Balanchine were offered by the New York City Ballet on Thursday night.
"Square Dance" started life in 1957 as an amusing and provocative meeting of ballet and American folk-dancing.
In the original staging, a square-dance caller enunciated dance patterns through which the dancers moved to music by Corelli and Vivaldi that was itself derived from folk dance.
The caller has been gone since 1976, along with some folksy set elements.
The costumes are now City Ballet generics.
What has lasted in Balanchine's reworking are the buoyancy of the choreography and its emphasis on the courtly manners shared by the dance forms.
Thursday's cast gave the ballet an airy, poetic performance, led by Margaret Tracey and Peter Boal.
Ms.
Tracey articulated with impressive clarity and fluency the dance's sometimes finicky steps and dynamic shifts.
One expects such clarity and precision from Mr.
Boal, but he danced an added Balanchine solo with an understated brooding and exaltation that brought to mind the most affecting of the Romantic ballet's melancholy males.


Family of War-Crime Suspect Recounts Its Trial by Ordeal
Since his marriage nine years ago to the daughter of John Demjanjuk, Edward Nishnic has been on a single-minded quest to prove that his father-in-law, a retired Cleveland auto worker, was not Ivan the Terrible, the sadistic operator of the gas chamber at the Treblinka death camp.
His quest has taken him from Israel, where Mr.
Demjanjuk has been convicted of war crimes and sentenced to die, to Poland, the site of Treblinka, and to Ukraine, where he has continued his effort to track down Ivan Marchenko, the man he believes was really Ivan the Terrible.


Angeion Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


EFI Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the removal of plywood huts for the homeless in Chicago misidentified another city where the Mad Housers, an advocacy group, has been building such huts.
It is Austin, Tex., not Boston.


Thousands Protest Against Serbian President
Two protests, one a solemn procession led by Orthodox priests, the other a joyful gathering of mostly young people ringing cow bells and alarm clocks, threaded their way through the Serbian capital today issuing essentially the same message to the Government of President Slobodan Milosevic: "Resign."
There was little overlap between the group of 6,000 who followed Patriarch Pavle of the Serbian Orthodox church in a march after the Orthodox Pentecost service this morning and a similar number of the bell ringers who this afternoon signaled their view that time had run out for the Government.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential candidates have scheduled these television appearances this week: Gov.
Bill Clinton
Today: 7-9 A.M.
CBS, "This Morning," question-and-answer session with a studio audience.


Market Place; Ringer Battered By Bad Weather
THE Ringer Corporation, the leader in the business of "natural" or "organic" lawn-care products, has fallen victim to natural forces: the weather.
After reporting a record quarterly profit on April 23 and raising $8 million in a stock offering the next day, Ringer shocked some investors with an announcement on June 4 that sales this quarter would fall 40 to 45 percent, to $5 million to $5.4 million.
Since more than 75 percent of Ringer's sales come between Jan. 1 and June 30, the weak sales were a severe blow and led the company to say it expects its sixth consecutive annual loss when its fiscal year ends on Sept. 30.


Private Brands reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Affinity Biotech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


YES Clothing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Paramount Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Suzanne Fischbein, Michael Rosenberg
Suzanne Beth Fischbein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Fischbein of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Michael Eric Rosenberg, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Seligman Rosenberg of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  10-Day Auto Sales Mid-June  Tuesday  Housing Starts May Industrial Production May Capacity Utilization May  Wednesday  Productivity 1st Qtr.
Thursday  Merchandise Trade April Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Federal Budget Report May


Any Championship Counts in Cleveland
The great bubblegum chew-off ended in a draw.
Cleveland Indians relievers Steve Olin and Kevin Wickander, who have been vying since last week to see who can chew the most gum at once, each destroyed the team record yesterday by stuffing 71 pieces of Bazooka bubblegum into their mouths and holding the wad there for four minutes.


NORTH KOREA PLAN ON FUELING A-BOMB MAY BE CONFIRMED
Administration officials say that the first experts to conduct a detailed survey of North Korea's nuclear installations have confirmed that the country has been building a large plutonium-reprocessing plant, but that the inspectors have so far found no evidence that enough nuclear material has been produced to make an atomic bomb.
The preliminary findings, expected to be announced in Vienna at a meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency that begins on Monday, cast doubt on the Central Intelligence Agency's worst-case estimates that the hard-line Communist Government could become a nuclear power within a few months to a year.


Gucci's Current Campaign: Recovering Its Elite Image
HOW do you get Palm Beach patricians and Hollywood tycoons back into Gucci loafers after their secretaries start carrying Gucci handbags?
That was the challenge facing Dawn Mello, the former president of Bergdorf Goodman who was given the mandate to revamp the Gucci image in 1990.
It has not been easy.
In the early 1980's, Gucci went mass market, distributing its products not only in its 36 United States stores but through 600 retail outlets as well.
That strategy ultimately tarnished Gucci's image and sales of its costlier items.


Injured Honor Student Dies
An honor student who was shot in the head when gunfire erupted outside a Brooklyn nightclub early Saturday died in the hospital Saturday night, the police said yesterday.
Dominique Sylvester, 18 years old, a straight-A student who had gathered with friends at the Rendez Vous in Flatbush, was hit when at least three groups of people began firing guns outside the club about 12:45 A.M.
Mr.
Sylvester was taken to Kings County Hospital, where he died at 6 P.M., said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


Housing Data May Give Signals on the Economy
Struggling to make sense out of economic statistics that are mixed at best, credit market participants are questioning whether the sluggish recovery that seems to be developing could falter.
One reason for such doubts is the way the housing industry, an important source of growth in the first quarter, seems to be sputtering.


Bali Jewelry Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


OEA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


If the Jump Is Good, The Rams Can Hold
HENRY ELLARD, three times a Pro Bowl wide receiver for the Los Angeles Rams, is a triple jumper who will try out for the United States Olympic track and field team at the trials that begin Friday in New Orleans.
A recent leap of 54 feet 1/2 inch at the Modesto (Calif.) Relays earned the 30-year-old Ellard 1 of 24 spots in the trials in his event.
The top three jumpers will make the team, but he is unlikely to be one of them.


Quotation of the Day
"We don't have any concrete proof that he is in the hands of any group or individual. We have no photograph, no voice recording. Before you have a motive you have to have an occurrence. So we can't speculate as to a motive." LOIS FERGUSON, a New Jersey prosecutor's spokeswoman, on the disappearance of an Exxon executive six weeks ago.  [ B1:2 ]


Time Warner's Chief Takes Indefinite Leave
Two months after saying that Steven J. Ross's prostate cancer was in remission, Time Warner Inc. announced yesterday that Mr.
Ross, its chairman and co-chief executive, had taken an indefinite leave of absence for additional treatment.
The news immediately raised questions about when, and if, Mr.
Ross, who is 64 years old, would return to the helm of the giant media company.
Because Mr.
Ross has been working from home since late last year, when he began chemotherapy treatments, and has focused more on strategic planning than day-to-day management, his leave is not likely to have an immediate impact on the company.


Chronicle
He did his homework, he passed the test, so tomorrow HUGH DOWNS will step out of his telvision persona to receive a special certificate in geriatric education from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Long fascinated by the processes of aging, Mr.
Downs, co-host of the ABC News program "20/20," returned to Hunter College six years ago, "and with tutorials, massive reading and night courses, got a post-master's certificate," he said the other day.
Dr.
ROBERT N. BUTLER, who is the Brookdale professor of geriatrics and chairman of the department of geriatrics at Mount Sinai, knew of Mr.
Downs's interest in geriatric medicine.
"So when this continuing medical education course for doctors came up, he suggested that I monitor it and sit in," the television host said, adding: "I am the world's worst amateur doctor. My wife accuses me of diagnosing everything in sight. And the more time goes by, the closer I come to becoming my own laboratory." Mr.
Downs is 71 years old.
He faithfully attended the course, which lasted for a week and a half, including a weekend, in March.
"I even played hooky from '20/20' not to miss anything," he said.
"I decided to take the exam to see how badly I would do -- and I passed."
To what does the certificate that is to be presented to him tomorrow by Dr.
Butler at the Jewish Home for the Aged in Manhattan entitle him?
"It entitles me to frame it and hang it on the wall." he said.


Lawrence W. Towner Dies at 70; Historian Led Research Library
Lawrence William Towner, a historian and former president of the Newberry Library in Chicago, died Friday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 70 years old.
Dr. Towner, who lived in Chicago, died of emphysema, his family said.


At One Time a Pro, Now an Amateur
The United States Open is, in theory, open to every golfer in the land.
But professionals dominate, of course.
Five amateurs have qualified for the United States Open this year, which begins Thursday at Pebble Beach, and most of them are hot-shot collegians soon to be pros like DAVID DUVAL and WARREN SCHUTTE.


What Some Preach in Rio Is Not What They Practice at Home
Environmentalists from the global North and South, who may not agree on much else about how to save the world's environment, are united on one contention: When the Earth Summit is over and nations face the task of putting promises to work, the people most likely to make a success of saving the planet will not be found in large international bodies but in small grass-roots organizations caring for their own land.
Whether governments in many developing nations will allow them to assume this role is another matter.
In some of the nations whose leaders were most strident in Rio in condemning the industrial world -- among them Malaysia, India and Indonesia -- environmental groups and individual campaigners have been harassed, assaulted and arrested.
In Kenya, an environmentalist.
Wangari Maathai, was nearly beaten to death by policemen this year.


Don't Turn Waterfront Plan Into a New Scandal
To the Editor:
The Hudson River shore on Manhattan's West Side should be a green strip of walkways, bikeways and river vistas, a haven and resource for the park-starved communities that are adjacent to it and a pleasure for all New Yorkers and visitors.
There is Federal money available to create that kind of waterfront.
The area must not get tangled again in political deals.
The proposed subsidiary of New York State's Urban Development Corporation (news article, May 20) would delay waterfront improvements and give control forever into the hands of an unelected board.


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Why Are the Baltics Still Occupied?
By peaceful and principled resistance, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania wrested back their independence last August, after the collapse of the coup in Moscow.
But that independence remains precarious so long as more than 100,000 Russian troops remain on their soil.
The three Baltic states rightfully want Russia to withdraw those forces.
And Lithuanians yesterday were likely to endorse that position in a referendum.
But Moscow refuses even to discuss repatriating its troops.
It's a lingering cold war burden worth attention when President Bush meets with Russia's President, Boris Yeltsin, in Washington this week.


Diana Szochet, Harry Chevan
Diana Joy Szochet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Szochet of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Harry Chevan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Chevan of Amherst, Mass.
Rabbi Abraham Feldbin performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Chevan, 30 years old, is an assistant counsel to the New York State Grievance Committee for the 2d and 11th Judicial Districts in Brooklyn.
She graduated from New York University and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a self-employed diamond cutter in New York and her mother, Berta Szochet, is an assistant bookkeeper for the Jewish Association for Services for the Aged, a nonprofit organization, in New York.


Today's Man reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Cynthia Starr, J. B. Hauptman
Cynthia Hope Starr, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Starr of Norwalk Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan Brian Hauptman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Hauptman of Hewlett Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Stanley Skolnick officiated at the Sheraton Meadowlands Hotel in East Rutherford, N.J.
Ms.
Starr, who is keeping her name, is a pharmacist and senior editor at Drug Topics magazine, a trade journal, in Montvale, N.J.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Military-Minded Gang Cited in Kiling
Four high school students who the police say are members of a secret militaristic club that fantasized about world domination have been arrested and charged with murdering one of their own for violating a code of silence.
The arrests and the claim that the group grew out of a chapter of the Reserve Officer Training Corps have rocked the respected high school, Long Beach Polytechnic, attended by the suspects and the victim.


Daedalus Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sharon Zimmerman, Jonathan Salwen
Dr.
Sharon Lynne Zimmerman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerrold Zimmerman of Randolph, Mass., was married yesterday in Lenox, Mass., to Jonathan Ellis Salwen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Salwen of New York.
Rabbi Marc Saperstein performed the ceremony at the Wheatleigh Inn.
The bride, 34 years old, is the director of psychological services at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a doctorate in clinical psychology from Northwestern University.
Her father is the director of optics manufacturing at Itek Optical Systems in Lexington, Mass.
Her mother, Lorraine Zimmerman, is the director of special services for the Braintree, Mass., school system.


2 Decades After a Political Burglary, the Questions Still Linger
The Watergate scandal still haunts the nation with unanswered questions 20 years after burglars broke into the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee and set off the political shock waves that brought down President Richard M. Nixon.
Lingering questions about the drama tantalize a small army of historians, investigators and politicians.
Students of the scandal have plausible theories but cannot prove their answers to such questions as these:


Mays (J.W.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Countrywide Credit Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Deborah Kadish, Jan W. Rivkin
Deborah Sharon Kadish, a daughter of Drs.
Anna and Lawrence Kadish of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jan Winter Rivkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maxcy Rivkin of Ellicott City, Md.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at Temple Israel Center in White Plains.
Dr.
Kadish, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Princeton University.
She received an M.D. from Harvard University and will start an internship at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass., in July.
Her father is an attending surgeon and the president of the medical staff at the White Plains Hospital.
Her mother is a professor of pathology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.


Rax Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Murphy Brown, Colonial Dame
The Speech of Miss Polly Baker, before a Court of Judicature, at Connecticut near Boston;
where she was prosecuted the Fifth Time, for having a Bastard Child.
M ay it please the Honourable Bench to indulge me in a few Words: I am a poor unhappy Woman, who have no Money to fee Lawyers to plead for me, being hard put to it to get a tolerable Living.
All I humbly hope is, That your Honours would charitably move the Governor's Goodness on my Behalf, that my Fine may be remitted.


A Family Clinic That Tries to Be Both
Patients have to love the way Dr.
Robert Zufall and his wife, Kathryn, shape the practice of family medicine to their needs: There are no intimidating questionnaires to complete.
No appointments are needed.
Best of all, there are no doctor's bills from the Dover Free Clinic -- only an inconspicuous box for contributions in bills or coins.
The doctor, who turned 68 this month, never seems hurried.
Mrs.
Zufall, an energetic 65-year-old, skillfully elicits needed information including such intimate details as how many people share a dwelling and who is a wage-earner.
If a translator is needed for the largely Hispanic clientele, there is always someone around eager to help.
Often it is Tania Roman, a winsome 13-year-old who comes after school, or Sandra Camayo, who arrived as a patient but then become one of the dozens of unpaid staff members who help the Zufalls.


Corrections
A picture last Monday with a report about the marriage of Nancy Val Lesk and Jonathan Ivar Polk was placed incorrectly.
It showed Jo Schein, known professionally as Jo Shane, and John Newton Cooper 3d, whose wedding was reported elsewhere on the page.


All For A Dollar reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alden Press Co., 3.2 million common shares. William Blair.


Hopes Rise for Release of 2 German Captives
A United Nations hostage negotiator arrived here today, heightening expectations that the release of Lebanon's last Western hostages, two German relief workers, is imminent.
Giandomenico Picco, who was credited with helping win freedom for the nine hostages released last year, met with members of the Hamadi clan, who are believed to be holding the two Germans, Heinrich Strubig, 51 years old, and Thomas Kemptner, 31.
Iran's English-langauge daily, The Teheran Times, said today that the two Germans would be freed within 48 hours.
The newspaper's information on hostage releases in the past has been accurate.


Aliza Raskas, Steven Major
Aliza Rachel Raskas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs Stanley I. Raskas of St.
Louis, was married there yesterday to Steven Major, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Major of New York.
Rabbi Murray Grauer, a grandfather of the bride, conducted the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.
Mrs.
Major, 21 years old, graduated this month from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a principal in Raskas Foods, a dairy-food producer in St.
Louis founded by his great-grandfather Shalom Y. Raskas.


ERC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Pulitzer Winner Is Poet Laureate
Mona Van Duyn, a writer admired for her intelligence and wit, was named poet laureate of the United States today.
Her breadth can be seen in her latest collection, "Letters From a Father and Other Poems" (Atheneum), which presents images both of shared joy and the last decline of her aged parents, and in an observation of hers that might have sprung from Ogden Nash:


Coal Miners Plead for Bailout of Ailing Health Plans
Harry L. Morris limped across his living room to turn off the television set, moving his arthritic left foot gingerly.
Returning to his beige easy chair, Mr.
Morris ticked off on swollen fingers the reasons he wants to keep his medical insurance after a lifetime in the coal mines, including 19 years working on his knees in front of a four-foot-high underground coal seam.


Worldwide Collections Fund reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Analogic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Engle Homes reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Lawsuit Over a Watergate Book Could Put Scandal Back in Court
They were a study in contrasts back in 1973.
G.
Gordon Liddy, the flamboyant former F.B.I. agent who led the Watergate break-in, stonewalled at naming co-conspirators in the scandal.
John W. Dean 3d, the cool, button-downed counsel to Richard M. Nixon, gave damning testimony that linked the President to the cover-up.
Because of a dispute between two crucial players in the Watergate scandal, the whole messy, darkly riveting drama of Watergate may be played again.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet
New York State Theater
Two dancers kept making beautiful choreographic music together on Wednesday night.
Two works on the New York City Ballet's program were pas de deux; the other two featured duets.
The loveliest of the pairings came in Sean Lavery's version of the balcony scene from Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet." Peter Boal was a gentle Romeo.
And he was obviously in love.


James S. Allen Named To Be Dean of Juilliard
Dr.
James Sloan Allen has been chosen to be the provost and dean of the Juilliard School.
The appointment, announced by the school's president, Joseph W. Polisi, is effective July 1.
Dr.
Allen replaces Bruce MacCombie, who is leaving to become the dean of Boston University's School of the Arts.
Dr.
Allen has been a member of Juilliard's administration and faculty since 1985, most recently as the vice president for academic affairs.


Democracy Hasn't Won in the Philippines; Putter Down of Coups
To the Editor:
I think it incorrect to suggest that President-elect Fidel Ramos of the Philippines was more successful in putting down coups than in "curbing human rights abuses by a freewheeling army pitted against a leftist insurgency" (editorial, June 1).
It was Mr.
Ramos's success in improving the human rights situation that led to the significant progress in arresting the insurgency.
Jaime Cardinal Sin agreed with this two years ago, as a result of poll results he had from his own network of bishops.


3 Men Killed and 2 Wounded In Shooting After Clash at Party
Three men were killed and two others were wounded outside of a Brooklyn party yesterday when an argument over a woman led to a drive-by shooting, witnesses and the police said.
Without saying a word, two men in a red sports car sprayed a group of about 15 people mingling outside during a party at 279 Buffalo Avenue in Crown Heights, the police said.
The police provided this list of victims:


Torborg Explodes as Mets Are Swept
Jeff Torborg was screaming.
The crushing weekend collapse against the Pirates was complete.
Shea Stadium was silently emptying.
The Mets were once more in full retreat to the clubhouse.
And there was the manager, unable to abandon the dugout, screaming.
At the umpires?
At his players?
At yesterday's latest failure of talent and strategy and resources, a 5-4 defeat decided in the ninth inning?


Review/Television; Gossip and a Gimmick For a Summer Premiere
Welcome to television's bustling summer schedule.
As viewers indicate a growing aversion to reruns and begin looking for alternatives on cable, the networks are aggressively pursuing the tactic of introducing new series between the Memorial Day and Labor Day weekends instead of waiting for the traditional fall season.
CBS is especially active, pointing out to anyone who will listen that "Northern Exposure" was launched that way.
Some half-dozen new CBS shows are ready to go, and none are getting a bigger push than "Grapevine," making its debut tonight at 9:30.
That's between reruns of "Murphy Brown" and, yes, "Northern Exposure." And that, be assured, is a cushy position to be in.


Kathryn Wolfson, Howard Jacobson
Kathryn Skidmore Wolfson, the daughter of Sally S. Wolfson of Westfield, N.J., and Sheldon Wolfson of Miami, was married yesterday to Howard Arthur Jacobson, the son of Pauline F. Jacobson of New York and the late Dr.
Paul H. Jacobson.
Rabbi Judith Brazen officiated at the National Arts Club in New York.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Media Business
Time Warner's chairman has taken an indefinite leave of absence for additional cancer treatment, two months after the company said his prostate cancer was in remission.
The news immediately raised questions about when, and if, Steven J. Ross will return to the helm of the media conglomerate.  [ Page D1. ]
The most gore and mayhem on television is not on the dial; it's on the phone lines of television executives, who hear lurid ideas for scripts based on actual crimes.
Bill Carter: Television.  [ D1. ]


Harold's Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


The Fatal Attraction of Three of the More Stunning Holes
The eighth, ninth and 10th holes at Pebble Beach make up perhaps the greatest three-hole stretch of consecutive par-4's in all of golf.
The setting is unparalleled, more than 1,000 yards of craggy coastline along the farthest reaches of the course.
When the wind is blowing against or across the golfer, the player who emerges with three pars will gain ground on the field.
No. 8, 431 yards
This is the hole that provides Jack Nicklaus's favorite shot in golf.
After a well-placed blind drive up a hill from an ocean-sprayed tee, the golfer will reach the top of the fairway as it begins to dogleg to the right, from where he will face one of the most awesome sights in the game.
Off a cliff that plunges 150 feet into a yawning inlet of Carmel Bay, he will be asked to launch a low- to mid-iron down to the smallest green on the course, which is surrounded by five bunkers and perched 60 feet above the churning sea.


AEL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Shopsmith Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Henley International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Palli Prevails As King Falters
To see Betsy King, the winner of 26 tournaments, double-bogey the last hole in a competition that she was leading with only one group after her was a disheartening sight for her followers at the ShopRite L.P.G.A.
Classic today.
King's double-bogey had the eventual result of allowing Anne-Marie Palli of France and Laura Davies of England to engage in a playoff.
Palli won with a birdie on the first extra hole for her first victory in nine years and her second victory in her 13 years on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour.


Review/Ballet; A Baryshnikov Debut at Age 44, In Balanchine's 'Duo Concertant'
At the age of 44 and with several knee operations behind him, Mikhail Baryshnikov cannot be expected to be the dancer he once was.
Yet his stage presence remains as potent as his reputation and George Balanchine's "Duo Concertant," which balances stillness with movement, was the perfect vehicle for the superstar's appearance with the New York City Ballet on Saturday night.
Box office appeal raised its not-so-subtle head at this first of six guest performances by Mr.
Baryshnikov this month at the New York State Theater with the City Ballet.
Ticket sales have slipped, as they have for American Ballet Theater this spring.
But as this occasion proved, higher-than-ever prices in a recession are no deterrent when the public is offered what it perceives as something outside the everyday dance event.
The City Ballet, even under Balanchine, has never been rigid about a policy that supposedly excludes guests.
Mr.
Baryshnikov left the City Ballet in 1979 after dancing with it for 15 months.
A few years later, although he was then artistic director of Ballet Theater, he returned for a handful of appearances in Balanchine's "Steadfast Tin Soldier."


Dance in Review
Sabatino Verlezza and Elyse Wright  Washington Square Methodist Church Greenwich Village
Because a nanosecond is a billionth of a second, "Nanoseconds" was an appropriate name for the program that Sabatino Verlezza and Elyse Wright presented on Friday night.
Each dance on it was filled with bits of movement of varying quality.
Fortunately, the good parts lasted longer than a nanosecond.
Unfortunately, so did the bad parts.
The choreographers often had trouble sustaining moods and ideas.
Ms.
Wright's most persuasive offering was "Shadows of Mourning," a dance of sorrow for a grieving woman and an ensemble that resembled a chorus in a Greek tragedy.
The choreographic fervor was compelling.
So was Teresa Degen in the leading role.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  NORTH KOREA'S ATOMIC AGENDA  North Korea has been building a plutonium reprocessing plant, but so far there is no evidence that enough material exists to make an atomic bomb, inspectors say.
A1  YELTSIN: A PROFILE IN CONTRASTS  When Mr.
Yeltsin comes to Washington for his first full-dress summit meeting, he packs an image woven from powerful but diverse fibers.
A1  Arms control and economic reform will be on the summit table.
A10  DUSTING OFF SOVIET SECRETS  A tantalizing dip into once-classified Soviet documents is likely to yield a fistful of treasure, but nothing that will solve the mysteries of 70 years of Communist rule.
A11  EARTH SUMMIT TURNS ON PROMISES  Some called it weak, others pronounced it disappointing, but many said the Earth Summit in Rio was a strong start toward achieving global cooperation made possible by the end of the cold war.
A1  The U.N. chief closes the Earth Summit with an appeal for action.
A8  JAPAN'S MOB FIGHTS BACK  Tough new laws against organized crime are being fended off by the well-established and perfectly legal yakuza.
The weapons in this essentially economic war range from lawsuits to luxury cars.
A1  OBSTACLES TO A CAMBODIAN PEACE  The refusal of the Khmer Rouge to put its soldiers under United Nations supervision will delay and could thwart the Cambodian peace process, officials say.
A3  WARNINGS ABOUT PANAMA SPEECH  U.S. officials in Panama said they had warned the White House against an outdoor speech by President Bush during his visit last week.
A3  2 PROTESTS, 1 MESSAGE  A solemn group led by Orthodox priests and a noisy gathering of mostly young people marched through Belgrade united in their cause -- forcing the resignation of the Serbian President.
A5  FEW LABOR BACKERS HERE  Ofra, a West Bank settlement, is emphatically not "waiting for Rabin," as campaign posters for the Labor candidate proclaim.
A9  Toronto Journal: A chief and orator speaks for his people.
A4  National A12-17  STRATEGY FOR 3-RING CIRCUS  Prodded by the strength of Ross Perot, the Bush and Clinton camps have begun adjusting their strategies for a three-way Presidential campaign.
The President is casting Mr.
Perot as dangerous, Mr.
Clinton is casting himself as more than a politician, and Mr.
Perot is merely being himself.
A1  FROM GRAY FLANNEL SUITS, COLOR  Following the successful lead of Republicans, Clinton aides are asking Madison Avenue executives to create positive advertising and giving political specialists the task of crafting negative attacks.
A16  Clinton stood by his criticism of a musician with ties to Jackson.
A16  THE GHOSTS OF WATERGATE  Questions still haunt the nation 20 years after burglars broke into a Democratic National Committee office at the Watergate Hotel and set off a scandal that brought down President Nixon.
But students of the scandal are agreeing on some probable answers.
A15  Who was who in the cover-up and uncovering of Watergate.
A14  CONCERNS ABOUT FORD BRONCOS  Statistics show a large number of people have been killed in accidents in which Bronco II's rolled over.
The utility vehicle is threatening to become a big financial, legal and public relations problem for Ford.
A1  CLEARING THE NAME OF 'IVAN'  Since marrying the daughter of John Demjanjuk, Edward Nishnic has pursued a tortuous quest to prove his father-in-law is not Ivan the Terrible, the sadistic guard at the Nazi's Treblinka death camp.
Last week his efforts yielded some success, but the toll on his family has been high.
A1  MINERS PLEAD FOR BAILOUT  More than 100,000 retired coal miners and relatives are in danger of losing their medical insurance because of huge deficits in their benefit plans.
With a Senate panel set to consider a bailout, the miners' plight has become a test case for the Government's handling of rising health costs.
A12  OF CUBAN SYMBOLS AND CITY FEES  The San Carlos Institute in Key West, Fla., is to Cubans what Independence Hall is to Americans, the birthplace of a nation's independence from colonial rule.
But the city sees the institute as just another commercial enterprise and is demanding $35,194 in fees.
A13  4 TEEN-AGERS ACCUSED IN KILLING  The police in Long Beach, Calif., arrested four high school students in the killing of a friend.
All five, the police say, were members of a secret militaristic club that fantasized about world domination.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  U.S. poet laureate named.
C13  Symphony orchestras face bottom line.
C13  Music: "A Carnegie Hall Hootenanny" C13  An early-music festival.
C14  Dance: Baryshnikov in "Duo Concertant" C13  Dance in Review C15  Word and Image: PBS looks at fundamentalism around the world.C18  "Grapevine," a gossipy new series.
C18  Obituaries B10  Sports C1-12  Autos: Winning by attrition in Canada.
C10  Baseball: Questions on Steinbrenner decision.
C1  Pirates sweep Mets.
C1  Yanks edge Indians.
C9  Basketball: Bulls take title again.
C1  Boxing: Holmes seeks more than title.
C10  Column: Berkow on Bulls-Blazers C3  Golf: U.S.
Open preview C6  Palli wins in New Jersey playoff.
C7  Olympics: Yugoslav hopes are dim.
C4  Trial not over for U.S. female gymnasts.
C4  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  The road from Rio.
The Baltics, still occupied.
Making Cubans suffer more.
Concert in the park.
Letters A18  Leslie H. Gelb: America in Israel.
A19  William Safire: Perot versus Social Security.
A19  Stephen Sestanovich: Yeltsin needs moral support, too.
A19  Benjamin Franklin: Murphy Brown, Colonial dame.
A19


Crown Books reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Aviva Patz and Wayne Lee Jebian
Aviva Miriam Patz, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Norman Patz of North Caldwell, N.J., was married yesterday to Wayne Lee Jebian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leroy Jebian of Mountainview, Calif.
Mrs.
Jebian, 22 years old, graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is the Rabbi of Temple Sholom of West Essex in Cedar Grove, N.J.
Her mother, Naomi Patz, is the executive director of the North American Jewish Forum, a nonprofit organization established to encourage communications between American and Israeli Jews, and is the author of four books, including "Explaining Reform Judaism" and "In the Beginning: The Jewish Baby Book."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; CLINTON STANDS BY REMARK ON RAPPER
Unrepentant in the face of criticism from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, Gov.
Bill Clinton refused yesterday to apologize for remarks he made Saturday that were critical of a black rap performer.
Mr.
Clinton said his comments were no different from calls for racial unity that he had made before black and white audiences throughout his Presidential campaign.


Foreign Affairs; America in Israel
Leaders here have always had an eye out for doings between the Israeli tail and the American dog.
The tail had gotten used to wagging the dog.
But Israelis know those golden days are waning with the cold war's end.
And many worry about what will happen when the dog starts wagging the tail.
So Israelis now keep especially close watch on the U.S. elections even as their own June 23 day of reckoning approaches.
Bill Clinton will be pleased, sort of, with the Israeli preference.
But President Bush can console himself, sort of, with the fact that deteriorating Israeli-American ties have not become a campaign issue in the Holy Land.
Thankfully, some Israelis are even beginning to think beyond elections to the question of new connections between tail and dog, and of how Israel might help itself and still perform a vital role for America in the Mideast.


Admar Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Lakewood Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Watergate, Then and Now
Twenty years ago this week, on June 17, 1972, burglars broke into the office of the Democratic National Committee in the Watergate Hotel and set off the political shock waves that finally brought down President Richard M. Nixon two years later.
Today the names of the Watergate figures still evoke powerful memories of that turbulent time.
Haldeman.
Sirica.
Dean.
Liddy.
Almost all are still living and most are still living and most are still active, some in new careers to replace the one broken by scandal.
Many questions about the scandal are still alive, too.
What were the burglars seeking?
Who was "Deep Throat," the source for the explosive disclosures published in The Washington Post?
Did Mr.
Nixon know a burglary was being planned?
And what caused the 18 1/2-minute gap in teh tape of a conversation between Mr.
Nixon and H.R.
Haldeman three days after the break-in?


Catherine Turnes, Stephen M. Bravo
Catherine Irene Turnes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ignatius J. Turnes of North Great River, L.I., was married yesterday in Port Washington, L.I., to Dr.
Stephen Michael Bravo, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Bravo of Fairfield, Conn.
Msgr.
Walter E. Simmons performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Church.
Mrs.
Bravo, 30 years old, is the trauma nurse coordinator at the North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
Her father, who is retired, was a chiropractor in North Great River.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY RASH OF FIRES IN MIDTOWN HOTELS


Making Poor Cubans Suffer More
Human considerations aside, would it truly promote democracy in Fidel Castro's island tyranny to further impoverish the Cuban people?
Representative Robert Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, believes it would.
His proposed Cuban Democracy Act has sailed through a House committee, with the blessings of the Bush Administration and Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Yet this misnamed act is dubious in theory, cruel in its potential practice and ignoble in its election-year expediency.
Tightening an already-harsh U.S. embargo on Cuba would enable Mr.
Castro to blame America for the mess that his own doctrines have spawned.
Nationalism is the one trump card left in his depleted hand.


Ann Harrisburg, Jeffrey Oppenheim
Ann Leslie Harrisburg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Harrisburg of Portland, Me., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Sable Oppenheim, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Justin S. Oppenheim of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Rabbi Marc D. Angel performed the ceremony at Congregation Shearith Israel in New York.
Mrs.
Oppenheim, 30 years old, is an institutional saleswoman at the Delaware Bay Company, an investment banking concern in New York.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
Her father is the president of the Bosal Foam and Fiber Company, a maker of foam rubber and polyester fiber in Limerick, Me.
Her mother, Saralee Harrisburg, owns and manages Gail-Ann Fabrics in Scarborough, Me.


Sparta Surgical Corp. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Two More Fires in Hotels May Be Linked to Others
Two fires broke out yesterday within an hour of each other at hotels separated by only three blocks in Manhattan, and baffled fire officials worked to determine whether the fires were linked to eight other small blazes -- all called suspicious -- at hotels in midtown over the last week.
Shortly after 6 P.M., firefighters stood side by side with worried guests in the lobby of the Sheraton New York, at 811 Seventh Avenue, at 53d Street, as the smell of smoke billowed down the elevator shaft from a mattress fire on the sixth floor.


Yeltsin Needs Moral Support, Too
When Boris Yeltsin meets with President Bush at the White House tomorrow, the most controversial issue in Russian foreign policy will probably not even be on the agenda.
That issue -- the fate of 25 million Russians who live outside Russia -- may determine whether liberals like Mr.
Yeltsin retain the political legitimacy to complete their revolution.
Russia is the only state to emerge from the old Soviet Union with mixed feelings about the empire's breakup.
For others, the U.S.S.R.'s dissolution meant national independence; for Russia, it meant borders, widely described as artificial, that no previous Russia ever had.


Rebecca Kaplan, A. I. Greenspan
Rebecca Kaplan, a daughter of Megan V. Kaplan of Bethesda, Md., and the late Sheldon Z. Kaplan, was married yesterday to Andrew Ira Greenspan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney N. Greenspan of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Norman Weinberg performed the ceremony at the Washington Hebrew Congregation.
Mrs.
Greenspan, 35 years old, is a vice president of the Maryland National Bank in Greenbelt, Md.
She graduated from Rollins College and received an M.B.A. from Marymount University in Arlington, Va.
Her father was a lawyer in Washington.
She is a granddaughter of the late Philip G. Vondersmith, a president of the Cincinnati, Newport &amp; Covington Railway.


Books of The Times; He Was Homespun, Maybe, but Full of Surprises
Truman By David McCullough Illustrated. 1,117 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


Travel Industry Plans For Life After Castro
Convinced that Fidel Castro's rule is nearing its end, executives in the American travel industry are laying plans for a surge of American visitors to Cuba.
While most of the executives play down any talk of an immediate bonanza from Cuban tourism, they note that the estimated one million Cuban-Americans represent a large pool of potential travelers along with other Americans who want to visit a nearby tropical island that has been largely off limits for more than three decades.


It's Off to the Races This Father's Day
For 64-year-old JOE BOLSTER of Princeton, N.J., Father's Day will mean rising at 4 A.M. to accompany his wife, TINK, age 63, to White Plains, site of the Danskins Women's Triathlon presented by B.M.W.
Tink Bolster, no triathlon tyro, will compete against a field of about 1,000 women next Sunday.
She will be the oldest competitor -- but probably not the last -- to swim a half mile, bike 12 miles and run 3 miles.


Waiting in the Wings Is the Next Mattingly
Whenever the Yankees get to a point where they have to look beyond DON MATTINGLY for a first baseman, they need not look too far.
A prime candidate for the job is J. T. SNOW, son of former football player, JACK SNOW, and now the everyday first baseman for the Columbus Clippers, the Yankees' Class AAA farm club.


Pacific Physician Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Festivals Galore


Plan Gains for Outdoor Cafe At Site in Union Square Park
Union Square Park would get a 200-seat, tablecloth-and-umbrella outdoor cafe, perhaps as early as this summer, under a plan that cleared several critical hurdles last week.
The cafe would occupy a sunken plaza at the northern end of the park, in front of an elegant, dilapidated pavilion that was built 60 years ago as a bandstand but that is now used for a park office and restrooms.


Aortech reports earnings for Year to March 31


Mining Soviet Secrets
Dark secrets trickle daily from the vast trove of documents Russia inherited from the Soviet Union, and they bring painful questions.
Page A11.


Cantel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bronco II Accidents Pose New Questions For Ford on Safety
For much of the 80's, the Bronco II, a rugged little vehicle, was one of the Ford Motor Company's most popular products.
Then statistics showed that a large number of people -- about 70 a year -- were killed in accidents in which Bronco II's rolled over.
All along, Ford insisted that the Jeep-like vehicles were safe, and in 1990 Government regulators decided that a recall was not necessary.
While the Bronco II is no longer made, 700,000 are still in use.


George deB. Bell, 68, An Investment Banker
George deBenneville Bell, chairman of a Philadelphia investment banking firm, died Saturday at his home in Gladwyne, Pa.
He was 68 years old.
Mr. Bell died of cancer, his family said.


Conrad Jones, 68, Marketing Adviser And Product Expert
Conrad Jones, a retired management consultant who was an expert on methods for developing successful new products, died on Friday at his home in Southport, Conn.
He was 68 years old.
He died of prostate cancer, his family said.


Del Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


L Rex International reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


U.N. Chief Closes Summit With an Appeal for Action
Closing the largest gathering of national leaders in history, the United Nations Secretary General told Earth Summit participants today that "the road from Rio" must translate 12 days of debate into action.
"The route is now marked out," Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said in a blunt farewell to an audience that included several of the 118 heads of state and government who had journeyed here.
"Today we have agreed to hold to present levels the pollution we are guilty of. One day we will have to do better -- clean up the planet."


Elizabeth Barkin, Nathan D. Leight
Elizabeth Barkin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Barkin of New York, was married there yesterday to Nathan David Leight, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Leight of Bay Harbor Islands, Fla.
Rabbi Bradley Shavit Artson performed the ceremony at Harmony Club.
Mrs.
Leight, 25 years old, is a psychotherapist at the Post Graduate West Center for Mental Health in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received masters degrees in counseling psychology and education from Columbia University.
Her father is a real-estate investor and developer in New York


A Grim Record: Hatred, Starvation, an Execution, More Hatred, Chernobyl
LENIN ORDERS DEPORTATIONS
At the time he wrote this letter in 1922, Lenin was the unquestioned leader of the ruling Communist Party and Stalin was his right-hand man, serving as party Secretary General.
The excerpt indicates Lenin's desire to rid the country of any potential political opponents.
July 17, 1922
Comrade Stalin!
On the matter of deporting Mensheviks, National Socialists, Kadets, etc. from Russia, I would like to ask a few questions, since this operation, which was started before my leave, still has not been completed.
Has the decision been made to "eradicate" all the NS's?
Peshekhonov, Myakotin, Gornfeld, Petrishchev, et al.?
As far as I'm concerned, deport them all.  [ They are ]  more harmful than any SR  [ Socialist Revolutionary ]  -- because  [ they are ]  more clever.
Also A. N. Potresov, Izgoyev and all the "Ekonomist" contributors (Ozerov and many, many others).
The Mensheviks, Rozanov (a physician, cunning), Vigdorchik, (Migulov or something like that), Liubov Nikolayevna Radchenko and her young daughter (rumor has it they're the vilest enemies of Bolshevism), N. A. Rozhkov (he has to be deported; incorrigible); S. A. Frank (author of "Metodologiya").
The commission supervised by Mantsev, Messing, et al. should present lists and several hundred such ladies and gentlemen must be deported without mercy.
Let's purge Russia for a long while!
. . .
This must be done at once.
Before the end of the SRs' trial, no later.
Arrest a few hundred and without a declaration of motives -- get out, ladies and gentlemen! . . .
With a communist greeting, -- LENIN  WARNING ABOUT FAMINE IN SIBERIA
A confidential
report in April 1932 illustrated the devastating effects of farm collectivization in Siberia.
At the time, the Soviet authorities went to great lengths to keep the widespread famine secret from the outside world.
The following is from a physician's report sent to Grigory K. Ordzhonikidze, a confidant of Stalin.
Filipp Borodin has earned 650 work-days, has a wife and 5 children ranging from one and a half to nine years of age.
The wife lies ill on the oven, 3 children sit on the oven; they are as pale as wax with swollen faces. . . .
Filipp Borodin himself sits on a bench and continuously smokes cigarettes made of repulsively pungent tobacco, cries like a babe, asks death for his children.
In tears he asks Comrade Sukhanov: "Give us at least one kilo of potatoes, give us at least one liter of milk, after all, I worked all summer and even now I work unceasingly. . . . According to the statement by Comrade Sukhanov and the brigadier of the kolkhoz "Red Partisan," Borodin was a noncomplaining worker.
Borodin does not even have food substitutes for nourishment; two days ago he and his family ate two sickly piglets thrown out of the common farmyard.
In the Borodin home there is unbelievable filth, dampness, and stench, mixed with the smell of tobacco.
Borodin swears at the children: "The devils don't die. I wish I didn't have to look at you!" Having objectively investigated the condition of Borodin himself, I ascertain that he (Borodin) is starting to slip into psychosis due to starvation, which can lead to his eating his own children. . . .
March 25, 1932 Regional Health Inspector Dr.
KISELEV  BUKHARIN PROCLAIMS INNOCENCE
Nikolai V. Bukharin, a leading Bolshevik theorist and a friend as well as a frequent intellectual opponent of Lenin, led the so-called "right opposition" to Stalin in 1928-29 and was perhaps the most prominent victim of his purges.
Here is his protestation of innocence in a February 1937 letter to Soviet leaders just before his arrest, and his plea for mercy after his conviction in a show trial on March 13, 1938, the presumed day of his execution.
February 20, 1937
Dear Comrades!
I have sent to the Plenum of the Central Committee a two-part "Deposition" of nearly 100 pages, responding to the cloud of slander contained in the testimony. . . .
As a result of all this, I am a nervous wreck.
The death of Sergo  [ Ordzhonikidze ] , whom I loved as deeply as a member of my family, was the final blow.
The position in which this slander has put me, when I can neither rejoice together with my Party comrades, together with the whole country (Pushkin Days), nor grieve and mourn over the body of Sergo is an insufferable position and I cannot endure it any more.
I swear to you once again on the last breath of Ilich  [ Lenin ] , who died in my arms; on my deep love for Sergo, and on all that I hold sacred that associating me with all these acts of terrorism, sabotage, Trotskyite pacts, etc. is unheard-of base slander.
. . .
In this most extraordinary situation, from tomorrow I will go on a full hunger strike until the charges of treason, sabotage and terrorism against me are removed.
I will not live with these accusations. . . .
Farewell.
Be victorious.
Yours,  N. BUKHARIN  A Plea for Mercy
I beg the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. for mercy.
I consider the verdict of the court to be just punishment for my most grave transgressions against the socialist motherland, its people, party, and government.
There is not a single word of protest in my soul.
I should be shot ten times for my crimes. . . .
If I allow myself to petition the highest government organ in our land, before which I appear on my knees, it is only because I believe that through a pardon I can be of value to my country; I do not say -- and I am not able to say -- that I can expiate my guilt; the crimes I committed are so monstrous, so enormous, that I cannot atone for the guilt -- no matter what I may do for the rest of my life.
But I assure the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet that my stay of more than a year in prison has forced me to do a great deal of thinking and to reconsider much from my criminal past. . . .
Step by step, I have re-examined my past life.
The former Bukharin has already died; he no longer lives on this earth.
. . .
Let a new, second Bukharin grow -- let him even be  [ called ]  Petrov -- this new man will be the complete antithesis of the one who has died.
He has already been born -- give him the opportunity of any kind of work at all. . . .
I shall strive to prove to you, with every fiber of my being, that this gesture of proletarian generosity was justified.
Nikolai Bukharin.
Moscow, March 13, 1938.
Internal N.K.V.D. prison.
ANDROPOV NAMES HIS ENEMIES
A memorandum written by the head of the K.G.B., Yuri V. Andropov, on Nov. 15, 1976, gives details on the activities of leading dissidents and steps taken against them.
Mr.
Andropov later succeeded Leonid I. Brezhnev as Soviet leader, holding power from 1982 until his death in February 1984.
In recent years our adversary's special services and propaganda bureaus have attempted to give the impression that a so-called "internal opposition" exists in the U.S.S.R., rendering support to those who inspire antisocial and anti-Soviet activities and promote the banding together of participants in a variety of anti-Soviet activities.
Accordingly, in 1969 antisocial elements headed by Yakir and Krasin founded an "initiative group" in order to form an organization made up of participants of the so-called "movement for democratization."
In 1970, in order to activate the antisocial efforts of individuals with hostile leanings, Chalidze established the so-called "Committee for the Protection of Human Rights" which, in addition to himself, includes among its members Academician Sakharov and Shafarevich, a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.
In 1973 the so-called "Russian Section" of Amnesty International, headed by Turchin and Tverdokhlebov, assumed organizational responsibilities for individuals with anti-Soviet leanings.
. . .
As a result of measures taken by the Committee for State Security, the "initiative group" and the "Committee for the Protection of Human Rights" have been completely compromised and have virtually ceased to exist.
The activities of the "Russian Section" have been curtailed.
Nevertheless, despite the failure to create an "internal opposition" in the U.S.S.R., our adversary has not abandoned this idea.
On May 12 of this year, on the initiative of Yuri F. Orlov, born in 1924, unemployed, corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences of the Armenian S.S.R., the antisocial elements announced the formation of a "Group for Implementation of the Helsinki Accords in the U.S.S.R."
G., born 1922, Jew, retiree; Bernshtam, M. S., born 1949, Jew, emigrated to Israel; Landa, M. N., born 1918, Jew, retiree, unemployed; Alekseyeva, L. M., born 1927, Russian, unemployed, and Korchak, A. A., born 1922, Ukrainian, fellow at the Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere and Radio Wave Transmission, Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.
. . .
The Committee for State Security is taking measures to compromise and put an end to the "group's" hostile activities.
Reported by way of information.
Chairman of the Committee on State Security  ANDROPOV  K.G.B.
WARNING ON CHERNOBYL
More than seven years before the Cherno
byl nuclear disaster, the K.G.B., led by An
dropov, had reported to the Central Committee of the Soviet Union that there were serious design and construction problems at the power station.
February 21, 1979
According to data in the possession of the K.G.B. of the U.S.S.R., design deviations and violations of construction and assembly technology are occurring at various places in the construction of the second generating unit of the Chernobyl A.E.S. and these could lead to mishaps and accidents.
The structural pillars of the generator room were erected with a deviation of up to 100 mm. from the reference axes, and horizontal connections between the pillars are absent in places.
Wall panels have been installed with a deviation of up to 150 mm. from the axes.
The placement of roof plates does not conform to the designer's specifications.
Crane tracks and stopways have vertical drops of up to 100 mm. and in places a slope of up to 8  .
Deputy head of the Construction Directorate, Comrade V. T. Gora, gave instructions for backfilling the foundation in many places where vertical waterproofing was damaged.
Similar violations were permitted in other sections with the knowledge of Comrade V. T. Gora and the head of the construction group, Comrade Yu.
L.
Matveyev.
Damage to the waterproofing can lead to ground water seepage into the station and radioactive contamination of the environment.
The leadership of the Directorate is not devoting proper attention to the foundation, on which the quality of the construction largely depends.


Cott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Battle in Rio: The Day After Friends and Foes Agree On a Sharper Sentinel
The Earth Summit, which wound up with predictable fanfare today, has given the world its first real glimpse of the kind of global diplomacy that is becoming possible now that the the cold war is over.
But the conference has also shown how difficult negotiating worldwide solutions to worldwide problems is likely to be.
For decades East-West tensions made it hard to take joint approaches to challenges affecting all the world's nations, including environmental problems like threats to the atmosphere, population growth, and international migration.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Stocks fell sharply here today, as the Nikkei index of 225 issues fell below 17,000 for the first time since April 22.
The Nikkei finished down 430.45 points, or 2.4 percent, to 16,953.23.
On Friday, the index fell 325.37 points, or 1.8 percent.


Miss Pomerantz, Stuart Strelzer
Sharon Edan Pomerantz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry I. Pomerantz of Silver Spring, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to Stuart Strelzer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Strelzer of Somers, N.Y.
Rabbi Joel Tessler performed the ceremony at the Park Hyatt Hotel.
Mrs.
Strelzer, 28 years old, is a freelance public relations writer in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.


N.V. AMEV reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Richfood Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for 17wks to May 2


Skyline Chili Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 10


Essay; Perot Versus Social Security
When Barry Goldwater floated out the notion that Social Security should be made voluntary, he put the fear of destitution into his most dedicated supporters and doomed his 1964 campaign.
Ross Perot may have just done the same thing.
It began innocently enough, with his seemingly generous suggestion that "people like me" should pay taxes on Social Security benefits.
Apparently he was ignorant of the fact that the highest earners over 65 have, for the past eight years, been paying taxes on half their Social Security benefits.


Pamela Sterling, Jeffrey Vogel
Pamela Lynne Sterling, the daughter of Howard Sterling of New York and Sylvia Sterling of Ferndale, Calif., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Louis Vogel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Vogel of Pleasantville, N.Y.
Rabbi Douglas Krantz performed the ceremony at the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y.
Mrs.
Vogel, 24 years old, is a graduate of Brown University, where she works as a computer consultant.
Her father is the managing director of corporate finance with Oscar Gruss &amp; Son Inc., a brokerage firm in New York.
Her mother owns and operates a wholesale and distribution gift company in Ferndale.


The Road From Rio
It's tempting to deride the just-completed Earth Summit as a noisy, irrelevant circus.
Tempting, but wrong, and a disservice to the environmental challenges ahead.
True, some developing countries seemed more interested in an abstract "right to development" than in concrete problems like explosive population growth.
Some developed countries proved readier to preach clean development than to change perverse incentives that make environmental degradation the path of least resistance.


De la Hoya, Five Others Gain Boxoffs
The United States Olympic boxing trials ended here this afternoon with six more fighters assuring themselves spots in next week's boxoffs in Arizona.
Oscar de la Hoya of Los Angeles, Raul Marquez of Houston and Larry Donald of Cincinnati scored impressive victories to close out the trials on their fifth day here at the Centrum.


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Amy Michelle Shapiro and Simon Guenzl
Amy Michelle Shapiro, a daughter of Ronald Shapiro of New York and Maxine R. Shapiro of Sands Point, L.I., was married in New York yesterday to Simon Guenzl, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Guenzl of Perth, Australia.
Rabbi Martin S. Rozenberg performed the ceremony at the Pierre.


Housing Aid Goes Unspent By Poor Cities
While Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council were reducing spending in New York City's recent budget crisis, hundreds of millions of dollars earmarked for the city was languishing unspent in Federal accounts.
At the beginning of this year, New York had accumulated more than $674.5 million in a program to modernize and rehabilitate public housing, according to a computer search by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The city had not even let contracts for $414 million, including $213 million appropriated three or more years ago.


Will 3 Be a Charm For Teresa Edwards?
The Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, this summer will be the third for TERESA EDWARDS of the United States women's basketball team that was named recently.
And if Edwards is any indication, this team will not be fooling around.
"I'm a lot calmer now, more businesslike," she said recently.
"I'm not into sightseeing and I'm ready to get started."


Dartmouth Graduates Hear Of Importance of Education
James O. Freedman, president of Dartmouth College, told 1,461 graduates gathered yesterday at commencement ceremonies at the Hanover, N. H., campus that educational opportunities were the key to providing equality for all Americans, whether they are rich or poor.
"It is education that holds the greatest promise of defusing the time bomb of inequality that remains menacingly ready to explode yet again," he said, referring to the recent unrest in Los Angeles after the verdict in the beating of Rodney G. King.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late in the day on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 3.65 percent and the six-month bill was at 3.74 percent.


Famous Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 19


Magazines Rebuild Advertising Ties
Still reeling from more than two years of declining advertising, the magazine industry is rethinking how it does business.
The buzzword these days is "relationship marketing."
Nowhere was that more apparent than at a two-day publishing management conference at the Macklowe Conference Center in New York last week attended by virtually all of the industry leaders.
The same themes reverberated through every session:


Bridgford Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Bulls Repeat as N.B.A. Champions


For British in the U.S., a Weekly Touch of Fleet St.
British expatriates have longings for home no less urgent than those of Americans abroad who savour Big Macs, the nectar of bourbon and the soothing titillation of People magazine.
For the British, the cravings are apt to be for room-temperature beer, Heinz baked beans on toast and the hottest scoop on royal scandal and cricket.


Cyclist Puts Pedal To Medal for a Mark
ANNA SCHWARTZ went to a lot of trouble to break SUSAN NOTORANGELO's 24-hour cycling record (401.6 miles), but the months of training and the day and night of virtually nonstop pedaling around a 15.14-mile loop in Dade County, Fla., paid off when Schwartz ticked off 417.5 miles.
That was in October 1990, and Schwartz, a nurse and graduate student in health and education at the University of Florida, had reason to be proud.
Notorangelo's record had stood for eight years.


Dan Quayle, Malcolm X and American Values
BLACKS realize increasingly that physically, politically, economically, and even to some degree socially, the aroused black man can create a turmoil in white America's vitals -- not to mention America's international image.
Spike Lee was dismissive.
Betty Shabazz was hopeful.
Robert Little was skeptical.
All three -- the film-maker, who is completing his production of "X," and Malcolm X's widow and brother -- were incredulous at Vice President Dan Quayle's revelation last week that he was mining the slain black nationalist's autobiography for clues to racial conflict and to its mitigation, reported in The Wall Street Journal.


BET Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Nobility Homes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 1


Foreign Investors Pouring Into China
Gunfire ringing in their ears, foreign executives fled China in the aftermath of the Tiananmen Square crackdown three years ago, and many people doubted that foreign investors and tourists would return as long as the hard-line Communists remained in power.
So much for conventional wisdom: these days the Chinese economy is booming, and foreign investment and tourism are setting records.
Despite the risks of United States trade sanctions over China's human rights record, executives once more are enthralled by the business potential of the most populous nation on earth.


Accounts
*
Schering-Plough Corp., Madison, N.J., to Willam Douglas McAdams Inc., New York, to handle consumer advertising for the introduction of Femcare, an over-the-counter vaginal yeast infection medication.
Billings were estimated at $10 million. *
Schieffelin &amp; Somerset, New York, to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, for its Ruffino wines account, which had most recently been at Ayer Inc., New York.
Kirshenbaum handles four other Schieffelin products including Hennessy cognac.
Billings were not disclosed.


Premier Choix TVEC reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Nairi Checkosky, Sevag Balian
Nairi Shushan Checkosky, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen F. Checkosky of River Plaza, N.J., was married to Gregory Sevag Balian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vartkess M. Balian of Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
Mampre Kouzouian performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Armenian Apostolic Church in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Balian, 25 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received an M.B.A. earlier this month from Harvard University, as did her husband.
The bride is to become an assistant brand manager at the Noxell Corporation, the cosmetics company in Hunt Valley, Md.
Her father is the president and founder of Selection Microsystems Inc., a Red Bank, N.J., consulting concern specializing in organizational behavior.


INSIDE
Poet Laureate Is Named
Mona Van Duyn, whose "Near Change" won a 1991 Pulitzer Prize, was named the nation's sixth poet laureate, the first to be a woman.
She succeeds Joseph Brodsky.
Page C13.
Time Warner Chief on Leave
Steven J. Ross, chairman and chief executive of the entertainment and media company, began an indefinite leave of absence to continue treatments for prostate cancer.
Page D1.


Rebecca Boren, Marc Bruner
Rebecca Boren, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Boren of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Marc Richard Bruner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Bruner of West Hartford.
Rabbi Simeon Glazer performed the ceremony in Westmoor Park.
Mrs.
Bruner, 26 years old, is a physicians' assistant in cardiovascular surgery at the St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.
She graduated from Earlham College and received a physicians'-assistant degree from Hahnemann Medical College and Hospital.
Her father is the medical director of the Institute of Living, a Hartford psychiatric hospital.
Her mother, Shirley T. Boren, who is retired, was a medical-office assistant in West Hartford.


BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; The Bulls and Jordan Blaze a Tough Trail in Playoff Finals
THE GAME was over, and nobody, but nobody, went home.
Not only did the 18,676 fans who filled Chicago Stadium last night not avail themselves of the exits and staircases, as is a generally held custom, but they stood and screamed at the top of their substantial lungs: "We want the Bulls! We want the Bulls!"
Now they began to crowd onto the basketball court, while the yellow-jacketed security force seemed oblivious, as they too were caught up in the excitement.
It had been many minutes since the Bulls had come from as far back as 17 points in the third period to overtake the Portland Trail Blazers and win the sixth and final game of the playoff finals, 97-93, for their second straight National Basketball Association championship.


Europe's Television Borders Start to Fall
The French and the Germans have long been the driving forces behind European unification.
Recently, the two countries announced plans for a joint military unit.
Now they have started Arte, a French-German cultural television network.
The new network takes a decidedly Eurocentric line, determined to resist what is seen as American cultural colonization and to play a role in the building of a European cultural community.
Like the French-German military force, Arte -- which is an acronym for Association Relative a la Television Europeenne, or Association for European Television -- aims to transcend its binational beginnings, and soon.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater  Metropolitan Opera House
Fire met fire on Saturday night when Cheryl Yeager and Julio Bocca starred in American Ballet Theater's production of "Don Quixote." Ms.
Yeager once again portrayed Kitri, the heroine of this choreographic comedy.
Mr.
Bocca danced Basil for the first time this season.
Basil is the barber Kitri loves, despite the protests of her grumpy father.
Whatever Basil's shaves and haircuts may have been like, Mr.
Bocca's turns were razor-sharp and breathtaking.
His taut bodily carriage made him convincingly Spanish.
His alert manner suggested that Basil was a clever fellow eager to have fun.


QUESTION BOX
Interstate N.C.A.A. Finals
Q.
When Pepperdine of Malibu, Calif., beat Cal State-Fullerton in the final of the College World Series on June 6, it was the first time two schools from the same state met in the N.C.A.A.
Division I baseball championship game.
Has it ever happened in the Division I basketball final?
A.
Only twice in 54 finals, and each time it not only was the same state but also the same teams with the same winner, and in successive years to boot.
The N.C.A.A. interstate showdowns took place in 1961 and 1962, which were good years to be rooting for the University of Cincinnati, even though Oscar Robertson had just left for the National Basketball Association.
Without him, such players as Paul Hogue, Tom Thacker, Tony Yates and Ron Bonham stepped up and Coach Ed Jucker's Bearcats twice knocked off their Ohio rivals from Columbus, the Ohio State Buckeyes.
The scores were 70-65 in overtime and 71-59, respectively, and the sites were Kansas City, Mo., and Louisville, Ky.


Proposed Pitches For Candidates
With the many advertising executives being asked by the press to propose Presidential campaign commercials, one might wonder when they have time for their actual clients.
Harper's Magazine is the latest to offer political advertising strategists a chance to suggest possible Presidential pitches.
In an article in the July issue titled "30 Seconds to Victory," they describe spots they would like to create for President Bush and Gov.
Bill Clinton. (Ross Perot, presumably, can afford to hire his own strategists.)


VSI Enterprises reports earnings for Year to March 31


Bonds Is Hurt, and Pirates Get Scared
When Barry Bonds crumpled in front of home plate after straining a muscle in his side, it meant more to the Pittsburgh Pirates than just losing their star player for at least two games.
"You see your pennant hopes going right down when you see him go down," said Pirates center fielder Andy Van Slyke after Pittsburgh's 5-4 victory over the Mets yesterday.
"He's been the force behind our offense and the main reason we're getting things done. If we lose him, I imagine our pennant hopes will probably vanish."


Democracy Hasn't Won in the Philippines
To the Editor:
I believe your tentative expression of confidence in Fidel Ramos, the apparent winner of the Philippine presidential election, is misplaced ("Hints of Hope in Manila," editorial June 1).
While it is true that General Ramos's efforts to end a succession of attempted coups bespeaks a commitment to constitutional government, it does not follow that he will "address a neglected social and economic agenda." You cite the need for "fundamental reform" of "quasi-feudal" Philippine society.
Your support for pillars of the Philippine establishment like General Ramos and Corazon Aquino calls into question your stated desire for change.
General Ramos's role in Philippine counterinsurgency policy should inspire skepticism about his commitment to the poor and needy.


Israeli Settlers Worrying About a Victory by Rabin
You can look all over this Jewish settlement and not find a single copy of the blue-and-white posters that the opposition Labor Party has spread across the country, ballyhooing its leader, Yitzhak Rabin, and proclaiming that "Israel is waiting for Rabin."
In Ofra, a religious community of 1,500 people, anyone waiting for Mr.
Rabin is doing so nervously.


Pamela London, Andrew Nicholls
Dr.
Pamela Vida London, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander London of New York, was married yesterday to Andrew Dean Nicholls, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dean Nicholls of Midland, Ontario.
Rabbi Lawrence Siegel officiated at the Helmsley Palace in New York.
The bride, 25 years old, is a resident in pediatrics at the Children's Hospital of Buffalo.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and the Medical College of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the United States division of Imprimerie Centrale Commerciale, a publisher of art books in Paris.
Her mother, Dorothy London, is the librarian at the Career Information Library at Columbia University.


Consolidated Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Foray Into Mainstream For Parallel Computing
Edward A. Masi, a top executive at the supercomputer manufacturer Cray Research, went on a secret recruiting mission last year, hoping to lure away a marketing executive from a smaller competitor.
But the hunter became the hunted.
To his surprise, Mr.
Masi found he was being courted by a company making a computer with a radically new design, based on an unproved technology -- hooking together hundreds of off-the-shelf chips to reach supercomputer speeds, a process known as massively parallel processing.
He decided to take a gamble, and in March left Cray to become president of the Intel Corporation's small supercomputer division.


Simmonds Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jimbo's Jumbos Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Dance in Review
Alvin Ailey American Dance Center  Marymount Manhattan Theater
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Center gave itself a party on Tuesday night.
The ostensible reason for this "Seventh Annual Spring Gala Performance" was to raise money for the Ailey school.
But the level of performing, the choice of dances and the smooth staging made it all seem like a big, warm-hearted celebration.
The evening, which featured dancing by advanced and professional-level Ailey students and members of the first and second companies, got off to a lyrical, formalist start with excerpts from Jose Limon's "Choreographic Offering," set to Bach and staged by Sue Bernhard.
The cast was led by Laura Lisa Rodriguez, Steven E. Brown and Felise Bagley.
In "The River Niger," Raymond C. Harris recited a poem by Joseph Walker and illustrated it with dance that made interesting use of bodies as elements in a kind of large-type sign language.
Mr.
Harris's vivid duet was performed affectingly by Torens Johnson and Victoria Sakamaki.


Japan Businesses Lose Confidence in Economy
Business confidence in Japan has rapidly deteriorated in the last three months and has reached the lowest level in five years, the Bank of Japan reported Friday.
Economists said the report, reflecting a survey of business sentiment, indicated that a rebound of Japan's sagging economy, which optimists had expected to begin this summer, would be delayed until later this year or perhaps next year.


Robyn Mewshaw, Ben Aaron Indek
Robyn Frances Mewshaw, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Mewshaw of Las Vegas, Nev., was married yesterday in New York to Ben Aaron Indek, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Indek of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Joel S. Gore performed the ceremony at the Conservancy Garden in Central Park.
Mrs.
Indek, 38 years old, is an assistant vice president at Merrill Lynch in New York.
She graduated from the University of New Mexico, and she and her husband received law degrees from New York Law School.


Chronicle
JERRY SEINFELD the comedian, says he can understand the frustration that led to riots after the RODNEY G. KING case in Los Angeles, and he wants to do something to help the victims of the riots.
"I felt like doing a little rioting myself when that happened," Mr.
Seinfeld said of the violence that erupted April 29.
"I was extremely frustrated with the racist social ignorance that caused that to happen."


Internet Communications reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Pop; A Hootenanny, but a Sedate One, at Carnegie Hall
For a moment or two in "A Carnegie Hall Hootenanny," Friday evening's crowning event in the hall's seven-concert folk festival, it was possible to imagine oneself transported back 30 years to an era when the communal folk sing-along was an organizing force for civil rights and liberal political causes.
The first and most palpably nostalgic moment came at the beginning of the evening when Odetta instructed the audience to "jump in feet first" regardless of vocal abilities and join her in "Kumbaya," an archetypal folk sing-along of the 1960's.
Odetta, at 61 years old, is a musician who seems virtually untouched by the years.
Her clear, penetrating alto, which breaks dramatically from narrative singing into an ethereal bluesy humming, remains a flexible and emotionally stirring instrument.
And onstage she radiated the same unwavering faith in the power of folk songs to bring people together that she exhibited three decades ago.


Incaviglia and Astros Pound Giants' Righetti
Astros 15, Giants 7
HOUSTON, June 14 (AP) -- Pete Incaviglia, signed to a minor league contract in January, entered today's game against San Francisco with only 2 homers and 15 runs batted in in 50 games this season for Houston.
But he hit two homers and drove in a career-high seven runs as the Astros routed the Giants, 15-7.
It was the eighth time Incaviglia has hit two homers in a game, and his seven r.b.i. tied the club record set by Rafael Ramirez on Aug. 29, 1989, against Chicago.


Volt Information reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


SCS/Compute Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Navah Perlman, Robert D. Frost
Navah Miriam Perlman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Itzhak Perlman of New York, was married in East Hampton, L.I., yesterday to Robert David Frost, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Frost of New York.
Rabbi Shira Stern performed the ceremony at the weekend home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Frost, 22 years old, graduated last month from Brown University and plans to pursue a career as a classical pianist.
Her father is the violinist.


Consilium Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


G-III Apparel Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Concert in the Park
"Sing us a song, you're the Piano Man . . ." A blond bearded man with a guitar was singing on a path beside the lake in Central Park yesterday and a scattering of people on the grassy bank swayed and sang back, "Sing us a song tonight." David Ippolito was his name and as he went on, more people stopped.
As the songs -- from James Taylor, Don Henley, Woody Guthrie -- glided past, the casual concert dissolved into a small golden homage to its site, both park and city.
In the background, disembodied Manhattan towers shimmered above the tree line.
In the foreground, a gnarled tree bent to the lake where two dozen rowboats were shuttling lazily past.
One stopped nearby, bearing a solo oarsman in a baseball cap festooned with a Puerto Rican flag.


The Mystery of a Missing Executive  Where Is Sidney Reso? No Demands, No Clues, No Idea
Where is Sidney J. Reso?
The short answer is: No one who is looking for him has the slightest idea.
In the six weeks since the Exxon official disappeared from the driveway of his home here, law-enforcement officials say that almost nothing is known about how he vanished and why, or who may be holding him and where.


Banker's Note Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Odd's N End's reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Cableshare Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Yeltsin, Due in U.S. Today, Is Still Complex and Elusive
It is a year now since Boris N. Yeltsin became the first elected President of Russia, and the reviews are as diverse as the extraordinary chain of events that transformed him from the maverick leader of a Soviet republic to the master of the Kremlin.
Though he travels widely and gives frequent interviews, the burly, 61-year-old President remains a complex and elusive figure.
He is still enormously popular at home, but abroad his stiff and formal demeanor have denied him the celebrity status enjoyed by his archrival, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
In Wake of Gorbachev
That contrast is certain to hang over Mr.
Yeltsin's visit to the United States starting Monday, which comes in the wake of Mr.
Gorbachev's successful voyage.
The trip is Mr.
Yeltsin's second to the United States as Russia's President and his first full-dress summit meeting, and he will have the rare honor of addressing a joint meeting of Congress.


Bridge
The Pan-American Open Pairs Championship ended yesterday in Corpus Christi, Tex., with two Midwest experts snatching victory in a photo-finish.
Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., and Doug Simson of Columbus, Ohio, began the day with a slender lead, and still had it when play ended.
These were the final standings: 1.
Rodwell and Simson, 416.71; 2.
Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil 413.6; 3.
David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., 410.61; 4.
Richard Pavlicek and Richard Pavlicek Jr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., 382.08.


Familiar Faces Returning Soon
It did not take long for the pair who portrayed Frank Bartles and Ed Jaymes in wine-cooler commercials to end their stint on advertising's unemployment line.
From 1984 until they were let go in January, David Rufkahr and Dick Maugg were the Bartles &amp; Jaymes duo for E.&amp; J. Gallo.
Though they were not actors when Hal Riney asked them to play the characters, their low-key humor won a wide following.
Now, the two have been signed as the spokesmen for a campaign for Golf Illustrated magazine.


People
*
Pam Cunningham, 34 years old, was named senior vice president and creative director at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, Los Angeles.
She was previously senior vice president and co-creative director on the Infiniti account at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Los Angeles. *
Michael Baldwin was named senior vice president and worldwide account director on the Apple Computer account at BBDO Worldwide, Los Angeles.
He was previously a management supervisor on the Compaq Computer account at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York.


Coalition Seeks to Adopt a Standard Unix Version
A broad coalition of computer makers and software developers will announce their intent tomorrow to adopt a common version of the Unix operating system, a sign that the end may be at hand to the bitter wars over competing versions of the sophisticated software.
Unix has long been popular with scientists and engineers and with researchers on university campuses, but it has not made a serious dent in the market for commercial and desktop applications.


Filling a Fish Bowl With N.F.L. Players
Want to promote a fishing tournament? Why not invite a few famous athletes.
So the Cayman Islands Super Fish Bowl II on Wednesday and Thursday will enlist such National Football League stars as CARL BANKS of the Giants, LONNIE YOUNG of the Jets, EARNEST BYNER of the Redskins, NICK LOWERY of the Chiefs, GILL FENERTY of the Saints, JAMIE DUKES of the Falcons, REGGIE ROBY of the Dolphins and RICKY PROEHL of the Cardinals.


Warnings to Bush on Panama Cited
President Bush went ahead with a public, outdoor speech during his visit to Panama on Thursday despite recommendations from American officials here that he give it indoors, people who helped organize the visit say.
They said recommendations against the outdoor speech were given by the military here to the Pentagon and by the United States Embassy to the White House advance team for the visit, which was marred by a protest.


FCMI Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yankees Get Off Seesaw In Time
The Yankees were teetering and tottering between victory and defeat today.
They took a lead against the Indians, lost it, then regained it and lost it once more.
Extra innings commenced and the outlook was hardly rosy.
But the Yankees altered those feelings almost immediately when they rocked consecutive doubles to start the 10th inning, secured a one-run lead and escaped Cleveland Stadium with a 4-3 victory over the Indians.


The '92 Open: Still-Life Beauty With Moving Pictures
In the world of golf, to borrow from an old jingle, everybody doesn't like something, but nobody doesn't like Pebble Beach.
Since it was built in 1919 by Jack Neville and Douglas Grant, the most contrary on-the-record criticism of the course came from the usually effervescent Jimmy Demaret, who once carped, "If you moved Pebble Beach 50 miles inland, no one would have heard of it."


Michelle Gavens and Brian Margolis
Michelle Gavens, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Gavens of West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Brian Margolis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney O. Margolis of New York.
Rabbi Stanley Kessler performed the ceremony at Beth-El Temple.
Mrs.
Margolis, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Chicago and is studying for an M.B.A. at Harvard University.
Her father is a senior partner in Blum, Shapiro &amp; Company, an accounting firm in Farmington, Conn.


Press Is Condemned By a Federal Judge For Court Coverage
A Federal appeals judge has criticized journalists for what he described as biased reporting of the Supreme Court.
The judge, Laurence H. Silberman of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, said the press had "accepted and embraced the tenets of judicial activism."


Japan Takes On the Mob, and the Mob Fights Back
With hit movies like "Tampopo" and "A Taxing Woman," Juzo Itami has developed a knack for making this serious-minded nation laugh at its quirks.
But when he decided to join a growing national debate with a new film about fending off the mob, satire gave way to a real drama.
On May 22, just a week after the new movie opened, three men attacked Mr.
Itami in front of his house, slashing him repeatedly in the face, neck and left hand, leaving him alive but disfigured.
Suddenly, the film director's bandaged face became a gruesome symbol of a kind of war the Japanese have been waging recently against the yakuza, or mob.


Who Was Who in the Cover-Up and Uncovering of Watergate
The discovery of an attempted burglary of the office of the Democratic National Committee on June 17, 1972 -- an incident President Richard M. Nixon referred to as "that pipsqueak Watergate" -- led to disclosures that unraveled over the next two years like a ball of twine.
Entangled in that skein were dozens of men implicated in the scandal, many of whom were top aides to the President.
As it steadily unwound, the American people watched a parade of witnesses expose the details of a political crime whose proportions were nearly unfathomable: wiretapping, money laundering, destruction of documents, payment of hush money, character assassination, disinformation and deception -- all perpetrated by people at the highest levels of Government.
More than 30 people pleaded guilty or were convicted of crimes like perjury, burglary, wiretapping and obstruction of justice.


Toronto Journal; A Cree Beats the Drum for All of Canada's Indians
"We don't want any more humiliation," says Ovide Mercredi, the woodlands Cree at the head of the struggle for Indian rights in Canada.
"We have young people committing suicide all over Canada, and part of that has to do with a people who have lost their sense of pride."
Native people -- about one million of 27 million Canadians -- have the deepest roots here, but have endured more injustices than any other group of Canadians.
Now many other Canadians are acknowledging the wrongs and trying to redress them.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Victory for Stich
Michael Stich, the 1991 Wimbledon champion, was a 6-4, 7-5 winner over Jonathan Stark, a 21-year-old from Medford, Ore., yesterday in the final of the Continental Grass Court Championship in Rosmalen, the Netherlands.
It was Stark's first tour final since he turned pro last fall.
Stich, who earned $33,800, took the lead in the first set when Stark double-faulted in the fifth game to lose his serve.
In the second set, Stich broke Stark's serve for a 6-5 lead. (AP) Ferreira Wins His First: Wayne Ferreira of South Africa won his first tournament title by defeating Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan, 6-3, 6-4, at Queen's Club in London.
The 20-year-old Ferreira was seeded 12th and ranked 24th going into this grass-court tournament.
The 81st-ranked Matsuoka, hindered by a sore shoulder, double-faulted and made two errors at 1-2 in the first set, giving Ferreira the only break he needed.
In the seventh game of the second set, Ferreira broke serve after a rally at the net. (AP)


Holmes's War Within
The last time Larry Holmes fought for the heavyweight title, against Mike Tyson in January 1988, the bout ended in the fourth round with Holmes's head bouncing off the canvas like a spaldeen and his handlers rushing through the ring ropes with the urgency of a MedEvac team.
At the time, that knockout loss to Tyson seemed a pretty definitive statement on the foolhardiness of a middle-aged man like Holmes seeking glory again in the arena.


Review/Music; Heralded in Celebration, A Maturing Movement
The early-music movement, with its impassioned devotion to musical instruments and styles before the 19th century, was once the vanguard of musical taste; it was fervently opposed to the manners and repertory of mainstream concert life.
But as it has grown in popularity, the movement, once avant-garde, has begun to settle into maturity.
That was the impression I got this weekend, sampling programs in the second Berkeley Festival and Exhibition, devoted to early music, which came to an end today.
The eight-day festival, first held in 1990, is the West Coast counterpart to Boston's Early-Music Festival, offering in alternating years an opportunity for this close-knit community of performers, scholars and listeners to gather in common cause.
Its hosts are the music department of the University of California at Berkeley, the San Francisco Early-Music Society and Cal Performances, a presenting organization.
About 12,000 tickets were sold to 47 events on the Berkeley campus and at the local First Congregational Church; the events included Gustav Leonhardt performing Couperin, the Artaria Quartet venturing into the world of the classical fugue and Hopkinson Smith playing Bach suites on the lute.
The festival was also the occasion for the annual meetings of Early Music America and the Historical Harp Society.
And it presented an exhibition of beautiful reproductions of early bows, viols, recorders and harpsichords.


Possis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Dear Dad, Something for Your Electronic Enjoyment
It was once so easy: Buy dad a tie.
But in this electronic age, a new generation of grown-up toys for grown-up boys are more complex, more expensive and more fun.
Gifts for Father's Day, 1992: Pocket Baseball Encyclopedia


Grand Casinos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


How Columbia Weathers the Economic Storm
To the Editor:
"Short of Money, Columbia Weighs How Best to Change" (front page, May 25) leaves mistaken impressions about the results of steps Columbia University is taking to meet the financial pressures it shares with many colleges and universities.
Columbia will not dip into endowment principal to cover the planned operating deficit for next year.
Temporarily we will spend more of the return of the endowment to cover critical needs in the operating budget, while we plan for complete elimination of the deficit in 1994-95.
The endowment will continue to grow.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; With Independent Candidate, The Race Just Won't Let Up
The clear lesson so far about a three-way Presidential campaign is that there are no intermissions.
So the ordinarily languid month of June, falling between the end of the primaries and the beginning of the conventions, has become a season of elbowing, risk-taking and struggling for position.
As recently as a few weeks ago, the campaigns of President Bush and Bill Clinton seemed utterly confounded by the dynamics of this race, paralyzed by a web of conflicting advice.
Now, prodded by the continued strength of Ross Perot, they are making some decisions and taking some actions.


Music Festival on Jersey Shore Ends in Melee With 28 Arrests
Fighting and bottle-throwing broke out late yesterday afternoon toward the end of a weekend-long sports and music festival along the beach in Belmar, N.J., and the police in riot gear were called in to quell the disturbance.
Some vehicles were overturned and windows were broken in oceanfront houses when the crowd was forced off the beach by the police.
One man said he was knocked off his motorcycle, which was then stolen, and the town's Mayor, Kenneth Pringle, said he was struck on the head with a bottle as he directed traffic.


Foie Gras Production Remains Inhumane
To the Editor:
The 1967 edition of "The Joy of Cooking" defines pate de foie gras as follows: "The famed foie gras of Europe is produced by the forced feeding of geese, which causes their livers to become marbled in appearance and so increases their bulk that they often account for one-quarter of the bird's weight. In this country the law forbids this practice, although unfatted goose liver is available."
It is unbelievable that Mitchell Davis, executive editor of Art Culinaire magazine (Op Ed, May 25) should pretend that geese or ducks raised for foie gras can in any way be considered healthy.
The whole point of foie gras is to produce an artificially fatty, enlarged and unhealthy liver, and a sick bird.


Review/Pop; Singing Soul as Though in Her Own Living Room
Three or four songs into Ann Peebles's first set at Tramps on Friday night, during a mean and blue version of "Breaking Up Somebody's Home," the lights went out.
This was too bad.
Ms.
Peebles, a soul singer from Memphis who is starting up a career she abandoned some 20 years ago, was bringing the audience to a consensus, the first step to putting on a classic show.
By starting out slowly, and by suggesting emotional commitment without histrionics, by adhering to a type of soul minimalism, she made the large and party-hungry crowd pay attention.
Then, with a careful attention to melody and the nuance of each song's narrative, she began tearing the house apart, slowly, using soul as a type of trance music.
Enter a 5- or 10-minute break.
But when she started up again, Ms.
Peebles hadn't really slowed down that much, and she patiently built momentum.
Singing songs like "Fear No Evil," from her new album "Full Time Love" (Rounder), and ending with her biggest hit, "I Can't Stand the Rain," she kept the audience involved.
And where soul often enough relies on extroversion, the explosive eruption of emotion, she kept things controlled.
Even on a capella endings to tunes, Ms.
Peebles repeated a phrase, remaking the melody in small increments, where the act was less about extravagance and more about control.


Pulitzer Winner Is Poet Laureate
Mona Van Duyn, a writer admired for her intelligence and wit, was named poet laureate of the United States today.
Her breadth can be seen in her latest collection, "Letters From a Father and Other Poems" (Atheneum), which presents images both of shared joy and the last decline of her aged parents, and in an observation of hers that might have sprung from Ogden Nash:


General Host Corp. reports earnings for 16wks to May 17


Arms and Aid the Main Topics at Bush-Yeltsin Talks
When President Boris N. Yeltsin and President Bush meet on Tuesday, they will seek to cement Washington's budding friendship with the new Russian nation in two ways: through arms control and by bolstering Russia's economic reforms.
Both efforts are needed, Administration officials say, because if Russia's painful transition to a Western-style market economy fails, a fledgling democracy could be snuffed out and a hostile dictator could come to power.


First American Health Concepts reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


With Little Excitement, Austrian Wins by Attrition in Canada
The international Formula One circuit, which is trying to strengthen its American audience, probably didn't do much to that end with today's Canadian Grand Prix, which Gerhard Berger won in a McLaren-Honda without having to work too hard to pass anyone.
Berger, a 32-year-old Austrian, started fourth and took advantage of the misfortunes of the drivers in front of him.
The three drivers who followed him across the finish line never gained a single position while at racing speed throughout the 69-lap, 189.9-mile race.


Rachel B. Bernstein, Theodore R. Spieth
Rachel Bernice Bernstein, the daughter of Dr.
Robert I. Bernstein of Tenafly, N.J., and the late Frances B. Bernstein, was married yesterday to Theodore Roland Spieth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Spieth of Bellevue, Wash.
Rabbi Bruce Kadden officiated at the Robles del Rio Lodge in Carmel Valley, Calif.
Ms.
Bernstein, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is a software engineer at Savitar in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
She is also the stepdaughter of Carol S. Bernstein of Tenafly.
Mr.
Spieth, 29, is a student at San Francisco State University.


CAPX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Orchestras Face Up to Trouble And the Bottom Line
The American Symphony Orchestra League gave itself some bad news this week and then set in motion a task force to deal with it.
Most of the 2,000 delegates to this national service organization's annual convention arrived knowing their institutions were collectively in trouble, but a new report by the Wolf Organization, a consulting and research company in Cambridge, Mass., translates cloudy financial malaise into numbers and graphs; they tell a vivid, occasionally promising but mostly distressing story.
The study leaves solutions to musicians, managers and trustees but suggests, almost demands, fundamental changes in the way American orchestras do business with their communities, sources of funds and subscribers.
High on the list of targets is the idea of growth as an unquestioned goal.
Does health, indeed survival, lie in more listeners, more money and wider recognition through tours and recordings, or will it ultimately depend on staying at home, thinking small and tending to one's own increasingly reluctant constituents?
Larger cities especially are offering a complicated mosaic of musical cultures not necessarily dominated by European art music.


Rebecca Colin, S. P. Braverman
Rebecca Diane Colin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick C. Colin of Roslyn Estates, L.I., was married yesterday to Steven Paul Braverman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving M. Braverman of East Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Joy Levitt officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Colin Braverman, 24 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Clark University.
She received a master's degree in general psychology from the New School for Social Research, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in clinical psychology.
Her father is the president of the Colin Management Company, a real-estate investment concern in Garden City, L.I.
Her mother, Barbara Flug Colin, is the poet in residence at the Henry Viscardi School in Albertson, L.I.


Educational Development Corp. reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


With Jordan Starring, Bulls Make It a Rerun
Putting a magnificent conclusion on a memorable season, the Chicago Bulls repeated as National Basketball Association champions tonight.
Trailing by 15 points at the start of the fourth quarter, the Bulls rallied to defeat the Portland Trail Blazers, 97-93, sending Chicago Stadium into a frenzy and sending the city into celebration.
By winning the N.B.A. finals, 4 games to 2, the Bulls joined the Minneapolis Lakers, Boston Celtics, Los Angeles Lakers and Detroit Pistons as the only N.B.A. franchises to win back-to-back titles.
And Michael Jordan (33 points) became the first player to win the N.B.A. finals' most valuable player award in consecutive seasons, winning the award by a unanimous vote both years.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Story Rights For Crimes Certainly Pay
The place to find the most blood, gore and mayhem on network television is nowhere on the dial; it's on the phone lines of television movie executives.
These beleaguered and at times paranoid executives hear lurid tales almost daily from eager producers who know the networks now base 35 to 40 percent of their made-for-television movies on crimes and other unhappy events from "real life."


International Ads Win Best of Show
The New York Festivals' "Best of Show" Grand Award winners for 1992 were presented last week at the organization's annual international print and radio advertising awards ceremonies in New York.
Among the winners for print advertising were McCann-Erickson Italiana in Milan, for the best consumer campaign, for Levi's 501 jeans; Burkhardt &amp; Christy Advertising in New York, for best trade ad, for Sony Data Cartridges, and Universal Pictures in Universal City, Calif., for best poster, for the film "Jungle Fever."


Devorah Wacks, Joshua Kosowsky
Devorah Batya Wacks, a daughter of Judith Wacks of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Harvey Wacks, was married yesterday in Great Neck, L.I., to Joshua Marc Kosowsky, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Kosowsky of Brookline, Mass.
Rabbi Dr.
Yitzchak Twersky performed the ceremony at the Great Neck Synagogue.
Mrs.
Kosowsky, 26 years old, graduated from Columbia University, from which he also received an M.B.A.
Her father was an engineer in New York.


Congress Steps Up Work on Taxes
Congress and the Bush Administration are again dishing up a variety of proposals to change the tax laws, including some tax increases that have been on the back burner since the President vetoed a comprehensive tax bill in March.
Taking up the provisions a few at a time, as if they were so many tapas or dim sum, the Government is assembling a smorgasbord of revenues -- a menu without the kind of politically unpalatable main course, like a cut in capital gains taxes, or income tax breaks aimed at the middle class, that doomed the earlier bill.


Dart Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Trak Auto reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Intelogic Trace Inc. reports earnings for 14wks to April 30


After Striving for Change, Newark Police Face a Crisis
This city's Police Department, praised last month for keeping the peace in the wake of the Rodney G. King verdicts and the Los Angeles riots, is now facing a crisis of confidence.
Six officers have been suspended without pay, their guns confiscated, in an investigation by the Essex County prosecutor's office into the shooting of a suspected teen-age car thief and a possible cover-up.


Lottery Should Increase Its Runner-Up Prizes
To the Editor:
New York's May 30 lottery is another example of the wrongheaded prize distribution that the lottery commission stubbornly refuses to modify.
But the prizes for lesser picks was a mockery.
One winner received $30 million by picking six correct numbers (news item, June 1).
But if you picked five out of six numbers correctly, you got only $799.50; four of six, $61; and three, plus a supplemental number, $27.
When will they chop several million dollars off the top prize and spread it below to the other winning categories?
A $10 million prize is more than enough to draw player participation, but all the moguls of the New York State Lottery can say is: "The first prize draws the players." Wrong.


Use of Semiautomatic Gun by New York Police May Pose Risks
The Glock 9-millimeter gun, the only semiautomatic weapon being tested by the New York Police Department, has been criticized recently by some police officials across the country as being one of the least safe high-tech pistols on the market.
New York police officials oppose the use of any semiautomatic pistols, which can hold more cartridges and be reloaded more quickly than revolvers, the department's standard weapon.
But the department is conducting a pilot study of the Glock at the insistence of police union officials, who argue that the standard police revolver is no match for the high-powered weapons now commonly carried by criminals.


The Trial Is Not Over For Female Gymnasts
In the aftermath of competition, the top six men and the top six women here at the United States Olympic gymnastics trials could not have reflected better a difference in team selection.
The men, whose optional round Saturday night ended the trial process, sat for a news conference, laughing, kidding with one another, voicing true emotions of anxiety, fright, relief and elation.
Behind them, the men's team coach, Francis Allen, walked back and forth, found something nice to say about each of them and predicted they could finish as high as second in Barcelona, Spain, behind the team representing the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Advanced Photonix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Khmer Rouge Balk at U.N. Peace Plan
Diplomats and United Nations officials warned today that the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to put their soldiers under United Nations supervision will delay -- and could eventually destroy -- the peace process aimed at ending a generation of bloodshed in Cambodia.
At the same time, diplomats said they suspected that the Khmer Rouge were bluffing once again in hope of winning new concessions, and that their leaders would eventually meet the terms of the United Nations-brokered peace treaty they signed last fall.


Dinkins's Europe Trip Polishes City's Image
What people say about you behind your back is typically more telling that what they say to your face.
By that measure, the delegation led by Mayor David N. Dinkins that just made a whirlwind tour of Britain, France and Germany to promote New York as an indispensable place for foreign companies to do business was successful.


Korean War Veterans to Get Memorial in Washington


Jamie Palter, Stuart Rennert
Jamie Lynne Palter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Palter of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday to Stuart Mitchell Rennert, a son of Mildred Rennert of North Woodmere, L.I. and the late Aaron E. Rennert.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel officiated at the Charles Hotel in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Rennert, 24 years old, is to become the law clerk to Judge Moody Tidwell 3d of the United States Claims Court in Washington in August.
She graduated from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a principal in the American Benefits Group, an insurance agency in Needham Heights, Mass.
Her mother, Rosalind R. Palter, is an interior designer in Boston.


In Prosperous Bridgehampton, a Racetrack Tries to Stay Alive
To auto racing fans, the historic Bridgehampton Racetrack has some of the best gear-wrenching curves and flat-open straightaways in the racing circuit.
To real-estate developers, the wooded 518-acre property overlooking Little Peconic Bay is one of the largest and most desirable undeveloped tracts in the Hamptons.
The struggle to control the track's future will come to a head Tuesday when the racetrack is auctioned off by Sotheby's International Realty in Manhattan.
Part of the proceeds will go to cover a $2 million mortgage payment owed by the principal owner, Robert Rubin, a racing enthusiast.


Harriet Josephson, Jack Sachs
Harriet Josephson and Jack Sachs were married in New York yesterday.
Rabbi Eric Polokoff performed the ceremony at the Savoy Terrace Club.
Ms.
Josephson Sachs is a fashion merchandising consultant in New York.
She graduated from Baruch College.
Her parents are Abraham and Anne Josephson of Belle Harbor, Queens.
Her father, who is retired, was a director of transportation for Breakstone Dairy in New York.
Her mother, also retired, was a speech therapist in Brooklyn and Queens for the New York City Board of Education.


Programming &amp; Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Roberta Rettner, Elliott Nacmias
Roberta Diane Rettner, the daughter of Marcelle Mandelbaum of Tamarac, Fla., and the late Morris B. Rettner, was married yesterday to Joseph Nacmias, a son of Elliott Nacmias of West Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Francine Schouchana Nacmias.
Rabbi Bernard Mandelbaum performed the ceremony aboard the World Yacht Duchess in New York Harbor.
Mrs.
Nacmias is the director of American Ways, an educational organization in New York that coaches foreign executives in communications skills and American customs.
She graduated from New York University and received master's degrees in adult education from Columbia University and in political science from the University of Utah.
Her father was the president of Rettner Realty, a New York real-estate company.


World Economies


Quiet, Calm, Faceless, Simpson Still a Threat
With the United States Golf Association's flag flapping above the first tee, the eye unavoidably follows an impossibly narrow ribbon of emerald fairway squeezed between the duller, darker green of dense rough.
It's definitely United States Open week at Pebble Beach, which practically guarantees one player in particular will be at his best.
Not Jack Nicklaus or Tom Watson, winners of the previous Opens held at this famous course, or even Nick Faldo or Fred Couples, the two favorites this year.
The combined best of that foursome's last five United States Opens still doesn't equal the recent record of the man who is in the habit of peaking for the most demanding playing conditions in golf.


Accounts
*
Spice Time Foods, Hoboken, N.J., to the Zak Agency, New York, as its first agency for consumer and trade advertising.
Also, Alpwater S.A., Saxon, Switzerland, to Zak as the bottled water's American agency to handle creative and media for an introduction in the New York market.
Billings were not disclosed.


Republicans Seek to Sell New Jersey Nonprofit TV
Republican legislative leaders unveiled a plan today to allow the transfer of the New Jersey Network public television system to an outside noncommercial television operator, most likely Channel 13/WNET in New York.
The Senate President, Donald T. DiFrancesco, and the Assembly Speaker, Garabed Haytaian, who lead overwhelming Republican majorities that dominate the State Legislature, said the plan to transfer the system, which the state owns and operates, would cut costs and mean "more independent" programming.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Quayle Attacks New York as Home of Liberal Failure
A month before the Democratic Party arrives in New York for its national convention, Vice President Dan Quayle returned here yesterday to lambaste the party's liberal leaders, warning, "We must not let them do to the rest of America what they have done to the people of New York City."
Attacking policies ranging from condom distribution in schools to high local taxes to rent control, and politicians like Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, whom he dismissed as "liberalism's sensitive philosopher-king," the Vice President used a speech to the Manhattan Institute, a conservative policy research group, to paint New York anew as the epitome of liberalism's failures.


Mayor Forms A Task Force On Hotel Fires
A fire broke out in an exercise room at a midtown Manhattan hotel last night, only hours after Mayor David N. Dinkins formed a task force to investigate a string of 10 other suspicious but small fires set in other hotels in the midtown area.
In creating the task force, the Mayor sought to reassure tourists and thousands of delegates coming to the Democratic National Convention next month that the city's hotels are safe and that the authorities are working to end a series of blazes that have puzzled fire officials.


New York Police, in Compromise, Are to Get More Semiautomatics
The State Legislature and the New York City Police Department have struck a deal to kill legislation that would have forced the department to arm all its officers with semiautomatic weapons, agreeing instead to give the guns to 1,000 additional police officers in a major expansion of a current pilot program.
Faced with the prospect of having the State Legislature tell them how to arm the city's police officers, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said the deal was an unpleasant but necessary compromise.


Nichols (S.E.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Eddie Lopat, 73, Yankee Pitcher On 5 Series Championship Teams
Eddie Lopat, one of the three pitching mainstays for the New York Yankees during their reign of five straight World Series championships from 1949 to 1953, died in his sleep early yesterday at the home of his son, John, in Darien, Conn.
He was 73 years old.
Mr.
Lopat, who lived in Hillsdale, N.J., had been battling a recurrence of pancreatic cancer, his son said.


Police Bring No Security to South Africa Slum
Alfred Mabulana came home from peddling sweaters in this black township and discovered the door of his one-room wooden shack ominously ajar.
"They broke into my house and then they left my house open," Mr.
Mabulana announced in despair.
The housebreakers he alluded to were heavily armed policemen conducting another anti-crime sweep through the Phola Park squatter camp on Thokoza's outskirts.


33 Win MacArthur Awards, Including 17 Women
On the same day that Janet Benshoof opened a center to defend the right of women to obtain safe and legal abortions, she was named a recipient of a fellowship from the MacArthur Foundation of Chicago.
Ms.
Benshoof, a New York lawyer who is an expert on women's reproductive rights, was one of 33 people named yesterday to receive the annual awards.


Israel Welcomes Gorbachev as a Hero
The last three years have seen 360,000 people come to Israel from the former Soviet Union, so one more Russian arrival should probably not cause heads to turn.
But in the first two days of a visit that will take him across Israel this week, Mikhail S. Gorbachev has received a hero's welcome, praised by his hosts as the Soviet leader who opened the gates for a vast emigration of Jews from his country.


Cuomo Warns of Election Delay
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo urged the State Legislature today to begin revising its legislative redistricting plan immediately, saying this year's elections could be threatened if time is wasted in appealing a recent court decision against the plan.
To add force to his request, Mr.
Cuomo said he would not agree to delay further the start of the state's ballot-petitioning period.
That date, which marks the first day that candidates may collect the signatures they need to qualify for the ballot, already has been delayed once because of redistricting, from June 9 to July 9.


Senior Classes Seeking Jobs, Not Themselves
At 18, Eva Pitera has her future all figured out.
After she graduates from Linden High School on Friday, she starts a job as a nurse's assistant at a nearby hospital. .
In the fall, she begins a nursing program at Bloomfield College.
She expects that to enable her to become a registered nurse at the same hospital.


Ephim Fogel, 71, Poet And English Professor
Ephim Fogel, a professor of English emeritus at Cornell University and a poet, died on Friday at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 71 years old and lived in Ithaca.
Professor Fogel died of a cerebral hemorrhage, said a son, Daniel Fogel.


CHRONICLE
His face may be a new one at Lincoln Center, but it is familiar at dozens of other academic and cultural institutions.
Dr.
ERNEST L. BOYER, the president of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and a Commissioner of Education in the Carter Administration, has been named the chairman of the Lincoln Center Institute for the Arts in Education, it was announced yesterday.
Dr.
Boyer will also sit on the Lincoln Center board and executive committee.
Asked why he had agreed to take on another appointment, Dr.
Boyer, who is also a senior fellow at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, said: "Even though it is probably the last thing I should be doing, I felt this was a commitment I couldn't resist. It should be a central responsibility of educators to give higher priority to the arts. The arts are the universal language through which children can discover who they are."


Trak Auto reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Quotation of the Day
"When you celebrate something in America, you break a window and grab something. When people have an excuse to loot, they loot, when they have an excuse to shoot, they shoot." -- MAYOR RICHARD M. DALEY of Chicago.  [ A16:4. ]


Keep Quiet On Shooting, Mayor Told
The New Jersey Attorney General admonished Mayor Sharpe James today to stop talking about the investigation into a shooting and possible cover-up by members of the Newark Police Department.
In a terse statement issued in Trenton, Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo commended the Mayor's "search for the truth," but warned that "continued press conferences and airing of the facts connected with this investigation cannot go on."


The Talk of Hollywood; An Ending That's Not Happily Ever After
A real-life drama involving high-stakes players and allegations of plagiarism against a television writer was all set to end happily and, above all, quietly the other day, just the way Hollywood prefers when it deals with potential embarrassments.
But even before the drama reached a finale, the dialogue abruptly turned nasty.
And some of the key figures, especially the winner, the director Barry Levinson, were left steaming.


Robert William Haack, 75, Dies; Led Stock Exchange During Crises
Robert William Haack, who led the New York Stock Exchange during a period of crisis and change and later became the chairman of the Lockheed Corporation, died on Sunday at his home in Potomac, Md.
He was 75 years old.
Mr. Haack died of complications from kidney failure, his family said.


Nassau County Limits Sale of Crime Trading Cards
David Berkowitz, the "Son of Sam" killer, can no longer show his face here.
Al Capone beware.
Charles Manson go home.
Leading a national wave of protest against a growing number of trading cards that depict mass murderers, rapists and other sordid criminals, the Board of Supervisors in Nassau County today rushed through a measure banning sale of the cards to children under 17.


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


COMPANY NEWS
BULL HN INFORMATION SYSTEMS INC., signed two contracts with New Jersey, totaling $15.5 million, for computer equipment and related services.
CHEVRON CORP., San Francisco, said its Transocean Chevron unit would sell its interest in Chevron Oil Co. in Sudan to Concorp International Ltd., Khartoum, Sudan.
No terms were disclosed.
L.
M.
ERICSSON TELEFONAKTIEBOLAGET, Stockholm, said its Ericsson Telekom unit had received a $64 million contract from Deutsche Telekom, the German telecommunications company, for network planning and other services.
NOVADYNE COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC., Santa Ana, Calif., signed an agreement valued at $10 million with Motorola Inc.'s commercial systems division to handle Motorola's series 8000 RISC-based systems.
RCI LONG DISTANCE and Value-Added Communications received a three-year contract of more than $100 million by the New York State Department of Correctional Services for equipment concerning a program for inmates.
TYCO TOYS INC., Mount Laurel, N.J., will establish an Italian subsidiary to sell and market selected Tyco products and licensed toys.


Executive Changes
DIME SAVINGS BANK OF NEW YORK named John F. Kennedy senior vice president and deputy controller and Paul F. Leone senior vice president and deputy auditor.
GE CAPITAL FLEET SERVICES, Minneapolis, appointed S. Tracy Coster senior vice president and general manager of GE Capital Public Finance, a business unit that provides tax-exempt financing of public services for state and local governments.
She had been manager of business development and planning for GE Transportation Systems in Erie, Pa.
H.
J.
HEINZ CO., Pittsburgh, appointed David R. Williams and Luigi Ribolla senior vice presidents.
Mr.
Williams will remain chief financial officer in Pittsburgh.
Mr.
Ribolla, who had been managing director of Heinz-Italia, will head European operations and will remain based in Milan, Italy.
PERSEPTIVE BIOSYSTEMS INC., Cambridge, Mass., named Noubar B. Afeyan president and chief executive, replacing James E. Coutre, who remains a director.
PREMARK INTERNATIONAL INC., Deerfield, Ill., named Joseph W. Deering president of its food equipment group based in Troy, Ohio.
He succeeds James M. Ringler, who was appointed to the newly created post of president and chief operating officer.
RIDDELL SPORTS, INC., New York, named Stephen D. Tannen president and chief operating officer.
SEARS P.L.C., London, a retailer, appointed John Lovering to the new post of managing director for corporate development and international operations.
He had been group finance director.
That post will be filled by Stephen Park.


Classical Music in Review
Steinway Foundation
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Washington
The Steinway Foundation's "21st-Century Piano Project" is an apparent emblem of what this venerable American piano company thinks of itself right now and aspires to in the future.
The commissioning venture, which began on Thursday night with three new concertos, aims at creating music and audiences for a company's product.
In such a symbiosis, composers and performers will continue to bask in Steinway's magic name and Steinway in theirs.
The company still makes some wonderful instruments, but grumblings about inconsistent workmanship and altered manufacturing standards in recent years will not go away.
The recent introduction of a cheaper, less labor-intensive model, the Boston, has been likened by some to Rolls-Royce adding Buicks to its line.
Steinway's bold, uncompromising inventiveness in the 19th century brought it head and shoulders over every other piano maker in the 20th.
If last night's music was a metaphor for Steinway's plans for the 2000's, then it carried an ominous message indeed.


Ion Laser Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Return of an Issue: Protectionism
After several months in the background of national debate, trade policy is returning as an issue, as Congress takes up new legislation and as Ross Perot sounds protectionist notes in his semiofficial Presidential candidacy.
Congressional Democrats, tugged at by warring interests in the automobile industry, have been unable to hammer out their differences in the last few months on how -- or even whether -- to restrict car imports, and bickered into this evening without reaching a compromise.


CHRONICLE
STEVE ALLEN comes to the city today to hit the talk-show circuit in connection with his new book, "Hi-Ho Steverino! My Adventures in the Wonderful Wacky World of TV," published by Barricade Books.
On Thursday, he is to speak at the 92d Street Y, and on Friday he is to sign autographs at the Algonquin.
He is also booked on the "Today" and "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee" shows.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Bosnia and Herzegovina misidentified Brig.
Gen.
Lewis MacKenzie.
He is a senior officer in the United Nations contingent there, not its chief.


Excalibur Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


For Fall, Think Vests, Ties And, Yes, Longer Skirts
Sportswear, the jewel in the crown of American fashion, is leading the march into fall.
Orders from retailers are up as much as 50 percent over last year, manufacturers report, and little resistance is expected from consumers to visible style changes like longer skirts.
Vests are the new addition to separates dressing, which is a key to the sportswear concept.
They are worn under jackets, which continue to be the No. 1 wardrobe item, and occasionally over them.
Ralph Lauren reports that a dress built like an elongated vest is his top-selling number.
It was ordered in two versions, with the knee-baring dress outselling the calf-length one.


To Our Readers
Beginning today, the Nasdaq National List table, on page D16, and the Nasdaq Supplemental table, on page D25, list the actual closing prices of the stocks, rather than the last bid and asked prices.
Closing prices were not previously made available by the National Association of Securities Dealers.
As a result, the price change column in the tables is blank today, since no information is available on Friday's closing prices.


Corrections
The calendar of events in the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday misstated the opening date of an exhibit on sharks at the Maritime Center in Norwalk.
It is June 27, not this Saturday.


By Design; Buckle Up for the Year of the Belt
If this will be, as some fashion experts proclaim, the Year of the Belt, now is not too soon to start cinching in.
Forget about narrow little strips of leather, or dangly-jangly chains.
The belts the style seers are talking about are at least two inches wide and bind the waist with a firm grip.
They are usually leather, sometimes decoratively punched; some are covered with animal patterns.
They probably have an impressive buckle, and might have a few bits of metal here and there, but generally, the plainer the belt, the better.


Knowledge House reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.87
3.65
5.61
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.65
5.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.74
5.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.87
6.88
8.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.85
8.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.77
8.78
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.59
6.60
7.27
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


METRO DIGEST
A GRADUATING CLASS MULLS ITS FUTURE
The Class of 1992 at Linden High in Linden, N.J., has plans, and for most of its 275 members, the plans are as carefully drawn as the rows of rhododendrons that line the city's compact front lawns.
But at a time when "lingering recession" is the national mantra, there is a sense of caution within the class that seems only natural.
That mood of uncertainty, mixed in varying parts with the unextinguishable optimism characteristic of those poised between childhood and adulthood, is echoed in members of the Class of 1992 in other high schools around the region.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  MORE OFFICERS TO GET NEW GUNS
The State Legislature and the New York City Police Department struck a deal yesterday that kills a bill that would have forced the department to arm all its officers with semiautomatic weapons but greatly expands a current test of the guns by giving them to 1,007 addition police officers.
The deal, fashioned in negotiations over the weekend between an extremely reluctant Police Department and the leaders of the Assembly, would put semiautomatics in the hands of beat officers for the first time.
A1.
BOYCOTT TO PROTEST RACISM IS URGED


Yanks Are Footnotes For Reardon
The winning formula the Yankees discovered for two days in Cleveland disappeared quickly against the Red Sox tonight.
In a matchup of mediocrity that pitted two legendary rivals with .500 records, the Red Sox emerged with a 1-0 victory at Fenway Park behind John Dopson's dominant pitching, Phil Plantier's sweet swing and a record-setting relief performance by Jeff Reardon.


Nurture, Not Nature, Gets Women Lost
To the Editor:
"Why Don't Men Ask Directions? They Don't Feel Lost" (Science Times, May 26) reports on a study of gender differences and navigation.
One of the striking findings -- after years of running hapless rats and hapless human college students through mazes -- is that men never seem to feel lost.
Nor, reportedly, will they ask directions.
It is assumed that women in similar situations behave conversely.
The researchers are quick to assure us that one method is not superior to the other -- just different.
They then rush to biology for the explanation, perhaps thinking that this way may dampen painful and wrenching social changes.
Nowhere is there any mention of what going places has historically meant to the two sexes.


Two Workers Injured in Building Collapse
Two constuction workers were seriously injured yesterday when the rear of a vacant building at 2317 First Avenue, near East 118th Street, collapsed yesterday.
One of the workers was trapped under rubble for more than two hours before firefighters could free him.
The collapse occurred about 4:35 P.M., as seven workers were knocking down walls on the fifth floor of the building, which is being renovated for moderate-income apartments.


New Panel in Chicago to Study Sexual Abuse of Children by Priests
The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Chicago said yesterday that he would establish an independent board made up mostly of lay members to investigate accusations of sexual abuse of children by priests in his archdiodese.
Establishment of the board was one of many recommendations in a report released yesterday by a special commission appointed last October by the Archbishop, Joseph Cardinal Bernardin.


Sandy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Russians Say I.M.F. Demands May Nullify Benefits of Loans
Officials negotiating Russia's aid package with the International Monetary Fund asserted today that the fund was seeking to impose demands so burdensome that they could weaken the nation's teetering economy and nullify many of the benefits of a $24 billion aid package for Russia.
In high-stakes public posturing aimed at winning American support, these negotiators sought to pressure the I.M.F. not to be so tough on Russia just hours before President Boris N. Yeltsin arrived here for a summit meeting at which economic aid will be high on the agenda.


Q&amp;A
Lighting Volts
Q.
How long does it take for a unit of electricity to get from say, Niagara Falls to a New York City wall socket?
What happens if too much electricity is generated?
A.
Electricity travels at the speed of light, 186,000 miles per second, so a unit would travel the 500 miles from Niagara to Manhattan in about three-thousandths of a second, said Bill Palazzo, an electrical engineer who is manager of generation planning for the New York State Power Authority.
"For all practical purposes, that is instantaneous," he said.


Score Board reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Japan's Parliament Votes to End Ban on Sending Troops Abroad
Ending nearly two years of bitter debate, the Japanese Parliament approved a bill today permitting the dispatch of military personnel abroad, for the first time since World War II, to play a limited role in international peacekeeping operations.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, who had battled for the bill against widespread criticism in Japan and considerable anxiety in neighboring countries, said he hoped that the first troops to be sent abroad would join the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Cambodia before the end of the year.


Albanian Leader Tells Bush of His Fear of Serbia
President Sali Berisha of Albania met with President Bush today and said his country was doing what it could to keep the conflict in neighboring Yugoslavia from spreading.
He said in an interview that his message to Mr.
Bush was, "We are trying to be a factor of stability." A 47-year-old cardiologist who was elected in March, Dr.
Berisha remarked he had met with the leaders of Greece and Macedonia, Albania's neighbors to the south and east, to promote stability.
Both nations have Albanian minorities.


Bracknell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Proler International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Observer; Save That Arch For Fu
Having recently betrayed irritation with the homilies of Parson Quayle, I am suffering the consequences.
A New Jersey man suggests I belong to "a cabal of ultra-leftists," and a fellow in Illinois, who really knows how to hurt a guy, calls me an "arch liberal."
Isn't it bad enough being a liberal, plain style?
Do I have to bear the burden of liberalism to the arch degree?
It makes me wonder about the age of this Illinois fellow, so angered by my disrespect for the Right Reverend Quayle's moral discourse.
I suspect he is a rather young man, too young to know the terrible sting of "arch."


Circuit City Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Drivers Tell Of Gunfire And Blood On School Bus
It began with "popping" sounds, continued with bullets ricocheting around the school bus and ended a block away with 6-year-old Cesar Sandoval surrounded by emergency workers, wounded by a bullet that pierced his skull.
Two drivers on a bus that was caught in a gun battle between rival gangs here last week described their ordeal at a news conference today.
One driver, Donna Smith, said she was just turning the corner onto a side street when the shots rang out.
"There was glass flying, and I could feel the breeze from the bullets," she said, adding that she believed at least one whizzed past her through her open window.


Mail Boxes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Court Backs Old Standard On State Tax
In an important corporate tax case, the Supreme Court today reaffirmed its longstanding approach to state taxation of the income of companies that are based outside a state but that conduct some business within the state's borders.
The case had been closely watched because the Court had indicated that it might abandon this approach, known as the unitary business principle, and give states much more latitude to reach a portion of a multistate company's income that was not related to the company's in-state operations.


Macy Appoints 2 Executives As It Begins Filling Vacancies
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company announced two key executive appointments yesterday as it began plugging the holes left in its top ranks by the departure of managers in the wake of the retailer's bankruptcy.
It said Burnett W. Donoho, an experienced retail industry executive, had been appointed vice chairman of Macy's East division, a position left vacant when Mark Sellers resigned earlier this year.
Mr.
Donoho will oversee all of the $3.6 billion division's support functions, including the computerized inventory and accounting systems, distribution and operations.


France Rebukes U.S. for Tariff Threat
The French Government denounced the United States today in an unusually strong statement, saying Washington had brought trans-Atlantic trade relations close to commercial war.
The statement, released by the Industry and Foreign Trade ministries, said recent American threats to impose prohibitive tariffs on a range of European foods posed "the risk of a dangerous escalation toward a commercial war from which all parties would suffer."


Courier and Seles No. 1 at Wimbledon
The All-England Club kept to the world rankings today, installing Jim Courier and Monica Seles as the top-seeded players for the Wimbledon tennis championships, which begin next Monday.
But tournament officials deviated from the rankings to avoid having the last three Wimbledon men's champions in the same half of the draw.


Thor Energy Resources reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Missouri Bonds Are Priced
An $82.6 million tax-exempt bond offering by the Missouri Health and Higher Education Facilities Authority was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by A. G. Edwards &amp; Sons.
The maximum yield was 6.384 percent for an issue due in 2012.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were priced to yield from 3.25 percent in 1993 to 5.1 percent in 1997, 5.9 percent in 2002 and 6.1 percent in 2004.


Alfin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Chess
At the end of the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt-Mephisto Tournament in Munich in late May, the one man to come through to victory was Mikhail Gurevich.
At the start of the last round, the 33-year-old former Russian grandmaster, who now lives in Belgium, trailed the leaders, Robert Hubner of Germany and Boris Gelfand of Ukraine, by half a point.
But Gurevich defeated the American entrant, Larry Christiansen of Queens, and achieved the winning 7-4 score while both his chief rivals lost and shared second place.
Christiansen, who had the lead as late as round 7, crashed at the finish, losing 3 1/2 out of his last 4 games.
He often wins in swashbuckling style, but Gurevich put this down with stubborn play and won with a clever little trick.
FINAL STANDINGS
Player
W
L
D
Pts
Player
W
L
D
P
Gurevich
4
1
6
7
Hubner
4
2
5
6 1/2
Gelfand
4
2
5
6 1/2
Yusupov
2
1
8
6
Hertneck
3
2
6
6
Christiansen
3
3
5
5 1/2
Speelman
1
1
9
5 1/2
Lobron
2
2
7
5 1/2
Khalifman
2
3
6
5
Hansen
2
3
6
5
Wahls
1
4
6
4
Lutz
2
6
3
3 1/2
In the Nimzo-Indian system with 5 . . .
Na6 6 a3 Bc3 7 Qc3 Nc5 8 b4, White obtains the bishop-pair at the expense of falling behind in development.
You would have expected Christiansen to jump on a current bandwagon by heading into a guileful gambit with 8 . . .
Nce4 9 Qd4 d5 10 c5 b6 11 f3 bc 12 bc Qa5 13 Qb4 Qc7 14 fe Rb8 15 Qa4 Bd7 16 c6 O-O, but he must have discovered something wrong with it.
His alternative was to invent a brand new pawn sacrifice with 8 . . .
Na4!? 9 Qc2 b5 10 cb Nb6.
You can see that Black's mobilization is far advanced after 14 . . .
O-O and also that it will be a long time before White can get use out of his extra pawn.
On 15 . . .
Nc4, Gurevich did not want to exchange his KB with 16 Bc4 Rc4 because there would have been the latent danger of Christiansen's building to an attack against the g2 point.
After 18 Rc1, Christiansen could not get his pawn back with 18 . . .
Na3? because 19 Bb2 traps his knight.
So Gurevich got a usful reduction of material after 18 . . .
Nb6 19 Bb6 ab.
Christiansen should have chosen the conservative 21 . . . h6 rather than produce a weakness in his king position with the aggressive 21 . . . h5?!
With 22 Nd2 Rc1 23 Qc1 Rc8 24 Ne4 Qg6 25 Qd1 Be4 26 Bf3, Gurevich struggled to diminish Christiansen's pressure, but winning this ending was still difficult.
Christiansen could not well play 31 . . .
Rb4 because 32 Qe8 Kh7 33 Qf7 Kh6 34 Ra1 Rb5 35 Ra8 yields White too strong an attack.
In this hypothetical line, 34 . . .
Rb1 35 Rb1 Qb1 36 Kh2 Qb5 37 Qe6 Kh7 38 Qd6 yields White excellent chances of winning the queen-and-pawn end game.
After 33 . . .
Rb4, Christiansen had recovered his pawn, but after 34 Qe2 Kg8 35 Kh2 Qe6 36 Rd2, there was the threat of 37 Rb2 followed by a decisive advance of the passed b pawn.
His method of preventing this with 36 . . . e4 and 37 . . . f5 loosened his kingside and he was again a pawn down after 42 Rd6.
Despite the American's efforts, Gurevich rigged the decisive 46 Rg6!
Since 46 . . .
Qg8 loses to 47 Rh6! and 46 . . .
Qh8 to 47 Rg5, Christiansen gave up.
NIMZO-INDIAN DEFENSE
White
Black
Gurevich
Christiansen
1
d4
Nf6
2
c4
e6
3
Nc3
Bb4
4
Qc2
c5
5
dc
Na6
6
a3
Bc3
7
Qc3
Nc5
8
b4
Na4
9
Qc2
b5
10
cb
Nb6
11
Nf3
Bb7
12
e3
Rc8
13
Qd1
Ne4
14
Bb2
O-O
15
Be2
Nc4
16
Bd4
d6
17
O-O
e5
18
Rc1
Nb6
19
Bb6
ab
20
Qb3
Qf6
21
Qb2
h5
22
Nd2
Rc1
23
Qc1
Rc8
24
Ne4
Qg6
25
Qd1
Be4
26
Bf3
Bf3
27
Qf3
Qd3
28
Qb7
Rc3
29
Qb6
Ra3
30
h3
Rb3
31
Qc6
Kh7
32
Qf3
Qg6
33
Rd1
Rb4
34
Qe2
Kg8
35
Kh2
Qe6
36
Rd2
e4
37
Qh5
f5
38
Qg5
Qe5
39
g3
Rb5
40
Qd8
Kf7
41
Qd7
Kg8
42
Rd6
Kh7
43
Kg2
Ra5
44
Re6
Qb8
45
Qf7
Re5
46
Rg6
Resigns


McCormick &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Today's Man reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Basketball Title Brings Chicago Night of Looting
When the sun rose over the city's West Side today, Frank Ingram tiptoed through the shards of glass on the floor of his looted pawn shop, his dreams shattered during a night of celebration turned ugly.
A few hours earlier, the shop was overrun by looters when hundreds of people spilled into the streets throughout the city following the Chicago Bulls' defeat of the Portland Trailblazers to win their second straight National Basketball Association championship.


Some New Turns for Motel 6
Motel 6, the nationwide motel chain, is taking its advertising into new arenas -- television and the market among Hispanic people.
The Dallas-based chain, which has more than 670 locations, said today that its first 30-second spots for television would begin next week on cable and network television programs in California and, as has its familiar radio campaign since 1986, will feature Tom Bodett, a humorist and writer.


GULAG HELD M.I.A.'S, YELTSIN SUGGESTS
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia said today that some Americans captured during the Vietnam War were apparently transferred from Hanoi to labor camps in the Soviet Union.
He added that some of them may still be alive, possibly in psychiatric hospitals.
Mr.
Yeltsin made his statements in an interview with NBC News as he flew from Moscow to Washington for a summit meeting with President Bush on Tuesday.


Black Clergy Urges Boycott in 'Day of Absence'
A group of black clergymen called on blacks and other New Yorkers "of good will" yesterday to boycott schools, shops and workplaces on Friday to protest the Rodney G. King verdict, police brutality and racism in general.
Announcing plans for a "Day of Absence," the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, urged participation in the "peaceful and civil demonstration to emphasize the importance of African-Americans to our city, state and nation." Friday was chosen, organizers said, because it is Juneteenth, which marks the day in 1865 that Texas slaves learned they had been freed two years earlier.


33 Win MacArthur Awards, Including 17 Women
On the same day that Janet Benshoof opened a center to defend the right of women to obtain safe and legal abortions, she was named a recipient of a fellowship from the MacArthur Foundation of Chicago.
Ms.
Benshoof, a New York lawyer who is an expert on women's reproductive rights, was one of 33 people named yesterday to receive the annual awards.


North Korean Denies Plan for A-Bomb Fuel
The North Korean delegate to the United Nations today denied the presence of any plutonium-reprocessing sites in his country and declared that the Government in Pyongyan was committed to a nuclear-free Korean penisula.
The delegate, Pak Gil Yon, was responding to a report in The New York Times, attributed to Bush Administration officials, that a survey of North Korea's nuclear installations by the International Atomic Energy Agency had confirmed that the country has been building a plutonium-reprocessing plant.


Con Ed Workers Protest Over Contract Negotiations


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  JAPAN PASSES TROOPS BILL
Despite a post-war prohibition on dispatching troops abroad, Japan's Parliament approved limited military participation in peacekeeping operations after a long and dramatic debate.
Despite the limits, Japan's neighbors are edgy.
A1  JAPAN MEETS CREDIT CARDS
The world's most fervent savers have discovered not just the joys of shopping with plastic but, in soaring numbers, the burdens of mounting indebtedness.
A1  YELTSIN'S PARTING DECREES
As President Yeltsin left for Washington, he signed several economic decrees on privatization and stabilizing the ruble.
Critics say he's moving too fast toward capitalism.
A1  GULAG HELD M.I.A.'S, YELTSIN HINTS
Soviet archives indicate that American prisoners were transferred from Vietnam to Soviet labor camps, President Yeltsin said in a television interview, adding that it is possible some may have survived.
A1  BACKSTAGE AT THE SUMMIT
The dialogue of Presidents preparing for a summit meeting and the simultaneous, 11th-hour arms negotiations between their staffs have a distinctly different tone.
A12
News Analysis: Russia needs time for its identity to jell.
A13  THE STREETS OF SARAJEVO
In an answer to hardship, the Sarajevans of Marshal Tito Street turn out with civilized scorn and meet a passerby called tragedy.
A8  HUSSEIN'S HIDDEN STRENGTH
Sanctions notwithstanding, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is stronger now than he was a year ago, according to a classified intelligence report.
A3  HOSTAGES REPORTED RELEASED
The state-run Iranian news agency said that two Germans, the last of the Western hostages to be held in Lebanon, had been released.
A5  NEW PRESIDENT FOR YUGOSLAVIA
Dobrica Cosic, a Serb, was elected President of what remains of Yugoslavia as thousands of university students in Belgrade continued to protest Serbian domination.
A9  ALBANIA AS A BUFFER
Albania's President met with President Bush today and said he feared the conflict in Yugoslavia might spreading.
A10  BRITAIN CUTS BACK ARMS
Britain will remove tactical nuclear weapons from all Royal Navy surface ships and attack aircraft as part of a program to dismantle all but "an absolute minimum" of Britain's nuclear stockpile.
A14  National A16-23  KIDNAPPING OF SUSPECT UPHELD
The Supreme Court ruled that the United States can kidnap a criminal suspect from a foreign country to put the suspect on trial, even if the foreign country objects.
A1
Excerpts from the High Court ruling.  A18  UNKIND WORDS FROM A VISITOR
Vice President Quayle returned to New York with words of scorn for Democratic leaders and subjects as varied as condom distribution in schools, high local taxes and rent control.
A22  CLINTON'S STUDIO AUDIENCE
With the help of a friendly studio audience, Governor Clinton pursued his new mission: persuading voters to keep an open mind about his chances of becoming President.
A23  RENDING A G.O.P.
MARRIAGE
Edward J. and Sherrie Rollins were the ultimate Republican power couple until he defected to the Perot campaign and she left her White House job.
Each thinks the other erred, and Republicans are furious at both.
Washington at Work.
A23
The President said he might grace the television talk-shows.
A22  BUSH'S BROTHER IS SUED
A Japanese company with reputed mob connections filed a lawsuit accusing President Bush's older brother of refusing to honor a $2.5 million guarantee he had given the company as part of a 1989 stock transaction.
A20  FROM WELFARE ROLLS TO REFORMER
Two decades ago Lynn Woolsey of Petaluma, Calif., was forced to go on welfare.
Within three years, she was off welfare and making swift progress in the business world, eventually winning election to the city government.
Now she is running for the House, telling voters that she knows just how to contain welfare costs.
A16  CHICAGO CELEBRATION TURNS UGLY
Chicago's celebration of the Bulls' N.B.A. championship was not entirely joyful.
Before the night was over, 100 people were injured, more than 1,000 people were arrested, and several arson fires were set.
A16  REPORT ON SEX ABUSE BY PRIESTS
The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Chicago said he would establish an independent board made up mostly of lay members to investigate accusations of sexual abuse of children by priests in his archdiocese.
A17  Metropolitan Digest, B1 GUN BILL BLOCKED
The State Legislature and the New York City Police Department have struck a deal to kill legislation that would have forced the department to arm all its officers with semiautomatic weapons, agreeing instead to greatly expand a current test of the guns.
A1  GRADUATING WITH UNCERTAINITY
The Class of 1992 at Linden, N.J., has plans.
There just aren't many June graduates thinking of spending the summer criss-crossing the country or backpacking through Europe, finding themselves.
They want jobs.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-11  Latest views of the universe are beautiful and inconclusive.
C1  Bromeliads, the natural terrariums of the rain forest.
C1  Toward exploding some myths about children's suicide.
C1  Whale losses in the polluted St.
Lawrence River persist.
C4  Fashion Page B9  Sports B10-16  Baseball: Vincent puts off Steinbrenner decision.
B11  Red Sox shut out Yanks.
B11  Mets lose to Expos.
B13  Basketball: Bulls favored for next season.
B11  Football: N.F.L. free agency case to open.
B10  Golf: Simpson a major threat in Open.
B14  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  An unhappy Hollywood ending.
C13  Debating the financial value of Andy Warhol estate.
C13  Two leave endowment posts.
C13  Music: Nightclub opera.
C13  Obituaries B8  Robert William Haack, former New York Stock Exchange head  Eddie Lopat, Yankees pitcher  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  Deadly business with Russia.
Adirondacks at risk.
School board meddlers.
Topics: G.O.P., democracy.
Letters A24  Russell Baker: Save that arch for Fu.
A25  A. M. Rosenthal: Congress, Yeltsin and prisoners.
A25  Michael Schudson: The archeology of a crisis.
A25  Larry Gelbart: Perot's ticket to the White House.
A25


Corrections
A brief sports article by The Associated Press on Sunday about the crash of a hydroplane racer, Paul Smith, referred incorrectly in some editions to the time of his death.
The crash occurred Saturday, but he was pronounced dead on Sunday morning.


Devils Trade for Veteran
The Hartford Whalers made two trades yesterday.
They sent veteran defenseman BRAD SHAW to the Devils in exchange for future considerations, and also traded right wing MARK HUNTER to Washington for left wing NICK KYPREOS.
Shaw, 28, had three goals and 22 assists in 62 games for Hartford this season.
Hunter had 10 goals in 63 games for the Whalers, and was second in penalty minutes, 159.
Kypreos had four goals and 206 penalty minutes with the Capitals.


Shaker Loses Position at CBS
TED SHAKER, the executive producer of CBS Sports since 1986, was removed from his post yesterday and replaced by RICK GENTILE, who will serve in the new position of senior vice president of production.
In a division reorganization, the position of executive producer was eliminated.
Although there had been speculation about Shaker's future in his job for several months, he said he was informed of the move yesterday by NEAL PILSON, the president of the division.
The 42-year-old Shaker, whose contract runs through the end of the year, will likely take on production assignments starting in the fall.


American Resource reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Bush Considers Following His Rivals on TV Talk Programs
President Bush said today that he was considering joining the parade of Presidential contenders to the television talk-show circuit, a move that his advisers were urging him to make as a means of countering the unexpected appeal of the independent Ross Perot.
But Mr.
Bush, who was said to be grappling with whether appearing on a talk show would seem too defensive or would diminish the Presidential stature he has been struggling to maintain, said he would not join in another political fad of the 1992 campaign and obtain a toll-free number.


Commtron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


On My Mind; Congress, Yeltsin and Prisoners
Boris Yeltsin and the American Congress have an opportunity, immediate and glorious, to turn his visit to the United States into a richness far beyond ceremony and speeches.
They have the opportunity to help the heroes of the Soviet anti-Communist revolution, the men and women who endured years of imprisonment for Russia's freedom and so made this visit possible.
Thousands of them, and their children, are now adrift, or in great want.


Robert Collins Christopher, 68, An Editor and Pulitzer Secretary
Robert Collins Christopher, an author and journalist who administered the day-to-day operations of the Pulitzer Prize Board for the last 11 years, died on Sunday at Lawrence and Memorial Hospital in New London, Conn.
He was 68 years old and lived in Old Lyme, Conn.
Mr. Christopher died of emphysema, his family said.


Shirmax Fashions reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Road Show on Biotech and Bugs
J.
D.
Brooks is barreling south through Virginia's Dismal Swamp region, a cellular telephone and a recently drained plastic coffee cup at his side, cheerfully explaining how his company's bacteria destroy the stomachs of Colorado potato beetles.
He falls silent for a moment and nods toward the soggy, heavily wooded flatlands crowding the two-lane highway.
"George Washington wanted to drain this area into farmland," he says, allowing the conversation to wander only as far as the agricultural issues of yesteryear.


British Are Planning to Remove A-Arms From Ships and Aircraft
The British Government said today that it would remove tactical nuclear weapons from all Royal Navy surface ships and attack aircraft as part of a program to dismantle all but "an absolute minimum" of Britain's nuclear stockpile.
The announcement, by the British Defense Ministry, is in line with a similar declaration by President Bush, who pledged last fall that United States would remove tactical nuclear weapons from American surface ships and sea-based attack aircraft.


ResourceCan Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bioplasty Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Classical Music in Review
New Amsterdam Symphony  Symphony Space Manhattan
Perhaps the real question underlying Friday night's concert was whether the New Amsterdam Symphony under Robert Black was serving Mahler or whether Mahler was serving its performers.
It was mostly the latter, yet not exclusively.
Granted, the Ninth Symphony is not the ideal repertory for a marginally professional group like this.
Still, it probably did its mostly young musicians good to play it; it stretches them.
The Mahler also gave Mr.
Black an opportunity to exercise his considerable fluency as a conductor in music that probably does not beat a path to his door every day.
He grasps the pace of this rambling music very well, and his graceful beat evidently made sense to his musicians.
The lulls of four-square literalism were probably necessary, a function of keeping complex material under control given the performing forces in front of him.


Hong Kong Journal; The Walled City, Home to Huddled Masses, Falls
The Walled City is a colony within this colony, a dark little enclave of narrow, twisting streets and rickety walk-ups that has defied British law and order for almost 100 years.
The two square city blocks, just beyond the glittering hotels and fashionable boutiques of Kowloon, have been contested territory since 1899, claimed by both Britain and China.


Pond-Making Plants Nurture Riot of Life In Forest Treetops
A VISITOR who glances upward into the canopy of a New World tropical rain forest will be struck by the sight of spiny, succulent plants that festoon the tree branches and trunks, making a constellation of star-shaped silhouettes against the sky.
This large family of plants, called bromeliads, is well known to plant enthusiasts and is most familiar to Americans in the form of its domesticated relative, the pineapple.
As biologists invade the upper reaches of the forest canopy, a habitat that some see as the last frontier of the tropics, they are discovering that these air plants are the hub of much of the canopy's activity.


Still Arguing the Value of Warhol's Estate
Nobody knew as well as Andy Warhol how much his art was worth.
And nobody hyped it better.
But five years after his death, Warhol's estate -- more the magnitude of an investment banker's than an artist's -- is enmeshed in a series of battles that seriously question both the value of his art and the uses to which the income from selling it should be put.
On the face of it, the major dispute is about a lawyer's fee.
Today, the New York County Surrogate's Court in lower Manhattan is to hear a petition filed by Edward Hayes, the lawyer for the Warhol estate, who contends that the estate owes him $12 million for his work.
But at the core of Mr.
Hayes's complaint are allegations of mismanagement of the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, the main beneficiary of the estate and potentially one of the richest, most influential nonprofit arts groups in this country.
The lawsuit also reveals deep divisions among the circle of business advisers, dealers and associates that surrounded the notoriously publicity-hungry artist.


Diet May Play a Role In Menopause Effects
To the Editor:
You report on hormonal treatments of troublesome menopause symptoms (Science Times, May 19) and indicate that other treatments are not well documented.
All the more reason to examine life style and diet in a scientific way.
Japanese women have a much lower incidence of hot flushes than counterparts in Europe or the United States, a striking difference unlikely to be accounted for by cultural differences.
Researchers (some quoted in the May 16 Lancet) have found that the traditional Japanese low-animal-fat diet gave subjects a high urinary level of phyto-estrogens.
Levels were 100 to 1,000 times higher than among subjects on a Western diet.


President of Yugoslavia Named; Protest Continues
As 15,000 university students added their voices today to mounting protests calling for a change of government, legislators from Serbia and Montenegro, the only remaining republics in the Yugoslav federation, elected a 71-year-old author of best-selling Serbian sagas as President.
The rally ended with students breaking into smaller groups to begin sit-down strikes at the university to press demands for the resignation of the government of the Serbian republic.


New Testimony Raises Questions at Au Pair Trial
A police sergeant's conflicting testimony about a broken window has become a central issue in the trial of a Swiss au pair charged with the arson murder of the baby in her care.
Although he was called by the prosecution, the sergeant, Brian Dwyer, initially seemed to bolster a defense claim that an intruder might have broken the window and set the fire that killed 3-month-old Kristie Fischer.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  A Breeze for Navratilova
Top-seeded Martina Navratilova played her first match on an English grass court in 12 months yesterday, and it was as if she had never been away.
The 35-year-old Navratilova, ranked No. 4 in the world, needed just 62 minutes to breeze past Amanda Grunfeld of Britain, 6-2, 6-2, in the first round of the $350,000 Eastbourne tournament.
Since 1987, Navratilova has not lost a match at Eastbourne, a warmup event for Wimbledon, which starts next Monday.
She has won Eastbourne 10 times.
In other action, second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, third-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain and fourth-seeded Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia all advanced.
Zina Garrison, seeded fifth, was upset by Jo Durie of Britain, 6-3, 7-5. (AP) Wheaton Tops Van Rensburg: David Wheaton recovered from a 0-3 deficit in the final set to defeat Christo van Rensburg of South Africa in the first round of the $235,000 men's grass-court tournament at Manchester.
Wheaton, seeded No. 3, took just under three hours to win, 4-6, 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (7-5), against the man he beat in the final of the Beckenham event two weeks ago. (AP) Champion Injured: Seventh-seeded Thierry Champion of France suffered an injured right shoulder in the second set and withdrew from the $260,000 Genoa International.
Champion had won the first set against Francisco Montana of the United States, 6-0, and was ahead, 1-0, in the second set when he left the court because of his shoulder problem.
Third-seeded Javier Sanchez of Spain and fourth-seeded Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands advanced with first-round victories. (AP) SOCCER  Germany Blanks Scotland
Germany was victorious and the Netherlands was frustrated yesterday at the European Soccer Championships in Sweden.
In Norrkoping, Germany beat Scotland, 2-0, as Karlheinz Riedle put the Germans ahead in the 30th minute, and Setfan Effenberg scored the second goal in the 47th minute.
In Goteborg, the Commonwealth of Independent States played a 0-0 tie against the Netherlands, the defending European champion.
Germany and the Netherlands now have 3 points apiece in two games.
The Commonwealth of Independent States has 2 and Scotland 0. (AP)


U.S. to Let States Set Rules on AIDS-Infected Health Workers
AFTER a year of acrimonious debate, the Federal Centers for Disease Control has decided to let state or local health departments decide, on a person-by-person basis, the care that can be provided by health workers infected by the virus that causes AIDS.
The centers are writing to health departments in all 50 states telling them to emphasize steps to prevent the transmission of the virus to patients and to monitor infected health workers to make sure they remain physically and mentally fit.


Cheese Duty On Hungary To Continue
The Bush Administration, which has criticized Western Europe for not allowing more food imports from Eastern Europe, announced this afternoon that it would not eliminate existing duties on Goya cheese imported from Hungary.
The decision followed months of strenuous lobbying by dairy farmers from Pennsylvania, New York and Vermont, who feared that ending duties on Hungarian cheese would foreshadow a flood of cheap Eastern European imports.


A Summer of Decisions for New York City's Newspapers
The summer of 1992 promises to be a watershed for New York City's major daily newspapers, with changes possible that could resolve major uncertainties about the futures of The Daily News and The New York Times and thereby affect the futures The New York Post and New York Newsday as well.
For a decade, New York City has been a roller coaster ride for its newspapers, with crisis after crisis in which either The News or The Post seemed poised for oblivion, only to be saved by concessions from unions, which seemed to help only for the moment.
In the meantime, New York Newsday gathered strength and the economy declined.
Robert Maxwell was hailed as a savior when he acquired The News last year after a violent five-month strike, but 10 months later, when his death highlighted the unraveling of his media empire, The News was again on the edge of an abyss, where it remains.


American Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Phillies Stop Pirates And Halt Streak at 5
Phillies 4, Pirates 1
PITTSBURGH, June 15 (AP) -- Terry Mulholland, one of baseball's best starters the last six weeks, stopped Pittsburgh on five hits and the Philadelphia Phillies halted the Pirates' winning streak at five games with a 4-1 victory tonight.
The Pirates, who took a season-high five-game lead in the National League East into the game, played without Barry Bonds, who strained a muscle in his right rib cage on Sunday at Shea Stadium.
Bonds, the National League's home run leader, was, however, reported to be much improved.
He will be re-evaluated Wednesday following two days of therapy and a decision whether to place him on the 15-day disabled list will not be made until at least then.


COMPANY NEWS: Coals to Newcastle Dept.; High-Tech Windmills Are Sold to the Dutch
All right, so foreign car manufacturers have grabbed a third of the United States market, America does not make videocassette recorders and even table grapes are imported these days.
But a California company is fighting back.
It is selling windmills to the Dutch.


A.L. Van Houtte reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


N.F.L. Free-Agency Trial Set to Begin
Jury selection and opening arguments are scheduled to start in Federal District Court here Tuesday in Freeman McNeil v. the National Football League, the antitrust case that could set the stage for unrestricted free agency in the league.
McNeil, a New York Jets running back, and seven other N.F.L. players sued the N.F.L. on April 10, 1990, claiming they had been illegally restrained from changing teams because they were protected by their clubs under the league's Plan B free agency policy.
Plan B free agency allows each team to protect 37 players; the remaining players are free to negotiate contracts with other N.F.L. teams.
The eight players are seeking a total of $3 million in damages and unrestricted free agency.


Star Gazers Bewildered By Odd Galaxies
LIKE pupils at a show-and-tell class, astronomers brought their latest studies of galaxies to a meeting of the American Astronomical Society here last week, displaying reams of pictures, graphs, equations and speculations.
But while the fare was often startling and sometimes spectacular, many galactic enigmas seemed even more impenetrable than before.
Though they have produced a host of tantalizing hints, the latest investigations still seem unable to explain fully how galaxies form, clump together and evolve and how their sometimes violent cores satisfy their hunger for staggering amounts of energy.


Alkermes Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Israel Land Development Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Excerpts From Clinton's Remarks in Appearance on a CBS Program
Following are excerpts from remarks by Gov.
Bill Clinton on the CBS News program "This Morning" in a question-and-answer session with an audience.


Festival's Violent End Prompts Tales of Fear From Belmar Residents
Plywood sheets covered the few broken windows in shops along Ocean Avenue today, and crews busily cleaned up the usual post-concert debris as bicyclists, strollers and vacationers returned to the beach front following a two-day music and sports festival that turned violent on Sunday.
The tranquil scene belied the anger and fear generated by nearly three hours of random violence marked by brick and bottle throwing and fistfights.
While the crowd, estimated at 75,000, was racially mixed, many of the white residents and black visitors said the fighting quickly became roving racial battles.


Snails as Clocks
A scientist has found a fast-ticking chemical clock in the shells of snails that promises to allow researchers to date deposits that are 350 years old and younger, sediments typically too recent for radiocarbon dating.
Amino acids come in mirror image forms called D and L. Organisms, for the most part, produce only the L form.
But while a snail may build its shell using only L forms, the L forms can convert themselves into their mirror image D forms.


Vincent Indefinitely Delays Steinbrenner Decision
Commissioner Fay Vincent deferred indefinitely yesterday his decision on George Steinbrenner's request to return to active duty with the Yankees.
By the time his office made that announcement, his representatives had already initiated an investigation into allegations that the owner had communicated with club officials when he was prohibited from talking with them.
A Yankee employee, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the commissioner's office, moving quickly, had spoken with several club employees in an effort to determine if Steinbrenner had violated his 1990 agreement with Vincent.
More than one of the employees have said privately that they knew of communications between Steinbrenner and club officials.


Dense-Pac Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


North American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Directors Resign From Arts Agency
Two of the 14 program directors of the National Endowment for the Arts resigned last week, bringing resignations to three since Anne-Imelda Radice became acting chairwoman of the Federal agency on May 1.
All denied that they were leaving to protest Ms.
Radice's refusal to approve grants for two college art exhibitions that include sexual imagery.


New York's Senior Representative to Retire
In the third blow in a week to New York State's influence in Congress, Representative Frank Horton, the dean of the state's Congressional delegation who faced a tough re-election battle because of redistricting, announced today that he was retiring.
The 72-year-old Congressman -- whose 30 years in the House spanned seven Presidents, five Speakers and four minority leaders -- said he had pondered retirement for "some time" but made the decision on Sunday after discussing it with his wife.


Enzo Biochem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


'Romper Room' Host On Her Abortion Case
When she talks about that summer of 1962 when headlines worldwide were howling about her, Sherri Chessen refers to herself as "Miss Sherri." That was the way she was known to the thousands of children who recited their Do Bees and Don't Bees as they watched her on the Scottsdale, Ariz., edition of Romper Room, the nationally syndicated television show.
Off screen in 1962, this 30-year-old mother of four was something of a Miss Sherri, too: perky and naive.
Believing her identity would be kept secret, she said, she told a reporter from The Arizona Republic that a tranquilizer she had taken, thalidomide, would probably cause the child she was expecting to be born with severe deformities.
She said she meant only to warn others about the drug.


U.N. Agencies Would Find a Welcome Just Across East River; Costs in New Rochelle
To the Editor:
In "New York Rediscovers the U.N." (editorial, June 2), the figure you give as the annual rent Unicef would pay for a headquarters facility in New Rochelle is the monthly rent and does not include operating expenses or electrical charges.
We calculate the comparable occupancy-cost figure for New Rochelle at $8 million to $9 million.
This means a cost differential between New York and New Rochelle many times smaller than you suggest.


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: Russia's New Role; As Moscow Feels Its Way Abroad, It Draws Conservative Fire at Home
For many years, the lugubrious former Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko, was known as Mr.
Nyet because of the Soviet Union's rejection of almost anything the United States proposed.
Now the new Russian Foreign Minister, the cheery Andrei V. Kozyrev, is being criticized at home for being Mr.
Da, going along with Washington and the West on nearly every issue.


Classical Music in Review
Stonewall Chorale
Fashion Institute of Technology Manhattan
Nancy Vang took over the directorship of the Stonewall Chorale this season, and on Sunday evening she led this 54-voice choir in an ambitious program of sacred and secular works.
Durufle's Four Motets on Gregorian Themes and Verdi's Four Sacred Pieces shared the first half.
After the intermission, the men in the chorus sang an attractive Ave Maria setting in seven-part harmony by Franz Biebl, a German composer, and the women sang Brahms's Four Songs (Op. 17).
The full choir reassembled for four Ives songs.
The choir, which is one of the oldest gay and lesbian choruses in the United States, has enjoyed a strong reputation since it was founded in 1979.
Judging from Sunday's performance, that reputation is not entirely unwarranted, but Ms.
Vang has her work cut out for her.
At its best -- in the Ubi Caritas of the Durufle, sections of Verdi's Stabat Mater and in the Ives Berceuse -- the choir produced a tone that is sweet, rich and warm.
The other side of the coin is that the singers cannot sustain that lushness very long.
Inevitably, ragged entrances and insecure ensemble creep in, and the sound degenerates.


U.S. Agents Seize Cocaine Processing Lab in Brooklyn
Federal agents in Brooklyn yesterday shut down a laboratory for refining cocaine, a type of operation that is rarely found in this country because processing can be done more cheaply and with less likelihood of detection in South America.
The output of the lab seized yesterday -- 100 to 200 pounds a day -- represented only a fraction of the thousands of pounds of cocaine that are sold in New York, the nation's biggest drug market.
But Federal agents said they were concerned that the establishment of a laboratory in New York indicated a fundamental change in South American cocaine trafficking.


Mutant Foods Create Risks We Can't Yet Guess; No Evidence of Danger
To the Editor:
There is no known scientific evidence that genetically engineered tomatoes may be dangerous to human health, as Sheldon Krimsky, professor of urban and environmental policy, maintains (Op-Ed, June 1).
He relies on people's ignorance and fear of the effects of biotechnology on foods.
Professor Krimsky implies that faulty genetic engineering was the cause of problems associated with contaminated L-tryptophan.
The investigative team that is studying this problem says there is no evidence to indicate genetic engineering had anything to do with the problem.


Too Much Tension, Too Few Runs
Even Mark Gardener, the Expos' starting pitcher, could sense the tightness around the Mets.
"You come into their place and it's a tough atmosphere -- for them," he said.
"The guys might be trying too hard. New York's a tough town."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
McDonnell Douglas postponed the start of its MD-12 program until next year.
The company has had no orders for the planned new jumbo jet, and it has been stalled in its efforts to line up a $2 billion investment from a Tawianese aerospace venture.  [ Page D1. ]
Scores of companies have employees crisscrossing rural America to drum up business for the first farm products based on gene-splicing and other biotechnology breakthroughs.  [ D1. ]


Big Debt Agency Seeks Better Odds of a Payoff
With credit cards accounting for nearly a quarter of the business at collection agencies, one of the nation's largest collectors of bad debts is evaluating the odds of recovery from deadbeats by using the same techniques that banks use to select and retain credit card customers.
To improve its highly computerized approach to collections, the FM Services Agency of Phoenix has hired John D. Rousseau, the former head of Bank of America's credit card business.
Mr.
Rousseau, who is 47 years old and has 20 years' experience in the credit card and collection business, is an expert in evaluating lists of debtors in order to concentrate on those most likely to pay, while paying less attention to those least likely to pay.


Homer by Milligan Keeps Orioles Close
Orioles 6, Indians 5
CLEVELAND, June 15 (AP) -- Randy Milligan's tie-breaking home run in the ninth inning tonight gave the Baltimore Orioles a 6-5 victory over the Cleveland Indians.
The triumph moved Baltimore within a half game of the first-place Toronto Blue Jays, who were idle in the American League East race.
Milligan led off the ninth with his sixth home run, making a loser of Dennis Cook (1-5).


Suicide Myths Cloud Efforts To Save Children
WITH suicide now the third leading cause of death among children and the second among older teen-agers, researchers are overturning long-held beliefs about the reasons young people kill themselves.
The findings also show that while most of these young people provide their families or friends with obvious clues to their suicidal intent, the hints are often overlooked, ignored or not taken seriously and instead are considered a "normal" variant of youthful behavior.


2d Police Inquiry Begins Into Drug-Dealing Charge
Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown appointed his second in command yesterday to investigate allegations that senior officials of the New York City Police Department had failed to adequately support an internal affairs investigation of an officer who was later arrested by Suffolk County officials on drug-trafficking charges.
Since the arrest of Officer Michael Dowd five weeks ago along with four other officers and a retired colleague, it has been the job of the department's chief of inspectional services, Robert J. Beatty, to determine why those officers eluded a corruption inquiry by New York police investigators.


Italians Are Captains of Their Own Ship
Wearing a sleeveless crew T-shirt and matching black gym shorts over a torn, threadbare blue sweatsuit, 33-year-old Giuseppe Abbagnale leans against the doorway of the Circolo Nautico di Stabia boathouse as the dawn light breathes a nascent green into the Bay of Naples.
"Where is he?" growls the 6-foot-2-inch, 196-pound rower.
It is 6 A.M. and Abbagnale and his brother Carmine should already be on the water.
But Giuseppe (Peppiniello) Di Capua, the 5-3, 110-pound fireplug who has steered the Abbagnales to seven world championships since 1981 and is directing them toward Barcelona and a bid for a third Olympic gold medal, is late again.


Sports of The Times; The Boss Explains (Sort of)
We do not really know if Hiroshi Yamauchi, the new $75 million absentee owner of the Seattle Mariners, speaks English.
We are just guessing that George Steinbrenner, the absentee owner of the New York Yankees, does not speak Japanese.
But let us assume that if they ever spoke on the telephone, it would sound something like this:
Yamauchi: Thank you, Mr. Steinbrenner, for taking the time.


Crime Boss Is Convicted in Rackets Trial
Vittorio Amuso, portrayed by prosecutors as the brutal boss of the Lucchese crime family, was convicted yesterday of all 54 charges in his racketeering trial, including nine murders.
In a hushed, crowded courtroom, the jury announced its verdict after deliberating for seven hours over two days at the end of the four-week trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Amuso, who has been held in jail since his arrest last July, faces life in prison without parole.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Washington at Work; When He Works for Perot, and She Backs Bush
Only days ago, Edward J. and Sherrie Rollins were the ultimate Republican power couple: He was a well-known strategist and former campaign official.
She was a high-ranking White House official.
But with Mr. Rollins's hiring by Ross Perot, they became an instant odd couple.


Pro-Dolphin Accord Made
The United States, Mexico, Venezuela and Vanuatu have agreed to ban the setting of nets around schools of tuna that include dolphins, a compromise that could resolve a festering trade dispute that has led the United States to ban tuna imports from several dozen countries, an Administration official said today.
Tens of thousands of dolphins a year become tangled in tuna nets.
The United States banned tuna imports last year from Mexico, Venezuela and Vanuatu -- an island group in the southwest Pacific formerly known as the New Hebrides -- because their tuna boats were killing more dolphins than American boats were.
Early this year a lawsuit by a San Francisco-based environmental group forced the Commerce Department to ban imports from several dozen countries that bought tuna from the three original countries and could not certify that they were not re-exporting it to the United States.


Review/Music; American Opera Finds a Home at the Nightclub
"Casino Paradise" at the Ballroom on Sunday night took American opera off the stage and put it in the nightclub, where it belongs.
Set in the middle of eating and drinking customers, without props and sets, using three performers at three microphones, a piano and a synthesizer, words and music achieved a symbiosis that the usual copies of European tradition never quite do.
In this story of corruption, capitalism and the urban South, Arnold Weinstein's words tumble over one another in seemingly inexhaustible invention.
They can be wickedly funny. (A streetwalker's hymn to the marketplace reads, "Come on night, make my day.")


Heico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Coming to Pizza Huts: All-You-Can-Eat Buffet
In an attempt to lift sales, Pizza Hut, the nation's largest pizza chain, plans to install all-you-can-eat buffets in 2,000 restaurants by the end of the year.
Sales at Pizza Hut climbed by 10 percent last year as its delivery business grew, but sales inside its restaurants have been flat.


For Holmes, the Fight Against Tough Odds Goes Back a Long Way
It takes a maverick to resist conventional wisdom and believe that at 42 years of age he can win the heavyweight title.
Larry Holmes, who challenges the undisputed champion, 29-year-old Evander Holyfield, on Friday at Caesars Palace, has always had the sort of nature that bucked against orthodox thinking.


Magnetic Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Powell Addresses Merchant Marine Academy Graduates


Utilities Say '81 New York Law Is Proving Costly
New York State consumers will pay $4.5 billion or more in extra costs in the 1990's, according to the state's utilities, because of a law passed in Albany at the tail end of the last energy crisis.
The law was intended to nurture competition in electricity generation and improve efficiency by offering a minimum price to independent producers.
Now those prices look extremely generous because of an unexpected drop in utilities' own costs.


For Holmes, the Fight Against Tough Odds Goes Back a Long Way
It takes a maverick to resist conventional wisdom and believe that at 42 years of age he can win the heavyweight title.
Larry Holmes, who challenges the undisputed champion, 29-year-old Evander Holyfield, on Friday at Caesars Palace, has always had the sort of nature that bucked against orthodox thinking.


INSIDE
Sarajevo's Main Street
Although Sarajevans going about their business along Marshal Tito Street face privation with panache, they know that the threat of death can lurk at the next intersection.
Page A8.
Ruling on State Taxation
The Supreme Court reaffirmed its approach to state taxation of income of companies that are based outside a state but do business in it.
Page D1.
States to Decide AIDS Rules
A Federal agency moved to let states decide what care health workers infected with H.I.V. can provide.
Science Times, page C7.
Children and Suicide
Clues about suicidal tendencies among young people are often overlooked or ignored, researchers have found.
Science Times, page C1.
Play Ball?
Not So Fast
George Steinbrenner's request to run the Yankees again was deferred until baseball determines if he violated the rules of his suspension.
Page B11.
The Value of Warhol
Five years after Andy Warhol died, his estate's financial worth is debated by the foundation he established and a lawyer for the estate.
Page C13.


Scrabble's Word Nerds Live for the Perfect Mix
THIS is a column about Scrabble and the raczy pleope who play it.
That engrossing word game, invented by an unemployed Poughkeepsie archteict, initially manufactured by a Connecticut ocuepl and now promoted by a Long Island mna, has just moved into its seventh decade of sccuess.
All right, the first two decades weren't so sccuessluf.
But after the mid-50's Scrabble sales took off.
Today, the National Scrabble Association says, 33 million North Americans play the game.
Atlanta, practicing for the Olympics, gets the national Scrabble championship this August.
We're talking gib money -- $10,000 for first place.


Yeltsin, Leaving for U.S., Issues Decrees to Reinforce His Reforms
As he left today for a state visit to Washington, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a series of decrees to underscore his commitment to economic reform and dispel skepticism in the West about his commitment to change.
The decrees, which were reported by the Itar-Tass news agency and are to take effect on July 1, included provisions for failing state enterprises to go bankrupt and for private companies to buy land, clearing away major obstacles to large-scale privatization of property.


Liberal Party Ponders Perot Endorsement
The leader of New York's Liberal Party said yesterday that he would not rule out endorsing Ross Perot for President, which would guarantee the potential independent candidate a place on the November ballot.
The party's vice chairman, Raymond B. Harding, also did not rule out backing Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, but in an interview yesterday Mr.
Harding repeatedly expressed his qualms about the Democrats' presumptive nominee and his admiration for Mr.
Perot.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Apple Finds a New Arena For Its Fight With Microsoft
After four years of battling the Microsoft Corporation and its Windows software in the courts, Apple Computer Inc. took the fight to a new arena last week with an advertising campaign that questions its rival's contention that the software is easy to use.
Windows is a "shell" program that runs on top of Microsoft's MS-DOS operating system software to give it an appearance and "user friendliness" similar to Apple's Macintosh.
With either system, users execute commands and create files by selecting graphical icons with a mouse pointing device.
Both present what has come to be known as a graphical user interface."


33 Win MacArthur Awards, Including 17 Women
On the same day that Janet Benshoof opened a center to defend the right of women to obtain safe and legal abortions, she was named a recipient of a fellowship from the MacArthur Foundation of Chicago.
Ms.
Benshoof, a New York lawyer who is an expert on women's reproductive rights, was one of 33 people named yesterday to receive the annual awards.


Adirondacks in Peril
A hundred years ago, with extraordinary foresight, New York State's Legislature created one of America's priceless treasures: the Adirondack State Park -- a six-million-acre patchwork of state forests, timber tracts and privately owned land.
Now, in its centennial year, it faces twin threats: from developers pushing at the wilderness, and from inattentive legislators.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo and several creative Democrats in the Assembly offer similar proposals to strike a balance between preservationists and the park's fiercely proud residents.
One measure, sponsored by Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, was approved last night.
It would help the region's dirt-poor hamlets while increasing zoning protection for threatened shorelines, streams and back-country wilderness.


Racetracks in Florida Are Jockeying for Dates
Florida, the winter home of Eastern horse racing, is flying down the homestretch of another political season that will determine the fate of its thoroughbred business, and it looks like a photo finish.
If the Legislature doesn't do something by this Friday, when its fourth special session of the year is supposed to adjourn, the three major tracks in the Miami area could be forced back into a free-for-all.
If it doesn't do something by July 1, the state's parimutuel law will expire and state regulation presumably will end for racing and all those other sports that generate about $2 billion a year in betting revenue for the state budget: harness racing, dog racing and jai-alai.


Yeltsin Arrives on a New Playing Field
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived here today for his two-day meeting with President Bush as negotiators for the two nations worked hurriedly into the night in an effort to conclude an agreement that would sharply reduce their nuclear arsenals.
There was a striking contrast between the remarks by the two Presidents and the reality of the 11th-hour arms control negotiations conducted by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Russian Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev.


HIGH COURT BACKS SEIZING FOREIGNER FOR TRIAL IN U.S.
The Supreme Court ruled today that the United States can kidnap a criminal suspect from a foreign country, over that country's objection and without following the procedures set out in an extradition treaty, to put the suspect on trial in a Federal court.
The Mexican Government sharply denounced the decision, calling it "invalid and unacceptable." It said tonight that it was suspending the activities of American drug agents in Mexico and ordering its agents in the United States to return home.  [ Article, page A19. ]


CHRONICLE
Their names are not usually associated with battles at clinic doors to preserve legalized abortion.
But this afternoon, LAURA POMERANTZ, a senior vice president of the Leslie Fay Companies; LINDA J.WACHNER, the president, chairman and chief executive of Warnaco Inc., and CHARLOTTE MOSS, the owner of an interior design concern that bears her name, are giving a power tea at the "21" Club for the National Abortion Rights Action League.
Among the 60 women, mainly from the fashion industry and related fields, who are expected to attend are: Pauline Trigere, Nancy Novograd, Allison Stern, Ellin Saltzman, Adrienne Vittadini, Lee Traub, Colombe Nichols and Dana Buchman.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Brandon Cromer, shortstop; Sy Dorsey and Scott Kennedy, pitchers; and Scott McCloughan, third baseman-outfielder; to minor-league contracts.
Assigned Cromer, Dorsey and Kennedy to the Blue Jays Gulf Coast League team and McCloughan to St.
Catharines of the New York-Penn League.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Brandon Pico, Keenie Steenstra and Collin Kerley, pitchers; Brant Brown, Chris Peterson and Patrick Fairly, infielders; Daniel Madsen and Tyrone Lewis, outfielders; and Paul Stojsavjevic, catcher; to minor-league contracts.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Missing Endorsements Leave Clinton Fragile
The primaries are over, the convention opens four weeks from today, but three of the Democrats whom Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas defeated on his way to locking up the party's nomination have still not endorsed him and have not decided whether they should do so.
In one sense, it matters little that Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California have remained silent.
Mr.
Clinton beat them fair and square in state after state, he has the delegates to assure himself a first-ballot nomination, and most of the party's leadership has joined his campaign.


Tokyo Company Sues Bush's Brother for Millions
A Japanese company with reputed mob connections accused President Bush's older brother in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday of refusing to honor a $2.5 million guarantee he had given the company as part of a 1989 stock transaction.
The organization, West Tsusho Company of Tokyo, charged in a civil complaint that the President's 69-year-old brother, Prescott S. Bush Jr., acting as a financial consultant to a now defunct company, solicited a $5 million investment in the company's stock by West Tsusho on condition that West Tsusho would get back half of the investment if anything went wrong.


Some Major Feuds Stand in the Way Of Problem Solving
Lost in the shadows of the power play that failed last week in major league baseball was an alarm sounded that the game has some serious problems.
So serious that management might do well to address them rather than wasting energy and time bickering and fighting.
What bickering?
Well, let's count the feuds.
Big salaries and which teams can afford to pay them are driving wedges between big and small markets.
The National and American leagues are still staring daggers over the divvying of expansion money.
And since Yogi Berra is more often right than wrong, it would be safe to assume that the power struggle between members of management's Player Relations Committee and Fay Vincent, the commissioner, won't be over for a while.


Topics of The Times; The G.O.P. and Democracy
Do Republicans care about increasing voter participation?
For the answer, pay close attention to the House's roll call vote today on landmark legislation to make voting a lot easier.
No legislation can supply the motivation to get voters to the polls; that's what campaigns are for.
But Congress can remove major hurdles to registration.


No Shift at Time Warner Despite Ross Absence
Although Steven J. Ross, its chairman and co-chief executive, is out on indefinite leave for further treatment of prostate cancer, Time Warner Inc. said yesterday that no shifts in management or strategy were planned.
"There's been no change," said Jeanette Lerman, a spokeswoman for Time Warner.
She declined to say whether any special meeting of the company's board had been called to discuss the condition of Mr.
Ross, whose prostate cancer was previously said to have been in remission.


Bulls May Still Be Best In N.B.A. Next Season
With the taste of champagne still fresh, Michael Jordan was already being asked the dreaded question on Sunday night.
Can the Chicago Bulls win their third consecutive National Basketball Association title next year?


Hallwood Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Books of The Times; Soap Operas and Fragments From Daily Life Around London
The Real Thing  Stories and Sketches  By Doris Lessing  214 pages. HarperCollins. $20.
In one of the stories in Doris Lessing's new collection, a passenger leans forward to speak to the cabdriver and tries to explain her affection for London: "It was like a great theater, I said; you could watch what went on all day, and sometimes I did. You could sit for hours in a cafe or on a bench and just watch. Always something remarkable, or amusing."
It's a sentiment apparently shared by Ms.
Lessing, who has created a collagelike portrait of London in her latest collection of articles and stories, which were apparently written for a variety of periodicals.
Some pieces are full-fledged stories that chronicle the city's "real-life soap operas"; others are simply snapshots that freeze a bit of local color for the reader's perusal.


Highland Superstores reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


McDonnell Postpones Jumbo Jet
Lacking a single order so far for its planned new jumbo jet, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it had bowed to the inevitable and postponed the start of the program until next year.
The delay, which comes as McDonnell Douglas is stalled in its efforts to line up a $2 billion investment from a Government-backed aerospace venture in Taiwan to help pay for development of the 500-passenger plane, raised new questions about the company's ability to get the program under way and remain competitive in the commercial aircraft business.


Running on Experience: On Welfare, Then Off It
If elected to the House of Representatives in November, Lynn Woolsey promises to be Exhibit A for a nation struggling to contain welfare costs, hold absent fathers accountable for the support of their children and ease the passage of single mothers from public assistance to sustaining work.
Ms.
Woolsey, a Sonoma County Democrat who won a nine-way primary on June 2, would bring more than good intentions and a female sensibility to the discussion of these interlocking issues.
She has lived them all, seen the social-welfare system in the most personal way and used it to boost herself and her family to self-reliance.


Patterns
The Well-Dressed Antihero
Alan Flusser, the dapper men's wear designer, has made a nice sideline out of dressing antiheroes for the movies.
Mr.
Flusser, who made the power suits for Michael Douglas's portrayal of the Gordon Gekko character in "Wall Street," recently designed the suits worn by cast members in "Barbarians at the Gate," the Home Box Office film that traces the takeover of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


N.B.A. Winners On Nestle Crunch
Television commercials for Nestle Crunch featuring Magic Johnson, which were filmed before the basketball star announced he has the virus that causes AIDS, remain shelved.
But a new advertising campaign for the candy bar features the Los Angeles Lakers teams on which Mr.
Johnson played.
The campaign promotes special Crunch bars into which are molded the names of 11 National Basketball Association championship teams, including the Lakers.
Mr.
Johnson, who retired from the Lakers in November, played on five of the six championship Lakers teams, in 1980, 1982, 1985, 1987 and 1988.


Volt Information reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Living Poolside, and Wanting More; Insider-Trading Charges and the Southampton Summer Set
They gathered by the sea during the hazy summer, and at first life couldn't have been sweeter.
The poolside parties at Ed Downe's place in this moneyed resort were a treasured habit.
In the morning, the tennis players would compete on the clay court.
Once the sun was high, the very adequate buffet lunch would be set out by the pool, and everyone ate and fraternized at the umbrella tables.
Then Mr.
Downe and the other gin rummy players would duck indoors to play, at stakes of three cents to a nickel a point.
A wretched streak could cost someone hundreds of dollars, but the pockets of these players ran exceedingly deep.


Critic's Notebook; On Talk-Show Circuit, It's Clinton vs. Perot
In the last week, the political talk show has gone upscale, and Bill Clinton and Ross Perot have gone more or less mano a mano, which translates roughly to mouth against mouth.
Yesterday, Mr.
Clinton answered questions from studio audiences around the country for about an hour of the two hours of "CBS This Morning." (The rest was given to news, weather and advertising.) Last week, he took an hour's worth of telephone calls on NBC's "Today Show," and Mr.
Perot took two hours's worth, minus breaks for commercials of course.
His appearance pushed the program's rating to 6, its highest level since the Persian Gulf war.
This season, "Today" is averaging 3.8.
Gov.
Clinton had a 4.1 rating for his hour on "Today." Each rating point represents 921,000 homes.


Classical Music in Review
Third Rail Brass
St. John's in the Village Greenwich Village
Brass-quintet programs can be predictable affairs, and Third Rail Brass did well to avoid the obvious on Saturday evening in a program of North American works spanning the last century.
But what is also to be expected nowadays, with so many crack brass ensembles around, is a high level of execution, and here Third Rail failed to measure up.
What's more, the works, for all their freshness, were often thin.
The most substantial was Eric Ewazen's "Frost Fire," well wrought and attractive but for a couple of queasy harmonic progressions.


After Court Ruling, Mexico Tells U.S. Drug Agents to Halt Activity
In a sharp, angry response to the Supreme Court decision supporting the abduction from Mexico of a doctor sought in the United States, Mexico announced tonight that it was suspending the activities of American drug enforcement agents in Mexico.
The action, which Mexican officials described as the most serious of its kind since President Carlos Salinas de Gortari took office in December 1988, marked a sudden break in what had been years of steady improvement in the bilateral relationship.


Mutant Foods Create Risks We Can't Yet Guess; Since Mary Shelley
To the Editor:
"Tomatoes May Be Dangerous to Your Health" (Op-Ed, June 1) by Sheldon Krimsky is right to question the decision of the Food and Drug Administration to exempt genetically engineered crops from case-by-case review.
Ever since Mary Shelley's baron rolled his improved human out of the lab, scientists have been bringing just such good things to life.
If they want to sell us Frankenfood, perhaps it's time to gather the villagers, light some torches and head to the castle.
PAUL LEWIS Newton Center, Mass., June 2, 1992


Louis Biancolli, 85, A Writer and Critic
Louis Biancolli, an author and a music critic, died on Saturday at the New Milford Hospital in New Milford, Conn.
He was 85 years old and lived in New Milford.
He died of complications after a hip fracture, said his daughter Amy Ringwald of Albany.


A Cold Final Quarter For Fratello and Albert
The Chicago Bulls had just laid waste to the Portland Trail Blazers on Sunday to win the National Basketball Association championship, outscoring the Fizzlers, 33-14, in the fourth quarter for a 97-93 victory.
And what did Mike Fratello, the motor-driven czar of the TeleStrator say about Portland?
"They played an excellent game this evening away from home," he said. (Yeah, too bad they count the fourth quarter.)


Further Adventures Of Carmen Sandiego
THAT gallivanting and elusive criminal Carmen Sandiego is back and better than ever.
Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?, a product of Broderbund Software of Novato, Calif., has been put on a CD-ROM disk.
As much of the world knows from the popular software series, which began in 1985, as well as from spin-off children's books and a P.B.S. television game show, Carmen Sandiego and her henchmen steal priceless treasures.
The player, in the role of a detective for the Acme Detective Agency, tries to recover the loot and apprehend the alleged perpetrators.
This involves traveling all over the world to gather clues and, not incidentally, learning a good deal of history and geography in the process.


U.N. Agencies Would Find a Welcome Just Across East River
To the Editor:
As "New York Rediscovers the U.N." (editorial, June 2) points out, the negative impact on New York City if four United Nations agencies that are being wooed to relocate were to leave, would be immense.
The loss would be greater than the hundreds of millions of dollars of revenues generated through salaries, expenses, tourism and conferences.
The stature of New York as an international center is at stake.
Relocation of these agencies could be the harbinger of the departure of most, if not all, United Nations operations.


Excerpts From Supreme Court's Decision on the Kidnapping of Foreigners
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 6-to-3 ruling today in United States v.
Alvarez Machain, holding that an extradition treaty with another country, in this case Mexico, does not bar the United States from kidnapping a citizen of that country and putting him on trial in Federal court.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the decision for the majority, joined by Justices Byron R. White, Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy, David H. Souter and Clarence Thomas.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion that Justices Harry A. Blackmun and Sandra Day O'Connor joined.
FROM THE DECISION By Chief Justice Rehnquist


Old, Deadly Business With Russia
When George Bush, elected President of the United States, sits down today with Boris Yeltsin, elected President of Russia, they'll have historic new business to do -- like nurturing democracy in Russia and getting International Monetary Fund backing for its economic reforms.
But the measure of a truly successful summit conference lies in how well they can complete their countries' old business, namely cutting deeply into their enduring nuclear arsenals.


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Less Expensive Lines From Compaq
FULFILLING a vow made in its darkest hours, the Compaq Computer Corporation yesterday introduced two new families of desktop computers that are hundreds, and in some cases thousands, of dollars less expensive than the company's premium Deskpro/M machines.
Suggested list prices for Compaq's new Prolinea computers start as low as $899, and one can assume the "street" or discounted price will be even lower.
Compaq has designed the new Prolinea computers for "entry-level" customers, primarily for home use.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled the following television appearances this week (all times Eastern daylight):  Gov.
Bill Clinton
TODAY: 10-11 P.M., MTV, "Town Hall Meeting," question-and-answer session with an audience of 200 18- to 25-year-olds.
THURSDAY: 9-10 P.M., Cable News Network, "Larry King Live," interview and telephone question-and-answer session.
President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Vice President Dan Quayle
TODAY: 11 P.M.-midnight, the Learning Channel, cable, "Charlie Rose Show," 15-minute interview.
Repeated Wednesday, 11 A.M.-noon.
Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; On TV, Clinton Finds an Audience That Listens
Listen to Bill Clinton on the morning talk shows.
No saxophone.
No sunglasses.
He is serious, concise and eager to repeat his claim of outsider status in an election year suddenly gone screwy.
As an elected Democrat in a year when voters want almost nothing to do with politicians, the winner of the Democratic primary race spent yesterday morning pursuing his new mission: trying to persuade voters to keep an open mind about his chances of becoming President.


Autotote Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mutant Foods Create Risks We Can't Yet Guess
To the Editor:
"Not-So-Bad Boy of Biodiversity" (editorial, June 5), which sides with the Bush Administration and the biotechnology industry against the Rio de Janeiro biodiversity treaty, trivializes and misrepresents the issues.
Readers are left with the Administration's claim that third-world countries are seizing a pretext to tax rich ones and that any industrial countries with a different view are trying to hobble the United States in the one sector in which it leads.
But the conflict between commercial biotechnology and biodiversity is real indeed.
Since the Supreme Court decision of 1980, we have granted patents for genetically altered organisms.
This holds that they are inventions, not variable products of nature.
Yet genetic engineers have not designed organisms from scratch; they have altered one or a few genes in a creature with an evolutionary legacy of millions of years.
No wonder poor countries, struggling to meet the competing but inseparable needs of environment and development, think our claims of "patent protection" must be weighed against their stake in a common heritage.


U.S. Reports a Stronger Saddam Hussein
Despite stringent economic sanctions and diplomatic isolation, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is stronger now than he was a year ago, according to a classified intelligence report that will be presented to President Bush and his chief aides.
The interagency report, known as a National Intelligence Estimate, concludes that Mr.
Hussein has begun to rebuild some of his country's infrastructure by importing goods from Jordan in violation of the United Nations-mandated sanctions and by tapping into hidden Iraqi reserves, said Administration officials familiar with the report.
It also states that he is trying to reconstitute his military and is strengthening his political base by imposing more repressive measures on his population.


Topics of The Times; Brooklyn: The Royal Borough
Last Sunday the young star of "The Secret Garden," Daisy Egan, announced to the annual Welcome Back to Brooklyn Day that she loved Brooklyn because it didn't smell.
She seemed to know what she was talking about, even if her audience didn't.
She's a native.
So are the actor Martin Landau and the actress Brenda Vaccaro, who were crowned Brooklyn's King and Queen at Grand Army Plaza, and feted by marching bands.
And dancing bands.
And a belly dancer, an A.S.P.C.A. mobile unit and a petting zoo with a couple of goats.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on Wednesday, about efforts to fend off the effects of aging and to improve thought processes through the use of the nutritional supplements, vitamins and prescription drugs collectively called smart drugs, misidentified a direct-marketing company that sells nutritional products.
It is Omnitrition International.
The article also referred incorrectly to products marketed by the company.
Of those mentioned in the article, Omnitrition sells only Wow! and Go for It!
The article also included a figure for the annual sales of these products that was attributed to the company and is now disputed.
The figure -- $100 million -- was provided by a company spokesman who has since left Omnitrition.
The company, which is privately held and does not disclose sales figures for specific products, says this figure is erroneous.


Randolph Accentuates the Positive
Willie Randolph's locker is in such a far corner of the Mets' clubhouse, it is almost as if he wishes he were in the next room.
"Look at that," the Mets' second baseman said of the mob scene caused by about two dozen reporters in the locker room before the slumping Mets opened a three-game set with the Montreal Expos last night.
Microphones, tape recorders, ballpoint pens were being waved like a roomful of on-deck hitters.


National Media Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reactions to Quayle Split on Party Lines
The response from elected officials in New York to Vice President Dan Quayle's remarks yesterday divided sharply along party lines.
Republicans accepted Mr.
Quayle's criticism that the party in power in the city -- the Democrats -- had been responsible for its mounting woes.
But Democrats said Mr.
Quayle and his fellow Republicans in Washington had abdicated their responsibility to the nation's cities in general and to New York City in particular.
A sample of the reactions follows.


Arch Petroleum Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


2 German Hostages Freed in Lebanon, Iran Says
The state-run Iranian news agency said tonight that two German relief workers, the last of more than 80 Western hostages to be held in Lebanon, had been released into the custody of Lebanese officials.
But the report could not immediately be confirmed.
The Iranian report said the two men had been handed over to Lebanese security officials but gave no further details.
An official reached by telephone at the German Embassy said he could not confirm the release.
Nor was there any confirmation from the German authorities in Bonn.


Quayle Portrays New York as Symbol of Liberalism's Failures


Reporter's Notebook; When Shells Stop Raining Down, Sarajevans Dress Up and Step Out
When the guns on the hillside paused for a few hours on Sunday, Zekria Cecko polished his black shoes, pulled out a freshly starched white shirt and a striped club tie, and tucked a lacy handkerchief in his breast pocket.
Then he set out to join the crowd strolling down Marshal Tito Street, the very picture of a gentleman.
Mr.
Cecko is 81 years old, 5 feet 3 inches tall, and natty to the point of being persnickety.
So when the World War II veteran came briskly down Sarajevo's main street, using his ivory-handled umbrella to push stray shards of glass into freshly swept piles of rubble along the sidewalk, he seemed puzzled to be asked why, amid the battle-scarred wasteland of Sarajevo, he had been so particular with his wardrobe.


Sprouse-Reitz Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 28


Meddlers on the School Board
It has never been clearer: New York City needs a new method for choosing its Board of Education.
Mayor David Dinkins is moved to say so anew, and his recent criticism of the board rings with merit.
With reading and math scores going down, with school buildings in disrepair, with public trust in the schools waning, what does the board choose to argue endlessly about?
The details of an AIDS education program.
That surely deserves sober attention; but it's hardly the only issue.
"Educational excellence and innovation have taken a back seat to fingerpointing, micromanagement and far too many fits of pique," Mr.
Dinkins said in an admirably strong statement.
"Rather than standing together and fighting for our children, board members too often have been fighting against each other."


Martin McKneally, Legion Commander And Attorney, 77
Martin B. McKneally, a former New York state and national commander of the American Legion who served one term as a Republican Congressman and later pleaded guilty to income-tax evasion, died on Sunday at the Castle Point Veteran's Administration Hospital near Beacon, N.Y.
He was 77 years old and lived in Newburgh, N.Y.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said one of his sisters, Catherine Curry of Cornwall, N.Y.


Survival Technology reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Business Scene; Figuring Profits The Russian Way
CALL on a store or a factory in Russia today and no matter how rundown it looks or how desperate its circumstances, the manager will probably declare that the enterprise is very profitable.
By all the rules of Russian accounting, that is the truth.
But that is largely because those rules encourage managers to spend their profits on housing, food, day care, holiday retreats and numerous other amenities for workers.
When an American company spends its money like that, the outlays are listed as costs.
Those costs cause profits to shrink, owners to suffer and chief executives sometimes to be dismissed.
But in a land where every state enterprise belonged in theory to the people, spending on benefits was -- in the logic of Russian accounting -- a distribution of profits to the worker-owners.
This accounting standard persists, even as Russia makes the transition to private enterprise.


Bridge
A women's team match played in Corpus Christi, Tex., a week ago in the Pan-American Championships had a meaning on two levels, one of which escaped the attention of the officials, the press and the players most concerned.
In a match that ended at 2 A.M., but was not scored, for technical reasons, until 4 A.M., a team consisting of Gail Greenberg, Dorothy Truscott, Judy Tucker, Lisa Berkowitz, Randi Montin and Pam Wittes eked out a win by 7 imps.
This team then went on to win the Pan-American title.


University Patents reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Luby's Cafeterias Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Thrift Is Under Siege in Japan As Use of Credit Cards Soars
For years the Japanese have been unwavering in their devotion to thrift, regarding personal savings as a measure of national strength.
Then they met credit cards.
Now the world's most fervent savers have discovered not just the joys of shopping with plastic but, in soaring numbers, the burdens of indebtedness.


Versus Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Laser Recording Systems reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Market Place; Taking On F.D.A. Is Costly to Barr
BARR LABORATORIES INC., a generic drug maker that was one of the first companies to blow the whistle on corrupt Federal drug officials three years ago, is still standing up to the Food and Drug Administration.
And it seems to be paying heavily for its feisty attitude, even though a number of F.D.A. officials were later found guilty of taking bribes and manipulating the drug approval process.
In the latest of several simultaneous court battles involving the company and the Federal agency, the F.D.A. says Barr's manufacturing processes are "fundamentally flawed," and it is seeking to shut down Barr, which had $94 million in sales in the year ended June 30, 1991.


Public &amp; Private; A Public Matter
"If I was in your position I'd do exactly what you're doing. I can't say that in public -- I know you understand that." -- The High School Principal
"You're not the only one, Mrs. Finkbine. We do a lot of terminations here." -- The Hospital Administrator


Poland Agrees to Change Auschwitz Tablets
After 50 years of deflecting the requests of Jewish groups, the Polish Government has agreed to change the wording on stone tablets at Auschwitz and Birkenau, the adjacent Nazi camps where more than one million Jews died during World War II.
The move follows decades of appeals by Jewish groups, who say the current plaques do not fully reflect the suffering of Jews there and focus too heavily on the camp's non-Jewish victims.
While thousands of non-Jews were among the estimated 1.5 million killed at Auschwitz, the victims were predominantly Jewish.


Review/Rock; Tossing Licks At a Fiesta For Guitars
At Arc Angels' show at the Marquee last Wednesday night, the guitars were turned up loud enough to be heard in Texas.
Guitars were the main course of the evening.
There are other elements to the band's rugged, blues-rock sound -- innocuous lyrics about girls and drinking, an extraordinarily tight rhythm section, pleasant rock melodies -- but they're carefully arranged so as not to get too much in the way.
Throughout the show, the guitarists Charlie Sexton and Doyle Bramhall Jr. traded leads, overlapped leads, supported each other on rhythm and generally plugged in notes wherever they had a chance.
It was a guitar fiesta.
Even Arc Angels' history is built around the guitar.
Mr.
Sexton began playing guitar for Joe Ely's band when he was 13.
Mr.
Bramhall was also sitting in on guitar as a teen-ager, with Stevie Ray Vaughan and the Fabulous Thunderbirds.
The group's rhythm section, Tommy Shannon on bass and Chris Layton on drums, were members of the Vaughan backing band Double Trouble.
Though Mr.
Sexton and Mr.
Bramhall are also Arc Angels' co-lead singers and co-songwriters, neither words nor vocals are meant to be selling points.
On Arc Angels' eponymous debut album (DGC), the journeyman writing skills are evidenced by such efforts as "The Famous Jane," based on rock songs featuring the name Jane in the title (Lou Reed's "Sweet Jane," the Rolling Stones' "Lady Jane," among others).


The Pop Life
To Fight AIDS
The New-Music Seminar going on in Manhattan is one big hustle, with bands looking for contracts, industry people looking for contacts and the average person left standing in line outside the clubs.
A good escape just might be Friday's It's Alive: the Monster Party, at the newly renovated Webster Hall, at 125 East 11th Street, once the home of the downtown Ritz.
Featuring 20 or so disk jockeys in four different rooms playing four different styles of music -- deep house, rave, dance-hall reggae and industrial -- it brings together the avant-garde of the club scene.
And it's only $10.
But best of all, the money earned by the show (none of the disk jockeys are charging for their work) will go to Lifebeat, an organization formed by members of the music community to raise money to support AIDS research.
For DB, a disk jockey who will be featured in the rave section of the show and is one of its organizers, the party has a personal side to it.
"A friend of mine got sick from the disease," he said.
"It was the first time it had happened to me, and I felt helpless; I didn't know how to deal with it. I know how to throw parties, so that seemed to be a solution."
DB went to Gari Pini, a vice president for Profile Records, and asked him to help.
"We pretty much figured out the whole concept," Mr.
Pini said.
The show's idea is to mix subcultures.
Each of the four categories has its own constituency and its own specific codes, but the producers want people to experiment with each genre, to hear the possibilities.
The disk jockeys, including Tony Humphries and Todd Terry for the deep-house room, Kevin Saunderson and DB for the rave room, Bobby Konders for the dance hall, and Reese for the industrial room are among the most popular disk jockeys working.
Each genre is made for dancing, but clubgoers pay attention to the differences among styles, from Jamaican dance-hall music -- with its syncopations and its raplike toasting -- to the dissonance-filled grinding sounds of industrial music.
"I hope people move around from room to room," DB said.
"I think the club scene has become a bit stagnant over the last year or so. People are closed to different types of music; they just want to hear one type. The idea is to really soak up what these D.J.'s can do, really taste all sorts of stuff."
Mr.
Pini said: "These are the four kinds of music that are on the cutting edge of new music. It's all great, really exciting music. We also tried to keep the emphasis on D.J.'s instead of live acts, because with live acts so many things can go wrong. D.J.'s, we know them all, and they were all happy to do it." Dark, but Not Sinister
A new love man has entered the pop world in the form of the 24-year-old English singer Ephraim Lewis.
Mr.
Lewis, like so many of his musical predecessors, comes with a church pedigree; he grew up in a Jamaican pentecostal church, listening to records by Andre Crouch and Al Green.
He has just released his first album, "Skin" (Elektra), and it's a trip behind closed doors.
Not so much because of the subject matter, but because the production, full and whispery, gives the record the sound of intimacy.
"It's very mellow and there's a kind of dark quality to it, but it's not sinister," Mr.
Lewis said.
"There's an underlying melancholy to it, but there's also the positive side that appeals to people. Pop music tries to make you feel a certain way, but I'd rather evoke a mood that can be translated different ways even in same song."
The album mixes bits of American soul and gospel with a cool English soul approach.
Mr.
Lewis can move his voice around easily, and he can make it sound as if passion were his thing, even if he's showing it off quietly.
Touches of the English singer Sade appear, and a lot of thought went into writing the melodies.
And while Mr.
Lewis produced mostly love songs, they're elliptical and vague, perfect for the gauzy sound of the music.
"The songs are stretching the boundaries a bit, they aren't made up of traditional lyrics, they're a bit intellectual," Mr.
Lewis said.
"Honestly, you get a bit tired of 'Baby, baby I love you.' The music on the album is about sharing the same outlook on life and spirituality."


President Who?
For virtually the first time since the war, Europe has been following the American Presidential campaign as a mildly interesting spectator sport.
Until now, there was always anxious attention.
People felt their own fate was at stake.
They complained they didn't have a voice or a vote "because the winner will be our president, too." They minded that candidates they knew nothing about suddenly emerged as serious challengers.
This is rarely the case in the politics of Europe, where leaders usually serve a long apprenticeship in parliament, leading the opposition if not serving in government.
The end of the cold war, which not only erased the threat of Soviet aggression but also revealed how much America had consumed of its own economic and political substance in the confrontation, has left the Europeans feeling far less dependent.


Prison for Wife but Not for Garcia in Wedtech
While condemning him as a "corruption of the American dream," a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday spared former Representive Robert Garcia of the South Bronx any more jail time for his role in the Wedtech scandal.
The judge, David N. Edelstein, sentenced Mr.
Garcia, who had already served three months in prison after an earlier conviction, to three years yesterday, but stipulated that he be eligible for parole immediately.


Books of The Times; Margaret Sanger, Warrior for Women's Rights
Woman of Valor  Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America  By Ellen Chesler  Illustrated. 639 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Howe Arbitrator Suggests Clearing Air
The arbitrator presiding over the grievance procedure involving the suspended Yankees pitcher Steve Howe yesterday suggested to both sides that they attempt to clear up differences over the indefinite nature of Howe's suspension.
George Nicolau, chairman of the Major League Baseball Arbitration Panel, made those suggestions during a four-and-a-half-hour hearing in which Howe attended.


U.S. to Press Yeltsin to Reduce Budget Deficit
Administration officials said today that they would press President Boris N. Yeltsin to bring Russia's budget deficit under control to help enable Moscow to sign an economic reform agreement with the International Monetary Fund.
If Russia controls its deficit, reins in its money supply and moves to make the ruble convertible, then the Administration will press the I.M.F. not to delay an agreement because of concerns about details, the officials added.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Youth Vote; Clinton Goes Eye to Eye With MTV Generation
Gov.
Bill Clinton put on a campaigner's charcoal gray suit, an awful-looking flowered necktie and strolled onto the explosively colorful MTV set.
He joshed with the audience, settled onto a stool and readied himself for questions on the issues.
"Hi, Governor Clinton," a 20-year-old student from Long Beach State University said in a friendly enough fashion.
"How did it feel growing up in an alcoholic family and having a brother who's a drug addict?"


Needle-Swap Programs Found to Reduce H.I.V. Transmission
To the Editor:
Bob Martinez, director of the Office of Drug Control Policy, has urged Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York and Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly of Washington to reconsider allowing drug addicts to receive clean hypodermic needles in programs designed to curb AIDS (news article, June 3).
Contrary to the assertions of Mr.
Martinez, needle-exchange programs across the country have been found to reduce transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus, and they serve as excellent recruitment sites for drug treatment services.
The Bush Administration may be able to keep its head in the sand and ignore the twin epidemics of substance abuse and H.I.V.
In New York City, we cannot afford that luxury.
Rates of H.I.V. transmission are increasing fastest among injection drug users, who account for 43 percent of AIDS cases in the state.
New York State has the capacity to offer drug treatment to only 43,000 of its addicts, whose total numbers are estimated at 500,000.


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: And Now, the Political Plowshares; Boost for Bush Campaign, but Will It Last?
On the face of it, the sweeping arms agreement announced today by President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia seems precisely the kind of political medicine Mr.
Bush needs.
It displays Mr.
Bush in his preferred role of accomplished international negotiator and peacemaker, which since the Persian Gulf war has been gradually eclipsed, in terms of public opinion, by concerns about health care, jobs, education, the environment and the credibility of politicians.
Nuclear disarmament is obviously an easier sell than sluggish economic growth.


Indictment Counters Weinberger's Image as Arms-Sale Foe
From the moment the Iran-contra scandal broke open in November 1986, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger made it impeccably clear that he had despised the whole affair from the very beginning and found out too late that it had been carried out behind his back.
In testimony and published accounts, he insisted repeatedly that he had argued against the sale of arms to Iran, believed he had managed to kill the program before it began and was surprised to learn by reading intelligence reports later that the program had not died but instead had blossomed into a major fiasco without his knowledge.


Greenspan Sees Benefits In Tying Bonds to Inflation
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, said today that if the Treasury issued bonds with the yield indexed to inflation, it would help the Fed formulate monetary policy by giving it more information on inflation expectations.
He said that by studying the difference in the yield between indexed bonds and nonindexed bonds, the Fed would get useful information about real interest rates and investors' expectations for inflation.


Wife of Missing Executive Issues Plea for Safe Return
Patricia Reso, the wife of the Exxon official who vanished from his home here seven weeks ago, called a news conference in her living room today to say that she "unconditionally" wanted her husband back and hoped he would return by Sunday, Father's Day.
Seated on an armless upholstered chair near a fireplace, Mrs.
Reso read a six-sentence statement and answered questions about her life since her husband, Sidney J. Reso, disappeared on April 29.
Mr.
Reso, 57 years old, is president of Exxon International, the division responsible for the oil company's operations outside North America.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Gaffes; Spelling by Quayle (That's With an E)
So Jay Leno has a week's worth of new Dan Quayle jokes.
At a school here, everyone was quite hush-hush the day after the visiting Vice President spelled potato wrong while directing a spelling bee.
Pupils in the after-school program were lined up in the schoolyard and told not to talk to milling reporters.
Counselors directed all questions to the Mayor's office.
And the Mayor was out.


U.S. Tries to Quiet Storm Abroad Over High Court's Right-to-Kidnap Ruling; Treaty Talks in Mexico
Mexican and American officials met today to begin discussing changes in the extradition treaty between the two countries as Mexico took steps to protest the Supreme Court decision.
By this afternoon, Mexican officials were meeting with Ambassador Negroponte and other United States diplomats to start discussing amendments to the extradition treaty and the D.E.A.'s Mexican charter.


Child Is Shot in Brooklyn
A nine-year-old boy whom the police described as an innocent bystander to a dispute between two men in Brooklyn was shot once in the chest last night when one of the men opened fire, the police said.
The man believed to be the target of the shooting, Wayne Gray, 23, was also shot once in the chest, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
Both Mr.
Gray and the boy, who was not identified because of his age, were listed in serious but stable condition last night at Wyckoff Heights Hospital.


Bill to Simplify Voter Registration Clears House and Pressures Bush
Seeking higher voter turnout among the poor, elderly and disabled, the Democratic-controlled House today overwhelmingly approved a measure that would enable all citizens to register to vote as they renew their driver's licenses and apply for social services at government agencies.
White House officials said they would advise President Bush to veto the measure, which was approved by the Senate in May.
But it could be politically uncomfortable for the President to reject a proposal that has the goal of encouraging more people to vote.


Northwest to Raise Fares 10% on Its Domestic Flights
Northwest Airlines said late yesterday that it would raise domestic fares 10 percent next week, but the proposal may not take off if its major competitors do not go along.
American, the industry leader, and Delta Air Lines said only that they were studying the move.
United and USAir said they had no immediate comment.
Continental also said it was studying Northwest's move but added, "We have said all along that fares have been too low."


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Martin Goodman, the founder and longtime publisher of Marvel Comics, misidentified the creator of Captain America.
The comic-book character was created by Joe Simon and Jack Kirby, not by Mr.
Goodman.


Plan Detailed For Inquiries In Police Case
First Deputy Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, who has been appointed to examine accusations that senior New York City police officers hindered an internal affairs inquiry into an officer suspected of drug trafficking, said yesterday that he would use civilian interrogators in the case to insure an aggressive investigation.
"We're talking about an organization that has 28,000 uniformed people in it that has a tradition and a strong hierarchical structure, and sometimes rank might get in the way of questioning people," Mr.
Kelly said in an interview yesterday.


Proposed AIDS Curriculum Stirs Heated Debate
For weeks now, New York City's Board of Education has been mulling a new curriculum on AIDS for elementary school children with only the faintest idea about how the teaching of concepts like anal intercourse and condom use might sit with parents and local officials in the great city beyond.
On Monday night, the board got its first solid piece of feedback, and, to perhaps no one's surprise, the tally of how the locals felt depended on who did the counting.


Control Panel Criticizes School Board on Feuding
The State Financial Control Board said yesterday that New York City's Board of Education had failed to meet cost-cutting targets over the last year because of "a serious lack of cooperation" between the Dinkins administration and the school board.
Without better cooperation between City Hall and the Board of Education, whose senior officials have been feuding publicly over fiscal matters, the school board "will continue to routinely exceed its budget appropriation and the city will continue to be the payer of last resort," the Financial Control Board said in a report released yesterday.


U.S. Says a Citizen Hid His Nazi Past
Federal prosecutors filed a civil complaint on Monday seeking to revoke the citizenship of a retired Philadelphia architect who is accused of concealing his wartime activities when he immigrated to the United States in 1954.
Prosecutors say the man, Jonas Stelmokas, 75 years old, was an officer in a Nazi-sponsored Lithuanian battalion that helped to murder thousands of Lithuanian Jews and other civilians in 1941 and 1942.


Holyfield Prefers to Punch A Fighter His Own Age
He is the undisputed, undefeated heavyweight champion of the world, but he has a public relations problem.
It seems Evander Holyfield can't get his just dues.
Take his fight against Larry Holmes.


Bridge; An American pair falls just short of a double victory.
A remarkable double almost came to pass Sunday in Corpus Christi, Tex.
David Berkowitz and Larry Cohen, who had won the Pan-American Open Teams four days earlier together with Cliff Russell, Sam Lev, Peter Weichsel and Bobby Levin, were making a strong effort to capture the Pan-American Open Pairs as well.
They just fell short, by 6 match points, and had to be content with the bronze medals.
The silver went to Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil, the reigning world pair champions, and the gold to Eric Rodwell and Doug Simson.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Deftly Navigates Shoals of Racial Issues
It's not so tough to combine politics, opportunity and self-righteousness in one package.
Gov.
Bill Clinton proved it again this week.
With his criticism of comments by Sister Souljah, a polemical performer little known outside the rap music culture, he accomplished much for his campaign.
He broke through the television news coverage void that had become a source of frustration, distanced himself from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and spoke out only against reverse racism.


A New Uncertainty About Life After High School; Students at Horace Greeley Wonder if the Best Years of Their Lives Are Ahead or Behind
Jennifer Hitchcock, a star athlete at Horace Greeley High School here who drives a sporty red Jeep, worries that these are the best days of her life.
"You always dream of making more money than your parents, but I don't think that will happen," said Miss Hitchcock, whose Jeep was a sweet-16 gift from her father, a vice president of Revlon cosmetics, and her mother, a real-estate agent.
"I feel like I'm living the best time of my life so I'm trying to take advantage of the money now."


17-Year-Old Is Charged In Hotel Fires In Manhattan
A homeless teen-ager from Philadelphia was arrested yesterday and charged with setting five of a series of fires at hotels in midtown Manhattan over the last 10 days.
Last week, the teen-ager, Raymond Charles Dunford, 17 years old, pleaded guilty in connection with another fire set at a midtown hotel, the authorities said.
But as the pattern of fires emerged, investigators had trouble finding him for questioning because the records in the juvenile case were sealed, they said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about windmill sales misidentified the company selling windmills to the Dutch.
It is U.S.
Windpower Inc., not United States Windpower Inc.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 12
June 5
June 14
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
220.4
217.9
218.1
Distillate stocks
98.7
95.7
111.3
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.4
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.5
2.2
1.9
Crude stocks
347.2
347.0
352.2
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
91.2
90.9
90.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Holocaust Dead
To the Editor:
"The Wrong Terrible Ivan?" (editorial June 9), on the possibility of mistaken identity in the trial of John Demjanjuk in Israel, states: "Extreme retribution, even against the right man, would only add another death to the Holocaust."
Death penalty arguments aside, you profoundly misunderstand who is counted among the Holocaust dead.
The Holocaust dead were, by their murderers' specific design, an exclusive club, the victims of the Nazis, their collaborators and henchmen.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.50
5.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.63
3.66
5.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.75
5.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.82
6.87
8.18
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.85
8.51
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.77
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.56
6.59
7.26
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


AT WORK WITH: Tim McCarver; A Ballplayer Who's Seen It All, Yet Makes It All Sound New
TO love baseball with concerted rapture and yet to consider it seriously it is necessary, when the moment calls, to be 8 years old.
This is the lesson of an evening with Tim McCarver.
There he was, broadcasting a Mets game one recent evening at Shea Stadium, his head bobbing, his shoulders rocking, his voice falling and rising, nearly cracking.
His headset sat on his head like earmuffs.
He was pointing.
He could not get over what he was seeing.


Honors
*
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Pacific, San Francisco, won the third-annual Media Bowl, a competition for media professionals involving knowledge of consumer magazines, sponsored by the Magazine Representatives Association there.
Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, placed second.


More Accurate Way to Detect Lyme Disease May Be Near
RESEARCHERS at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases are advancing on a major goal in their battle against Lyme disease: a reliable method of determining who has it and who does not.
Clinical results, announced last month at the Fifth International Conference on Lyme Disease and the Lyme bacteria in Arlington, Va., indicate that a new test for the disease is much more sensitive than the currently available standard tests and that many more people may have Lyme disease than are now found to have it.


Officials Defy Ruling on Paying for Health Care for Poor
Ignoring a Federal judge's ruling that New Jersey must take immediate action to correct its system of financing health care for the poor, Gov.
Jim Florio and the Republican-controlled Legislature have decided to stick with their own deadline, Nov. 30.
Judge Alfred M. Wolin of the Federal District Court in Newark rejected that timetable last week, giving the state two weeks to develop a suitable plan.


Eating WellGene-Spliced Foods: Is It Safe Soup Yet?
DR.
DAVID A. KESSLER, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, is adamant: there are stringent rules for regulating genetically engineered foods, and he intends to enforce them.
"This is not a voluntary system," he said.
Michael Hansen, a research associate at Consumers Union, is equally adamant: the rules aren't stringent.
"Everything is left up to the discretion of the companies," he said.
"The industry is on the honor system."


The I.M.F.'s Ruinous Caution
As Boris Yeltsin and George Bush have discovered, it takes courage and trust to make arms control work.
It will require a similar leap of faith to help Russia move to a free economy.
Yet the International Monetary Fund seems unprepared to make that leap.
Its cramped response endangers Mr.
Yeltsin's dream of economic reform.
The I.M.F. is blocking the release of $24 billion the West promised to provide in 1992.
This caution might make sense if the Russian Government had moved slowly.
Instead Mr.
Yeltsin has carried out an astonishing array of market reforms even without the promised aid.


Energy Bill Is Cleared By Senate Committee
A Senate panel approved and sent to the Senate floor today an energy bill that would encourage the development of electric cars and ease Federal regulations on the nuclear power industry.
But it does not raise gasoline taxes, which many economists regard as critical to curbing oil imports and automotive-generated pollution.
The measure is likely to win the full Senate's endorsement within the next several weeks.
The Administration strongly backed a similar bill passed by the House on May 27, suggesting that a compromise measure may be approved by both houses and receive President Bush's signature within the next several months.


Wine Talk
IS wine made from a secret formula?
Jess Jackson, a San Francisco lawyer who owns the Kendall-Jackson Winery in Lake County, Calif., says it is.
Jed Steele, his former wine maker and one of the California wine industry's more colorful figures, says it isn't.
Mr.
Steele left Kendall-Jackson in 1990 after eight years to start his own winery and to work as a consultant.
The parting was amicable, with Mr.
Jackson agreeing to pay Mr.
Steele severance of $400,000 plus $10,000 a month while he trained his successor.
In May 1991, however, Mr.
Jackson dismissed Mr.
Steele as a consultant and refused to continue paying the settlement.
He accused his former wine maker of revealing "trade secrets" to new clients and of luring away Kendall-Jackson grape suppliers.
Mr.
Steele sued to get $275,000 he said was still owed him; Mr.
Jackson countersued to keep Mr.
Steele from using information he gained while he was employed by Kendall-Jackson.


Weinberger Faces 5 Counts In Iran-Contra Indictment
Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary and architect of the Reagan Administration's military buildup in the 1980's, was indicted today on five felony charges related to the Iran-contra affair, including accusations that he had lied to Congress and obstructed Government investigations.
Mr.
Weinberger is the highest official of the Reagan Administration to be charged with a crime in the five-year-long investigation.
A longtime political associate of Ronald Reagan, Mr.
Weinberger headed the Pentagon from 1981 to 1987 and operated within the inner circle of Mr.
Reagan's advisers on military and diplomatic affairs.


COMPANY NEWS
ASEA A.B., Stockholm, a holding company, said its A.B.B.
Traction unit had received an order worth $123 million for 366 subway cars for the Seoul metropolitan government.
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO., Murray Hill, N.J., announced a discount plan for companies with telephone spending between $3,000 and $30,000 a month that offers volume discounts and detailed billing like customized bills for individual offices.


DDT Linked to Pancreatic Cancer in Humans
DDT, the persistent pesticide that was banned in the United States in 1972 because of devastating effects on wildlife, can cause cancer of the pancreas in people, a long-term study of chemical workers has found.
Workers who were most heavily exposed to DDT during the manufacturing process faced a risk of developing this cancer that was as much as 7.4 times as great as that for comparable workers without any industrial exposure to DDT.
The researchers said, however, that the risk to ordinary consumers might be minimal since workers involved in DDT manufacture were exposed to the chemical at levels hundreds of times as great as those generally present in the environment.
The study was conducted by researchers at the University of Michigan School of Public Health and the University of Southern California School of Medicine in Los Angeles.
It was based on death records and interviews with immediate relatives of 28 men with pancreatic cancer and a comparison group of 112 men without the disease.
All were employed in chemical manufacturing from 1948 to 1971.
Among those involved with DDT production, the average risk of developing pancreatic cancer, which is nearly always fatal, was 4.8 times as great as for those never exposed.


Traveling More on Business, Women Seek More of Hotels
When Connie Cone Walters checks into a hotel, she carries a doorstop and makes sure the room has a dead bolt.
Like many other women, Ms.
Walters, a Northwest Airlines flight attendant, will not stay in a room on the ground floor.
And when her room-service order arrives, before opening the door she asks that the receipt be slid under it.
"It's not enough to open the door just because you see a man in a white coat outside the door," she said.


Panel Kills Abortion Bill on Parental Notification
An Assembly committee today killed a bill that would have required minors to notify at least one parent before getting an abortion, preserving New York's status as one of 15 states without parental consent or notification laws.
Proponents of the bill, including the Roman Catholic Church, had presented it as a compromise to appeal to lawmakers who have voted in the past against bills to require parental consent for abortions.
Those bills have failed consistently to move out of the Assembly Health Committee.


Excerpts From Indictment
The Federal indictment of Caspar W. Weinberger mentions several instances of testimony in which the grand jury says Mr.
Weinberger was deliberately misleading or untruthful.
Following are two examples cited in the indictment.
On Dec. 17, 1986, the defendant, Caspar W. Weinberger, testified about the Iran initiative in closed session before the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.
With regard to the November 1985 Israeli Hawk missile shipment to Iran, the defendant, Caspar W. Weinberger, testified as follows:


Navy Chief Admits To Being Close By During Lewd Party
Responding to apparent discrepancies, Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d provided new details today of his actions at a convention of naval aviators last year in Las Vegas, where 26 women were assaulted.
The more detailed description, relayed by a spokesman, came after the Navy released new investigatory reports that had been omitted from a report in April.
These reports quoted a Marine captain as saying that Mr.
Garrett "came by" one of the hotel suites where squadrons were holding parties featuring pornographic movies, strippers and free beer.


White House Dinner: The Guest List
Following is the list of guests at the Russian-American state dinner tonight, as made available by the White House:
President Bush and Barbara Bush.
Vice President Dan Quayle and Marilyn Quayle.


Dismissal Is Upheld For Times Libel Suit
A New York State appeals court unanimously upheld yesterday the dismissal of a libel suit against The New York Times in which Dr.
Elliot M. Gross, a former Chief Medical Examiner of New York City, charged that he was defamed by a series of critical articles in 1985 and 1986.
The Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, in upholding a lower-court ruling a year ago, ruled that the articles were permissible expressions of opinion and were protected by state constitutional guarantees of freedom of the press.


Reducing the Russian Arms Threat
The latest Russian-American arms control agreement not only reduces their total nuclear arsenals from about 22,500 warheads to 7,000, but also does so in a way that eliminates the most threatening Russian nuclear weapons while allowing the United States to maintain its most advanced missiles, American officials and arms control experts said today.
"We are talking about a very good deal," said Jack Mendelsohn, deputy director of the Arms Control Association.
"On paper, it looks like the two forces will be reduced equally, but in fact the Russians will be giving up the backbone of their arsenal -- land-based multiple warheaded missiles -- while we will be retaining the area of our greatest strength, sea-based ballistic missiles."


Review/Dance; A Street Man's Music Finds a Home Onstage
American Ballet Theater's final week at the Metropolitan Opera House is chock-full of not-so-bad goodies, beginning with the program presented on Monday night.
There was the return of "Bruch Violin Concerto No. 1," Clark Tippet's vibrantly original ballet of 1988, and the premiere of "Moondance," a quirky and imaginative effort by John Selya, a novice choreographer who is in the corps.
Robert Wallace also made a strong role debut, dancing fiercely but looking vulnerable as the sacrificial victim in Glen Tetley's idiosyncratic "Rite of Spring."


Bullpen Is Rocky But Pirates Survive
Pirates 6, Phillies 5
PITTSBURGH, June 16 (AP) -- Pittsburgh's bullpen twice squandered two-run leads, then shut out Philadelphia for the final five innings tonight before Mike LaValliere's game-winning r.b.i. single in the 12th gave the Pirates a 6-5 victory over the Phillies.
Jay Bell tied the score at 5-5 with a home run in the seventh after Mariano Duncan's three-run shot in the top of the inning put Philadelphia ahead.


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: Reporter's Notebook; In World-Weary Washington, a Sudden 'Hooray!'
It took a crowd of tourists to do it, but the Russian-American summit meeting finally generated some public excitement in Washington this evening.
For much of the day, Washington residents had gone about their business seeming more or less oblivious to the presence of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.
A few people ran up to the back gate of the White House when he and President Bush appeared there briefly, but they were mostly from Hong Kong and Germany.


Personal Health
AN 8-year-old boy: "Sometimes when I'm really upset, I say I will shoot myself. When my brother gets on me, I feel like dying."
A 10-year-old boy: "I think about dying a lot. I thought of hurting myself, cutting my wrist. I think about how it's going to be when I die. It keeps coming back."


CHRONICLE
ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER, the composer and impresario, and JEFFREY ARCHER, the novelist, will acquire new titles, thanks to the Queen's list of honors, issued in conjunction with the official celebration on Saturday of the birthday of Queen Elizabeth II.
Mr.
Lloyd Webber, whose musicals include "Cats" and "Phantom of the Opera," will be a knight of the realm, and Mr.
Archer, author of "Kane and Abel" and other best sellers, will sit in the House of Lords for life.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances this week (all times Eastern Daylight):  President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Gov. Bill Clinton
TOMORROW: 9-10 P.M.
Cable News Network, "Larry King Live," interview and telephone question-and-answer session.
Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.  Vice President Dan Quayle
TODAY: 11 A.M.-noon, the Learning Channel, cable, rebroadcast of 15-minute interview from the "Charlie Rose" program shown Monday and yesterday.


All Dressed Up, Eggs Are a Welcome Suppertime Visitor
THIS meatless, eclectic menu can be served at any time of the year, but is particularly appealing as we approach high summer and can make use of the bounty of herbs and greens the season offers.
When I was a child, we ate eggs more often than we do now, primarily for economic reasons.
They appeared as the main course on our dinner table several times a week, in lieu of costlier meat or fish.
Concerns over cholesterol have made them a less frequent visitor, but they are rich in protein and still one of the most nutritious foods on the market.
And their reasonable price makes them a good occasional choice for a main dish.


Pornography Harms Without Violence
To the Editor:
In "Only Violent Pornography Is Harmful" (letter, May 25), Philip D. Harvey states that the pornography victims' compensation bill should be defeated or in some way limited to violent material.
But much so-called nonviolent pornography depicts sexual activities involving inanimate objects, groups of people, adults portraying minors, incest, animals, urination or defecation, or degradation.
Such depictions, according to Victor Cline, a clinical psychologist who has treated hundreds of sex offenders, "while lacking violence still have the potential of having negative effects on many viewers because of their modeling unhealthy sex-role behavior or giving misinformation about human sexuality."


Czechs and Slovaks Edging Toward a Separation
Apparently convinced that they have irreconcilable differences over the future shape of Czechoslovakia, leaders from the Czech and Slovak halves of the country have begun negotiating a separation.
President Vaclav Havel, who has led Czechoslovakia from Communism to democracy, is now trying to insure that if the country cannot be held together, it can at least be divided peacefully.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
I chose lunch time the other afternoon as the occasion to propose to my girlfriend.
The setting was easy to choose: the front steps of the Public Library at 42d and Fifth, where we met two years ago.
That morning I'd gone into the Grand Hyatt, held up a bottle of Champagne and begged the front desk manager to keep it on ice for my brother to pick up and present to us after I popped the question.
The ring was hidden on a bed of cotton inside a plastic deli salad-dressing container.
After Erin said yes, the strangers around us applauded and offered congratulations.
My brother appeared with the bubbly, which the hotel had iced, adorned with flowers and complemented with two champagne flutes.
Then he took pictures of our toast and a first walk through a reborn Bryant Park as a betrothed couple.
The following evening in Central Park a runner passed by and waved.
"I was sitting behind you yesterday when you got engaged," she said.
"Well done!"
I love New York in June, how about you? -- DON GEHAN
. . .
FATHER'S DAY Like some stubble-faced King in his suburban court, I will rule this sunny Sunday with the pretense of paternal power.
And my progeny, like royal subjects, will pretend that I am the regal ruler!
Sermons from the college freshman on yuppie greed and the greenhouse effect will surcease
and her high school sister will abandon that earringed boyfriend and the loud late-night music.
All until tomorrow when I will surrender my crooked crown and, dethroned but still loved, accept the reality that daughters, not dads, possess the family royal ancestry. -- ROGER GRANET
. . .
Dear Diary:
Walking past the main post office in Manhattan on a recent Wednesday evening at about 6:30, I noticed that the parking meters along Eighth Avenue were decorated with Police Department placards proclaiming "No Parking Friday." A series of orange cones had been placed in the street preventing motorists from parking at the curb.
As I turned the corner into 33d Street I saw a young woman in civilian clothes engaged in putting up additional signs.
I asked her if it was not a bit premature to be posting "No Parking Friday" signs on Wednesday and already blocking the streets to prevent parking.
She replied that the prohibition would be taking effect at midnight that night.
I suggested that it would then be only Thursday.
"Well," she replied airily, "we ran out of 'No Parking Thursday' signs."
I inquired whether motorists who parked their cars adjacent to these signs on Thursday would be towed away.
"Of course," she said without batting an eye.
What a remarkable city. --RICHARD A. NACHMAN
. . .
The scene:
British Airways plane heading to New York from Heathrow Airport.
Dramatis personae:
Two splendidly dressed women, both in their late 40's, both New Yorkers, and a third New Yorker who overhears their conversation.
Woman 1:
Did you have a great vacation?
Woman 2:
Well, it wasn't as terrific as I thought it would be.
But that turned out to be the case with my marriage
and
my bridge club.
. . .
Dear Diary:
After too long an absence I recently moved back to New York.
The other afternoon -- sunny, breezy, lovely -- I took a stroll along Broadway.
A woman fell into step beside me.
"I love this weather," she said.
"It works against my hot flashes."
I laughed, we started to talk, and I said I had just returned to Manhattan after 25 years in California.
"Why?" she asked me, adding that she had been thinking of moving out there.
So I told her how much I had missed the interaction of New York; that Los Angeles had no sense of community; that San Francisco had proven to be a more surprising disappointment, the city being strangely without heart, like a beautiful woman who got by on looks alone.
I told her that for all New York's problems, I felt wonderfully warm returning here.
We talked for several blocks until we reached my apartment building.
I turned to say goodbye.
"I'm really glad you decided to come back," she said.
Me, too.
You could live in California for 25 years without that kind of spontaneous interchange. --GWEN DAVIS
. . .
A friend writes:
Like most of my contemporaries I can't believe I'm really past the half-century mark.
Surely we don't look 50-plus.
So there I was zipping down the West Side, tired after the long drive from upstate, eager to return the car to the garage.
Too late I realized that I had slipped through a red light.
Flashing lights appeared in the rear view mirror and an embarrassingly loud bullhorn commanded, "Make the turn and pull over to the curb."
"Forty-first Street and 12th Avenue, the light was red when you went through," the officer said.
"Let's see your registration, insurance card and driver's license." He looked at the photo on my license, then at me.
"I've been a cop for seven years and I've never done this before. But your papers are all up to date, you've got your seat belt on and, well, you remind me of my mom. So I'm not going to give you a summons. Now be more careful in the future."
His mom, I'm certain, is a
most
attractive woman.
. . .
Metropolitan Diary welcomes contributions of short anecdotes, observations and light verse about life in the New York region.
Unused material cannot be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed envelope.


Macy Deficit More Than Doubled in 3d Quarter
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company yesterday reported sharply lower sales and earnings for the third quarter that ended on May 2.
It cited laggard economic conditions in its major areas of operation and disruptions in merchandise flow and business in the aftermath of its bankruptcy filing.
Macy's painted its latest grim financial portrait on the same day news broke of the company's intentions to offer Mark S. Handler, who shares the chairman and chief executive positions with Myron E. (Mike) Ullman 3d, a $2.6 million, three-year contract and to give Mr.
Ullman a 10 percent raise.


Sports of The Times; Holy Liddy!  Now It's Francogate
AT least the Vice President didn't get on New York for our baseball teams.
That would have truly stung.
He can taunt New York for all our other failures, our politics and our potholes, but leave the Mets and Yankees out of it.
We'll take care of our own problems.
As Jeff Torborg says, "We'll keep it in the family."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  ACCORD ON NUCLEAR CUTS  News analysis: Russia and the U.S. agreed to slash atomic weapons stocks, eliminating the land-based missiles that were the heart of the Soviet arsenal.
A1  A BOOST FOR BUSH, BUT HOW BIG?
News analysis: History shows that an arms agreement will boost a leader's image, but it's not November yet.
A1  HERO OR JUDAS IN MOSCOW  Some Russians were jubilant about the arms-cut surprise, but others see it as a betrayal of the ruins of an superpower.
A1  The arms cuts are seen as a "very good deal" for Washington.
A11  Joint action is pledged to disentangle the P.O.W.-M.I.A. mystery.
A11  The Administration is smoothing Moscow's way with the I.M.F.
A13  SOUTH AFRICAN STRIKE BEGINS  The African National Congress began an open-ended campaign of public protest today.
A3  ANGRY REACTION TO KIDNAP RULING  The Supreme Court's ruling on international kidnapping has generated angry reactions from foreign Governments.
A8  GERMANY DENIES HOSTAGE DEAL  Germany denied it had paid money or made promises in exchange for the expected release of two Germans held hostage in Lebanon.
A5  CALIFORNIAN FOR YUGOSLAVIA?
Belgrade's Socialists want Yugoslavia's next Prime Minister to be a Serbian-born millionaire industrialist who lives in California.
A7  'THE WORLD WAS SILENT'  The Polish Government is changing the wording on stone tablets at Auschwitz and Birkenau to more fully reflect the suffering of Jews there.
A15  Likud and Labor go head to head in debate.
A3  National A18-26, B10  WEINBERGER IS INDICTED  The former Defense Secretary was charged by a Federal grand jury with five felony counts related to the Iran-contra affair.
He is the highest official of the Reagan Administration yet indicted as a result of the scandal.
A1  Two views of Weinberger: his own and the indictment's.
A20  VOTER REGISTRATION BILL GAINS  Seeking higher voter turnout among the poor, the elderly and the disabled, the Democratic-controlled House gave final Congressional approval to a measure that would enable all eligible Americans to register as they renew their driver's licenses and apply for social services.
Republicans said the bill would enhance the possibility of fraud and add to state expenses, and the White House threatened a veto.
A1  With his criticism of Sister Souljah, Clinton accomplished much.
A22  Sister Souljah described Clinton as a hypocrite.
A22  On MTV, Clinton took questions from a blunt audience.
A22  Quayle's spelling-bee error spelled a lot lof laughs.
A23  On the Trail: Perot canceled a Senate appearance on M.I.A.'s.
A23  NEW DETAILS IN NAVY SEX CASE  Asserting again that he had been unaware of any wrongdoing, the Secretary of the Navy acknowledged that he had been at the entrance of one of the Las Vegas hotel suites where naval aviators were having parties featuring strippers, free beer and pornographic films last September.
It was in a hallway connecting some of those suites that 26 women were assaulted during the aviators' convention.
A1  THE MAYOR OF MAYERSVILLE  Unita Blackwell of the tiny settlement of Mayersille, Miss., was born into a family of sharecroppers.
Since then, she has become the state's first black mayor, traveled in lofty circles and now become the recipient of a $350,000 grant from the MacArthur Foundation.
A18  WOMEN AND HOTEL SECURITY  At a time when almost 40 percent of the nation's business travelers are women, there is growing concern that many hotels do not provide them enough safety.
A18  NAZI PAST LAID TO IMMIGRANT  Federal prosecutors filed a civil complaint seeking to revoke the citizenship of a retired architect accused of concealing his wartime activities when he immigrated to the United States in 1954.
The Government said the man, Jonas Stelmokas, had been an officer in a Nazi-sponsored Lithuanian battalion that helped to murder thousands of Lithuanian Jews and other civilians in 1941 and 1942.
B10  The A.M.A. urged that doctors screen women for abuse.
A26  The Michigan Supreme Court struck down a tough drug law.
B10  Education B11  A teacher who is surrogate parent and health provider, too.
News analysis: Elite colleges' hunt for new presidents.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 DIVERSITY IN MEDICAL SCHOOLS  In the New York region and throughout the country, medical schools have been making an effort to recruit a more diverse group of student to train as doctors.
But speculation has begun within the medical community about how long this trend will continue.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-10  As rich food wanes, chefs make the best of vegetables.
C1  Eating Well C1  At work with Tim McCarver.
C1  Wine Talk C10  Health Page C12  A new diagnotic test for Lyme disease.
Personal Health: Intervening to head off suicide in youths.
Sports B12-17  Baseball: Mets end losing streak.
B13  Red Sox beat Yankees in 10 innings.
B13  Vincent summons Michael.
B13  Arbitrator at Howe hearing suggests clearing the air.
B15  Boxing: Holyfield prefers to fight someone his own age.
B16  Column: Vecsey on the Mets.
B13  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Tony panel's new members.
C13  Joyceans are in bloom again.
C13  Film: "The Inland Sea." C13  Dance: American Ballet Theater presents a premiere.
C13  Obituaries D20  Teodoro Moscoso, a former envoy and economic aide.
Arthur Knapp Jr., a yachtsman.
Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  The I.M.F.'s ruinous caution.
Sister Souljah, Willie Horton.
Mr.
Quayle's "e" for effort.
No day in court.
Letters A24  Anna Quindlen: A public matter.
A25  Hou Xiaotian: A start on human rights in China.
A25  Richard A. Cloward and Frances Fox Piven: Voting.
A25  Flora Lewis: President Who?
A25


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; SUNUNU SIGNS UP AS LOBBYIST
John H. Sununu, the former White House Chief of Staff, is registered as a lobbyist on behalf of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, a manufacturer of specialty chemicals and health care products.
The Senate Records office said today that it received Mr.
Sununu's registration on June 5.
A company spokesman, Fred Bona, said Mr.
Sununu was an "adviser" to the Boca Raton, Fla., company, not an employee.
Sununu's first assignment will be to work in opposition to Senate legislation on legal judgments against insolvent companies.
The bill would allow the transfer of legal liability from insolvent firms to solvent companies.


Housing And Output Post Gains
Allaying fears that the slow economic recovery might be starting to falter, the Government reported today that home building and industrial production made sizable advances in May.
Builders broke ground on new homes at an annual pace of 1.23 million, an 11 percent gain that substantially offset a 17.3 percent April plunge.
Production from the nation's factories, mines and utilities climbed six-tenths of 1 percent, the biggest of four straight monthly gains.


60-Minute Gourmet
ONE of the better bargains in fish markets at this time of the year is flounder, which is a member of the extended sole family.
Prices vary according to supply, but in general it is less expensive than gray sole and it can be prepared in just as many ways.
Keep in mind that flounder fillets are relatively thin, so extra care should be taken against overcooking.
One of my favorite traditional recipes is for quickly sauteed flounder -- a nonstick pan coated with a little oil works best -- accompanied by a simple brown butter sauce with lime.
Capers or lemon are nice touches.
For the recipes here I experimented with giving this delicate fish extra texture without obscuring its flavor.
Finely chopped pecans worked exceedingly well.
Macadamia nuts are a fine alternative, for they have the requisite texture and a mild, buttery flavor.
In this case the pecans contributed a delightful crunchiness and a distinctive nuttiness to the fish.
Another twist on traditional sauteed flounder is the addition of soy sauce to the egg wash in which the fillets are dipped.
The salty soy seemed to blend perfectly with the nuts.
Normally, a flounder fillet in a pan over medium-high heat cooks in about 1 minute.
The nut coating adds about 30 seconds to that time.
A quick sauce is made at the end with olive oil, butter, lime juice and coriander.
A good seasonal side dish is fresh corn with tomatoes and curry.
Southern corn is looking good in my hometown market, so I put together this dish by removing the kernels and cubing some tomatoes.
They are then tossed briefly in a curry sauce and served warm.
Flounder Fillets With Chopped Pecans
8 small skinless fillets, about 1 1/2 pounds total  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste  1 large egg  3 tablespoons water  2 teaspoons dark soy sauce 3/4 cup pecans chopped fine with a food processor or heavy knife  3 tablespoons vegetable oil  2 tablespoons olive oil  2 tablespoons butter  1 tablespoon fresh lime or lemon juice  3 tablespoons chopped coriander or parsley.
1. Sprinkle the flounder fillets on both sides with salt and pepper to taste.
2. With a fork or a wire whisk, beat the egg with the water and soy sauce.
3.
Place the chopped nuts on a flat dish.
Dip the fillets one at a time into the egg mixture until well coated.
Remove the excess.
Then dredge the fillets in the chopped nuts.
Pat them firmly so they are evenly coated.
4.
Heat one tablespoon of the vegetable oil in a large nonstick skillet over medium-high heat.
When hot, add as many fillets as will fit without crowding.
Saute for a total of about 2 minutes, or until lightly browned on both sides.
Do not overcook.
Cooking time will vary with the thickness of the fillets.
Add more oil as necessary.
Transfer fillets to a warm serving plate or platter.
Keep warm.
Cook the remaining pieces.
5.
When all the fillets are cooked, wipe the pan clean with paper towels.
Add olive oil and butter.
Cook until butter foams and starts to brown.
Add lime juice and pour the mixture over the fish.
Sprinkle with coriander and serve immediately.
Yield: 4 servings.
Nutrition analysis per serving:
500 calories, 40 grams fat, 150 milligrams cholesterol, 537 milligrams sodium, 32 grams protein, 5 grams carbohydrate.
Fresh Corn and Tomatoes With Curry  3 to 4 fresh ears of corn, medium size  1 tablespoon butter  1/2 cup chopped scallions  1 teaspoon curry powder  4 small ripe plum tomatoes  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste  2 tablespoons fresh chopped coriander.
1.
Shuck the corn, and with a knife cut the kernels off the cobs.
There should be about 2 1/2 cups.
2. Core the tomatoes and cut them into 1/2-inch cubes.
3.
Melt butter in a skillet.
Add the scallions and curry powder.
Cook, stirring briefly, until wilted.
Add the corn, tomatoes, salt and pepper.
Stir and cook for about 4 minutes over medium-high heat.
Do not overcook.
Serve hot.
Sprinkle with coriander.
Yield: 4 servings.
Nutrition analysis per serving:
127 calories, 4 grams fat, 8 milligrams cholesterol, 287 milligrams sodium, 3 grams protein, 23 grams carbohydrate.


BUSH AND YELTSIN AGREE TO CUT LONG-RANGE ATOMIC WARHEADS; SCRAP KEY LAND-BASED MISSILES
President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin announced an agreement today that not only sharply reduces their stocks of long-range-missile warheads, but also eliminates all multiple-warhead missiles based on land, the core of the old Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal.
The accord was announced by the leaders in the White House Rose Garden just hours after Mr.
Yeltsin began the first state visit to Washington by a Russian President.
It must still be translated into a formal treaty, which United States officials said could be done within three months, then approved by the United States Senate and the Russian Parliament.


Yank Nosedive Continues Despite Their Good Effort
There was a comeback from a one-run deficit against the career saves leader.
There was a rookie gaining redemption after three strikeouts.
There was a second closer failing to close and there was a game-tying homer.
But in the end for the Yankees, there was just another defeat tonight, their 10th in the last 13 games.
It came after Ellis Burks ripped a liner to right field off John Habyan with the bases loaded in the 10th inning to score Jody Reed and thrust the Red Sox to an exciting 4-3 victory at Fenway Park.
Dion James dived for Burks's ball and it fell about five feet in front of him.


People
*
Tom Wolf, the general manager of new-product development at Hearst Magazines, New York, has been named general manager of magazine development.
He succeeds Jack Heistand, the vice president and publisher of magazine development at Hearst who supervised magazine start-ups like Smart Money and Countryside.
Mr.
Heistand will join Electronic Arts, a software company in San Mateo, Calif., as senior vice president of marketing.


Enterprise Zones Are Tested, and They Work; Urban Policy Needed
To the Editor:
"No EZ Answer for Cities" (editorial, June 4), which exposes the weaknesses and errors of the enterprise-zone approach to inner-city problems, is excellent so far as it goes.
But in your criticism of enterprise zones, and your endorsement of the 1988 Family Support Act as the better remedy, you don't face up to the whole syndrome of the ghetto.
It is not just that -- as shown in numerous studies -- enterprise zones will create very few new companies, very few net new jobs and extremely few hirings of deprived people in the ghettos.
Indeed, Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles, in recent testimony in Congressional hearings, called for a "high proportion" of the intended jobs to be reserved for local ghetto dwellers.
But even this programmatic kind of affirmative action is weak when the employers do not want unskilled, uncooperative and frequently hostile employees, who reject the low wages and unpleasant conditions that, alas, are all they can attain with their low productivity.


Cleaner and Quick, Natural Gas Goes to the Races
When gasoline cars are converted to run on another fuel, they usually wind up cleaner and more environmentally correct, but, well, more sedate.
Not so Joe Mezquita's "Natural Gasser."
The car, a 1987 Buick Somerset, has a fiberglass body and a 468-cubic-inch engine that was designed to run on gasoline.
It is now a dragster on the North American circuit, with this legend painted on the trunk lid: "Natural Gas . . . It Cooks Your Dogs &amp; Hauls Your Buns."


U.S. Tries to Quiet Storm Abroad Over High Court's Right-to-Kidnap Ruling
The Bush Administration moved today to assure Mexico and other countries that it would respect their sovereignty in spite of a Supreme Court ruling Monday upholding the United States's right to kidnap a criminal suspect without following procedures set out in extradition treaties.
Following protests over the ruling by Mexico and several countries, the United States opened talks in Mexico City over the Mexican Government's demand for an immediate renegotiation of the extradition treaty to bar the sort of kidnappings that have now won sanction by the Supreme Court.


Corrections
An article in Science Times yesterday about prostate cancer included incorrect figures from the Federal Centers for Disease Control about increases in death rates from that disease among black men and white men from 1980 to 1988.
The rate rose 7.5 percent among whites, not 2.5 percent; it rose 5.9 percent among blacks, not 5.7 percent.


Coming Soon: New Tapes and CD's
Within months, the Sony Corporation is to roll out its answer to the recordable compact disk, the mini-disk.
Philips N.V., meanwhile, plans to introduce a digital version of the venerable audio-cassette tape, to be called the digital compact cassette.
Both products employ the computer precision that comes of recording sound in digital code, as compared with old-fashioned recording techniques that created electronic patterns analogous to sound waves.


Troubadour Sings Only in the Kitchen
SAVE some small skylights, it is still dark in the East Side restaurant Nicola Paone named for himself 34 years ago.
Before 6 A.M., this elegant, 75-year-old man is doing what he always does.
First, he takes off his pressed pants, and pulls on his restaurant whites over his boxer shorts.
He then goes to the kitchen to brew himself a cappuccino and sort through the faxes that have arrived in the night.
Before the coffee is ready, he picks up a blond guitar.
He sits in the usual place, the table nearest the kitchen.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Racial Issues; Rapper, Chided by Clinton, Calls Him a Hypocrite
Responding to criticism by Gov.
Bill Clinton that remarks she made in a newspaper interview were hate-filled and divisive, the rap artist Sister Souljah yesterday characterized the Arkansas Governor as a hypocrite and called his remarks "a poor excuse for an agenda-less candidate."
"Sister Souljah was used as a vehicle, like Willie Horton and various other black victims of racism," she said at a news conference at the Marriott East Side Hotel in Manhattan.
She was referring to the furloughed rapist whose image in 1988 Republican campaign advertisements became a racially charged issue.


Hard Sell for Top Universities: Finding New Chiefs
It is the year of presidents and the race is on, and on, and on, and on.
Four of the nation's most elite universities -- Chicago, Columbia, Duke and Yale -- along with a horde of public institutions are hunting for new presidents who possess, in abundance, the gifts of leadership, integrity, consensus-building, scholarship and more.
It is a job description, some educators have said, fit only for "God, on a good day."
Having four highly select universities looking for presidents at the same time gives this year's searches an unusual twist.
Real competition is likely to be a factor, with some names on all four lists and short-list names resurfacing from previous searches at Harvard and Stanford.


Autos Gone From Trade Bill
The House Ways and Means Committee today approved and sent to the House floor a wide-ranging trade bill without any specific provisions on the automotive industry.
The trade bill originally had a provision ordering the Administration to negotiate limits on the sale of cars made in Japan or in Japanese-owned factories in the United States.
But that section was withdrawn after criticism that it would discourage foreign investment and would hurt joint ventures between American and Japanese auto makers.


Teodoro Moscoso, a Former Envoy And Economic Aide, Is Dead at 81
Teodoro Moscoso, a former United States Ambassador to Venezuela and a leader of the Alliance for Progress in the 1960's, died Monday at his apartment in San Juan, P.R.
He was 81 years old.
He died of cancer of the liver, said Scott F. Runkle, a Washington-based consultant to the Government of Puerto Rico, who was a longtime friend.
Mr.
Moscoso played a key role in the economic development of the island.


Mandela's Group Begins Mass Protests
The African National Congress began an open-ended campaign of public protest today with a day of rallies, work stoppages and threats of a crippling general strike by the summer's end if the white minority Government does not move more quickly to give blacks full voting rights.
In what black leaders conceded was a high-risk return to the unpredictable theater of the street, Nelson Mandela, the president of the Congress, said the "mass action" campaign would continue until the Government agreed to terms for creation of an interim government and an elected assembly to write a new South African constitution.


Faldo's Revised Style Is Fitting Him to a Tee
It would be an overstatement to say that Nick Faldo has been through a dark night in the last 15 months.
More like the Twilight Zone.
Whatever it has been, Faldo feels he has emerged, ready for a victory at Pebble Beach that would once again place him in the glow.
After a season that bottomed out with an abysmal performance at the Ryder Cup last September, Faldo decided to abandon some career moves that simply weren't working out.
A physical training program that put 15 pounds of muscle on his 6-foot-3-inch frame is gone, and so are the pounds.


Yeltsin Reaches Out
President Boris N. Yeltsin had more on his mind here than arms control and economics: He also had a phone call to make -- to Cavendish, Vt., and the exiled writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn.
A spokesman for Mr.
Solzhenitsyn said Mr.
Yeltsin, whose call had been expected, telephoned on Monday evening and spoke to the writer for about 30 minutes.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Media Business page on Monday with an article about the magazine industry's marketing efforts misidentified the man shown.
He is Reginald K. Brack Jr., chairman and chief executive of Time Inc., not Gregory G. Coleman, publisher of The Reader's Digest.


The Metropolitan Opera's 'Summer Season' Opens in Central Park


N.H.L.'s Flying Fists Could Be Grounded
Bare-knuckle fist fights have long been a quasi-legal sideshow in the National Hockey League.
They attract some fans, repel others and, in some minds, define the image of the sport.
For the first time in the league's 75-year history, team owners are seriously considering rule changes that could virtually eliminate fighting.
At the league meetings in Montreal this weekend, owners will discuss and likely vote on a proposal to eject any player penalized for fighting.
The current punishment is a five-minute penalty.


Expert Witness Backs Prosecutor In Au Pair's Arson-Murder Trial
An arson expert today supported a police sergeant's testimony that the direction a window broke indicated that a Swiss au pair was the only one who could have started the fire that killed a 3-month-old girl last December.
Testifying at the murder trial of the au pair, Olivia Riner, the expert, Joseph A. Butler Jr., said that two weeks after the Dec. 2 fire he and a laboratory analyst "picked up various pieces of glass which were lying on the earth" outside the window of the infant's room, in the hamlet of Thornwood, in Mount Pleasant.


Sister Souljah Is No Willie Horton
Less than two weeks after the Los Angeles riots, the rap singer Sister Souljah said the following to a Washington Post reporter:
"I mean, if black people kill black people every day, why not have a week and kill white people? . . .  black people were dying every day in Los Angeles under gang violence. So if you're a gang member and you would normally be killing somebody, why not kill a white person?"


Quotation of the Day
"With this agreement, the nuclear nightmare recedes more and more for ourselves, for our children and for our grandchildren." -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A1:6. ]


25-1 Shot Wins as Arazi Takes a Pounding
A 25-to-1 Irish-trained colt named Brief Truce narrowly won the St.
James's Palace Stakes today, as the favorite, Arazi, failed once again to match his dazzling form of a year ago, fading to fifth in a field of eight horses.
Brief Truce, ridden by Michael Kinane, came from well back in the pack during the final two furlongs to edge Richard Hills on Zaahi in a photo finish.
Ezzoud, another Irish horse, ridden by Pat Eddery, finished third.
Rodrigo de Triano finished a head behind Ezzoud, edging out Arazi for fourth place.


Executive Changes
AEROQUIP CORP., Maumee, Ohio, a unit of Trinova Corp., named John P. Marano Jr. vice president for new business development and chief technical officer.
GIORGIO ARMANI FASHION CORP., New York, named Ed Glantz senior vice president for merchandising and production for men's wear.
CASCADE MEDICAL INC., Eden Prairie, Minn., named Ronald Jackson vice president of sales and marketing, a new post.
EMI MUSIC PUBLISHING WORLDWIDE, New York, a unit of Thorn EMI, London, named Robert Flax executive vice president.
EQUITABLE CAPITAL MANAGEMENT CORP., New York, named seven executive vice presidents.
They are Kathleen A. Corbet, Nelson Jantzen, Joseph Briggs, Robert R. Coby, Barbara J. Krumsiek, Patrick J. Mellet and James P. Pappas.
METRO-GOLDWYN-MAYER INC., Culver City, Calif., a unit of Credit Lyonnais, appointed Richard Parness senior vice president and chief administrative officer, a new position.
UNITED STATES TRUST CO., New York, appointed S. Jeanne Hall senior vice president.
ZENITH DATA SYSTEMS, Buffalo Grove, Ill., a unit of Groupe Bull, named Clifford A. Jenks executive vice president for North American sales and marketing.


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: And Now, the Political Plowshares; Russians Greet Accord With Joy and Remorse
Like so many of the drastic changes taking place in Russia, the agreement to sharply reduce the strategic arsenals of Russia and the United States is likely to be welcomed for the new era it heralds and resented for the collapse of empire it confirms.
The agreement announced by Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin on the first full day of the Russian leader's visit to Washington seemed to come as a major surprise.
None of the newspapers here had predicted it, and none of the evening news programs had any advance notice.


Needle-Swap Programs Found to Reduce H.I.V. Transmission; A Welcome New Center
To the Editor:
I want to welcome the new Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, under the stewardship of Joseph Califano Jr., to New York and the national war on drugs and substance abuse.
As chairman of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Anti-Drug Abuse Council, I am proud of the state's progress in fighting substance abuse.
Demonstration projects in New York City and Newburgh show how neighborhoods can be organized to fight drugs.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Off
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit drifted lower in the week ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
Analysts at The Monitor noted that the yields were apparently not moved by economic indicators that suggested conditions were getting better.
They said yields should coast into July, barring any abrupt action by the Federal Reserve.


Snap. Cackle. Pop. Mets Finally Come to Life.
The numbers had become a numbing blur for the Mets.
The record was 29-33.
There were five straight defeats, 9 in the last 11, 13 in the last 17.
There was the game with six errors, the nine games with zero runs.
The Mets were seven games back of the Pirates.
One hundred games remained in the season, but suddenly, ominously, the Mets had to go 61-39 to wind up with 90 triumphs.
"It's been real depressing," said David Cone.
"We have been looking for anything to respond to."


Book Notes
Book Cover Is Questioned
The cover of Darius James's new novel, "Negrophobia" (Citadel Press), has made some black employees and associates of the publishing house cry racism.


Miscellany
*
Ted Turner, CNN's chief executive, will speak Sept. 24 at the Baruch College of the City University of New York, inaugurating the Carl Spielvogel Lectures on Global Marketing Communications.
Carl Spielvogel is the chairman and chief executive of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc.
He is also a past board president of the Baruch College Fund.


Michael, Summoned by Vincent, Enlists a Lawyer
A nervous and fidgety Gene Michael called reporters together before tonight's Yankee-Red Sox game to reveal he had secured a lawyer because he has been asked to meet with Commissioner Fay Vincent on Wednesday.
The meeting will involve allegations that George Steinbrenner contacted Yankee employees in violation of Steinbrenner's agreement with the commissioner.


Mr. Quayle's 'e' for Effort
Vice President Dan Quayle sometimes requires a kind and tactful audience.
He is, after all, the man who addressed the United Negro College Fund and transformed its slogan -- "a mind is a terrible thing to waste" -- into "what a waste it is to lose one's mind." Mr.
Quayle thus owes a debt to a 12-year-old student who displayed an initial talent for diplomacy when the Vice President called on his school on Monday.
William Figueroa is a student at Rivera Elementary School in Trenton, N.J.
On a campaign stop promoting President Bush's "Weed and Seed" program, Mr.
Quayle visited William's class and conducted a spelling bee.
The boy, as nervous, presumably, as any 12-year-old would be in that situation, was asked to go to the blackboard and spell the word "potato." Which he did.
Correctly.


H. Lawrence Bogert, Ex-Investment Banker
H.
Lawrence Bogert, a retired investment banker and an active civic figure in New York and Florida, died Monday at New York Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan, Hobe Sound, Fla., and Fishers Island, L.I.
Mr.
Bogert died from complications following heart surgery, said a son, H. Lawrence Bogert 3d.


Excerpts From Bush-Yeltsin Conference: Working Toward a Safer World
Following are excerpts from statements and a brief news conference by President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, who spoke through an interpreter: BUSH STATEMENT
Mr.
President, let me just say that I'm pleased to announce that President Yeltsin and I have just reached an extraordinary agreement on two areas of vital importance to our countries and to the world.
First, we have agreed on far-reaching new strategic arms reductions.
Building on the agreement reached with Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus, our two countries are now agreeing to even further dramatic strategic arms reductions substantially below the levels determined by Start.


Economic Scene; Less Marijuana, More Alcohol?
WHAT do teen-agers do when they are priced out of the market for marijuana?
Some, presumably, take oboe lessons or join the 4-H Club.
But others look for solace in less wholesome pursuits.
And, surprisingly, economists may have more to say on the subject than toilers in the fields of psychology or criminology.
Drug policy is grounded on the premise that illicit drugs are birds of a feather -- that reducing the availability of one decreases the consumption of others.
But economists who measure the demand for illicit substances the way, say, Exxon analyzes the demand for grades of gasoline, challenge this conventional wisdom.
Their identification of a strong substitution effect between marijuana and alcohol suggests that the full court press against the weed is partly responsible for stubbornly high levels of binge drinking by teen-agers.


Tyson Plans To Expand Into Seafood
Tyson Foods Inc., the nation's largest poultry processor, said today that it would expand into seafood by acquiring the Arctic Alaska Fisheries Corporation, a fishing and seafood processing company based in Seattle.
Under the agreement, 0.5686 Tyson share plus $2.23 in cash will be exchanged for each Arctic Alaska share.
Don Tyson, the company's chairman, valued the transaction at $212.4 million.
He said the deal should become final on Oct. 5, pending shareholder approval.


Sign of Welcome


Transactions
Baseball  National League
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Brian Jordan, outfielder, on a three-year contract.
Carolina League
DURHAM BULLS -- Announced the resignation of Rob Dlugozima, general manager, effective at the end of the season.
Basketball


Sears Ducks, Then Tries to Cover
Faced with serious public relations problems, companies tend either to stand up and take the heat or duck and deflect the blame.
Last week, after being accused by California's Consumer Affairs Department of systematically overcharging for car repairs, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company initially tried to duck, according to crisis-management experts, who added that such a response could potentially alienate customers and make it more difficult for the company to retain its reputation for trustworthiness.
"Their first response was absolutely atrocious," said Gerald C. Meyers, a consultant in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., who teaches courses on crisis management at Carnegie Mellon University.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Duke Power Co., Charlotte, N.C., is offering $100 million of 7 percent first and refunding bonds due in 2000 at a price of 98.203 to yield 7.301 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable bonds are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Lehman Pass-Through Securities Inc., a unit of Shearson Lehman Brothers, New York, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $3 billion of asset trust pass-through certificates.


Port Authority Plans Review Of Spending
Admitting that it had not maintained sufficient control over its billion-dollar annual construction budget, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is proposing to bring in outside experts to review its capital spending plans and to open most of its highest-level meetings to the public.
Authority executives described the proposals yesterday as part of a significantchange in an agency that has long operated in a shroud of confidentiality, earning a reputation as one of the country's richest and most politically unassailable municipal master builders.
The changes are intended to prevent the kind of unproductive spending that was involved in an aborted plan to rebuild Kennedy International Airport.


South Africa's Meyer Finds a World Stage
South Africa's best hope for Olympic gold at the Summer Games in Barcelona stands 5 feet 2 inches tall and weighs less than 100 pounds.
But Elana Meyer has emerged as one of Africa's most formidable runners, despite her scrawny frame, elfin look and a docility that masks her aggressiveness on the track.
Meyer's cropped dark hair and shy smile triggers instant recognition at home but she is virtually unknown abroad, though she leads a pack of South African women bound to make inroads in world competition.
They include the runner Gwen Griffiths and the hurdler Myrtle Bothma.
Only Zola Budd-Pieterse, Meyer's middle- distance rival, is familiar overseas because she ran for Britain in the 1984 Olympics.


Fragrance Irritation
Many people feel assaulted by scents that make them sneeze and cough: scented catalogues in the mail, perfume-splashed passengers on planes and trains, scents wafting from co-workers, not to mention perfumed soaps, detergents, tissues and room deodorizers.
There is no question that scents are disturbing to many people, also causing congestion, headache and tearing.
But according to a specialist at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center in Oklahoma City, in a vast majority of cases, the reaction is one of irritation, not allergy.
Dr.
James Wells said that in most people an allergic basis for complaints about perfumes cannot be demonstrated.
Unfortunately, he added, reactions to irritants are less responsive to treatment than allergies, so avoiding offending chemicals is the only effective solution.
The phenomenon seems to develop and worsen with age.
"Children almost never experience this type of sensitivity," Dr.
Wells said.
Rather, it shows up largely in people who are middle-aged or older.
Such people often react not only to perfumes but also to other irritants, like detergents, cleansers and deodorizers that send volatile chemicals into the air.


Theater in Review
Vanquished by Voodoo  Dwyer Warehouses West 123d Street and St.
Nicholas Avenue Manhattan Through June 27 Written and directed by Laurie Carlos; music by Don Meissner; choreography by Marlies Yearby; set by Kyle Chepulis; costumes by Natalie Walker; lighting by Brian Aldous; sound by Tim Palmer; stage manager, Keith Jones; production manager, Michael Casselli.
Presented by En Garde Arts.
WITH: Avis Brown, Dor Green, DeWarren Moses, Cynthia Oliver, Carl Hancock Rux and Viola Sheely.


Dinkins Names Commissioner of Mental Health
Dr.
Luis Rojas Marcos, a New York psychiatrist and leading researcher into mental illness among the homeless, was appointed the city's Commissioner of Mental Health yesterday, two years after he was passed over for the job.
With the appointment of Dr.
Marcos, who is currently head of mental health services for the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, Mayor David N. Dinkins is addressing two problems, one administrative, the other political, City Hall aides said.


M.T.A. Panel Backs Cut in Cigarette Ads
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority would sharply reduce the number of cigarette advertisements on its subways, trains and buses, while at the same time increasing anti-tobacco messages, under a proposal approved yesterday by a committee of the M.T.A. board.
Under the plan, the M.T.A. would lower the cap on cigarette advertising from 20 percent of gross revenues to 10 percent.
In addition, it would set aside 5 percent of its advertising space for ads aimed at discouraging smoking.


Playtex Shifts Ad Agencies
Playtex Apparel has shifted its $40 million worldwide account to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.
The move ends a 21-year relationship with Grey Advertising that was broken off at the behest of Playtex's new parent, the Sara Lee Corporation, which wanted to limit the number of agencies handling its advertising.
Now that it has won the account over Interpublic Group's Lintas, Saatchi faces another challenge: freshening the image of Playtex Apparel's core brands -- its Cross-Your-Heart and 18-Hour bras -- to bring in new customers while not alienating its faithful buyers.
"We want to broaden our franchise," said Lee Chaden, president of Playtex Apparel U.S.


The Less-Traveled Road to Medical School
Mary Gratch spent 10 years trying to become an actress, but once she reached her goal she decided it was not enough.
So now she is trying to become a doctor.
As she begins her fourth year at the School of Medicine at the State University of New York campus here, Ms.
Gratch represents a future direction in medical education.
In the New York region and throughout the country, educators and administrators say, medical schools have been making an effort to recruit a more diverse type of student.
Seeking Sensitivity
Part of the reason for this push is the theory that applicants who know about more than physics and organic chemistry will bring a more sensitive touch to the practice of medicine.
But there is also a less idealistic drive at work: as medical school applications declined sharply during the last decade, students like Ms.
Gratch were one way to fill the gap.


Cooling (and Safety) Trend For Buses: White Tops
Air conditioning school buses used to mean opening windows, which on a hot day simply let in hot air.
Now more and more states and school districts are finding that painting the tops of school buses white makes the ride cooler.
The paint job may also make riding on school buses safer.


13 Named To Panel On Tonys
The administrators of the Tony Awards, who voted last week to drop 9 of the 12 members of the Tony nominating committee and to increase the committee's size, revealed the names of the new members yesterday.


A Preferred Issue Is Priced by Chase
The Chase Manhattan Corporation was in the market yesterday to price an issue of of perpetual preferred stock through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The 6.1 million shares of fixed-rate perpetual stock were priced at $25 a share with an annual dividend rate of 8 1/2 percent.


Hear About the Restaurant That Went to Miami and Stayed?
MIAMI has always had a bit of a New York accent.
About the only city outside New York with decent bagels, it has been a mecca for decades for New Yorkers escaping the wintery cold or retiring.
And now, New York restaurants are also flocking south, hoping to satisfy a ready-made clientele of familiar faces and European tourists and to capture the fancy of a new population of models, photographers and others in the fashion business who make Miami home.
"It seems that practically our entire New York clientele has come by at some point or other this winter," said Maguy Le Coze, who owns Brasserie Le Coze in Coconut Grove, Fla., with her brother, Gilbert.
They also own Le Bernardin, the seafood restaurant that relocated to New York from Paris in 1986; in October, after attempts to open a brasserie in New York fell through, they opened Brasserie Le Coze.


No Headline
Despite Gov.
Bill Clinton's allergy and voice problems, he is in excellent health, his doctors say.
Mr.
Clinton's campaign provided letters from three physicians in response to a request from The Associated Press to review his health records.
Dr.
Kelsy J. Caplinger of the Little Rock Allergy Clinic wrote that Mr.
Clinton had "allergic rhinitis," and was "sensitive to house dust, mold, weed pollens, cat and grass pollens." Mr.
Clinton also had a slight reaction to milk and beef, the doctor wrote.
Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary defines allergic rhinitis as a general term to denote allergic reactions.
Mr.
Clinton gets an injection for the allergies every week or two.


Health Insurance: Two Sides of Proposed Changes in System
Under a plan proposed to overhaul New York State's health insurance system, 45-year-old Margaret Gordon of Manhattan, who suffers from multiple sclerosis and cannot get insurance, would actually be able to find a company to provide it for her.
But under the same plan, Thomas D. Caska, a small-business owner in Manhattan with a group of young, healthy employees, could see premiums rise so much for his company's insurance plan that many employees would be forced into the position Ms.
Gordon is in now: without insurance.


Dozens Arrested in Anti-Abortion Protest


Mexican Market Off Again; Perot Is Cited as a Factor
The Mexican stock market dropped sharply for a second consecutive day yesterday, raising questions about the outlook for what has been one of the world's best performing stock markets for the last three years.
"It has been a painful and a rather sharp rout in the market," said Jeffrey Russell, a managing director of Smith Barney's International Equity Portfolio in New York.
The firm has a major portion of its portfolio in Mexican stocks.


No Day in Court
The Supreme Court has taken a narrow view of the injury many Americans suffer when Washington hurts the environment.
Last week it denied citizens legal standing to sue the Government for misinterpreting the Endangered Species Act, finding that environmentalists hadn't been harmed even if the Government was mistaken.
Four Justices went further, warning that even when an act of Congress grants such standing, they'll dismiss citizen suits as an unthinkable intrusion on the power of the President.


Review/Television; Judy Garland, Singing, In Shows From 1964
Constantly recycling the past, television has evolved into an extraordinary time capsule.
Consider the phenomenon of Judy Garland, who died in 1969 at the age of 47.
She would have been 70 this year.
Fading away would not, in a pre-television sense, be out of the question.
But it's just about impossible these days to click through a daily television schedule without bumping into some version of Garland, whether ebulliently young or drifting into middle age.


The Compromise on New Police Weapons: A Deal That Neither Side Likes
Sometime this fall another 1,000 New York City police officers will receive semiautomatic weapons in a big expansion of the Police Department's current test of the guns.
They will get semiautomatics even though Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown and Mayor David N. Dinkins have said again and again that they do not want them in New York.
The agreement between the Police Department and the Legislature that resulted in expanding the gun test has its roots in a series of telephone conversations over the weekend between Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, Mayor Dinkins, Mr.
Brown and Phil Caruso, the head of the police union.
Accounts from the Police Department, City Hall and the Legislature say it was Mr.
Weprin who appointed himself as mediator to avoid a showdown on a measure that would have forced the department to arm all its officers with the guns.
And it was Mr.
Weprin who first decided how many additional guns should be supplied to the department, plucking the number 1,000 almost out of thin air.


A Mayor And Town Rise Jointly
Mayor Unita Blackwell runs the Mississippi hamlet of Mayersville from a one-room City Hall that was once a Baptist church.
The community, about 80 percent black, is made up mainly of old people and children.
Unemployment is high, especially in the months when there is no farm work.
This week, the Mayor became one of 33 recipients of a five-year grant from the MacArthur Foundation, which gives the awards to free "exceptionally gifted individuals" from economic constraints so they can develop their potential.
After completing her current four-year term in 1993, Ms.
Blackwell said, she might use the $350,000 grant to support herself while writing a book about reviving rural communities.


CHRONICLE
The Royal Danish Ballet opened a six-day run last night at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington with scenery and costumes designed by the company's royal sponsor, QUEEN MARGRETHE II.
The ballet to which the Queen lent her artistic hand is "A Folk Tale," with choreography by Auguste Bournonville.
Her costumes were worn by various knights and ladies, to be sure, as well as some dancing trolls, servants, elf maidens and peasants.


How the Top Chefs Learned to Make Meat and Potatoes Out of Vegetables
FOR almost a decade, chefs have watched in horror as their larder dwindled.
Meat became a nutritional no-no; butter and cream became public enemy No. 1; even sugar and salt became equivocal.
And the hand of many a chef trembled.
The customers' health concerns required resisting the habits of a lifetime: the enriching nub of sweet butter; the irresistible counterpoint of a nice, fatty lardon; the liberal shower of salt; even eggs.
Removing these staples from the haut repertoire was like taking red or yellow off a painter's palette.
One chef predicted the death of cuisine.
Another looked toward the future, saw a steady diet of low-fat roughage and water and considered falling on his knife.


Bonn Denies It Made Deal for Beirut Hostages
Government officials denied today that Germany had paid money or made any promises in exchange for the expected release of two Germans held hostage in Lebanon.
The hostages, Heinrich Strubig and Thomas Kemptner, had been expected to be released today in Beirut after three years in captivity.
But Bernd Schmidbauer, state minister in Chancellor Helmut Kohl's office, emerged from the office of the Lebanese President late this afternoon without them.


El Alto Journal; A Cup of Coca Tea, Anyone? Bolivia Sees a Market
In the shadow of a 50-foot statue of Jesus that looks down on La Paz from this sprawling shantytown city, Valentin Quispe tossed leaves of coca onto a brightly colored cloth in his tiny, musty cubicle.
"Coca has the faith of God," said the gnarly faced yatiri, or fortuneteller, of the Aymara Indian culture.


Arthur Knapp Jr., 85, Champion In International Yacht Racing
Arthur Knapp Jr., a yachtsman whose lifelong passion for the sport ranged from the America's Cup races of the 1930's to frostbite sailing on Long Island Sound, died on Monday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 85 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
He died of leukemia after a long illness, according to his daughter, Corliss Engle.


2 Israelis Debate; Focus Is on Security
Israel's two main rivals for Prime Minister pummeled each other's policies today in an election debate that dwelt heavily on who would better protect Israel's interests and national security in peace talks with Palestinians and neighboring Arab countries.
In one of the harsher exchanges, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of the Likud Party challenged the opposition's loyalty, accusing the Labor Party of engaging in "conspiracies with the Arabs" in 1990 to pull apart a Likud-Labor coalition that had existed for six years.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the former major league pitcher Eddie Lopat gave an incorrect figure in some editions for his total victories.
He won 166 games in his career.


Market Place; Emerson's Holders Get Say at Last
Emerson Radio, a once-proud company that has fallen on hard times, is torn by a bitter dispute that has led to a court ruling that a number of directors -- among them former Vice President Walter F. Mondale -- have breached their fiduciary responsibilities.
Now it appears that shareholders, who have been forced to watch from the sidelines for nearly three years, will finally get to choose between two competing groups that want to run the consumer-electronics company, and indirectly between two competing plans to restructure it.


COMPANY NEWS: News by Telephone Message; As Much of the World As 9 Minutes Gives You
Too busy to read The Wall Street Journal?
The Journal's publisher and a major telephone company in California have a new electronic information service for people who like their news over the phone.
Think of it as the Sound Bite Meets Voice Mail.
Dow Jones &amp; Company has teamed up with Pacific Bell on "voice mail news," an offshoot of the message-taking service provided by the phone company's powerful central-office computers.


PRESIDENT PRAISES YELTSIN ON M.I.A.'s
President Bush praised Boris N. Yeltsin today for acknowledging, after years of denials from Moscow, that American prisoners from several wars may have been taken to the Soviet Union.
Mr.
Bush said the Russian President told him for the first time in meetings this morning that the Russians were investigating new information that servicemen from the Vietnam War might have been among those prisoners.


Ad Federation Announces Awards
Best-in-show honors at the Addy awards went to Crispin &amp; Porter, Coral Gables, Fla., for its Legal Personnel Pool print campaign; to Scharbo &amp; Company, Atlanta, for a television spot for Longhorn Steaks restaurant, and to Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, for a poster promoting the Cleveland production of "Cats."
Other national award winners in the annual competition, sponsored by the American Advertising Federation, included Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, for its Saturn campaign and for work on the Alamo car-rental account; Leo Burnett, Chicago, for its McDonald's and Ads Against AIDS campaigns, and BBDO, Los Angeles, for Apple Computer Inc.


Lucretia S. Robertson, Interior Designer, 48
Lucretia Speziale Robertson, an interior designer, died on Monday at her home in Montclair, N.J.
She was 48 years old.
She died of cancer, her family said.


YUGOSLAVS OFFER POST TO AMERICAN
The ruling Socialist Party formally proposed today that the post of Prime Minister of Yugoslavia be given to a Serbian-born naturalized American pharmaceuticals magnate.
At a time when Yugoslavia is reeling under United Nations economic sanctions intended to punish the Belgrade Government for its support of ethnic fighting in Bosnia, the party said that Milan Panic, a millionaire industrialist from California, offers the best hope of leading the country from its crisis.


CHRONICLE
"What a wonderful way to finish my time in New York," JOAN McMENAMIN said.
"To be in the harbor and have the Statue of Liberty hovering benignly near us.
"And to keep moving. I found that symbolic."


New Campaigns
*
Wendy's International Inc. is introducing a television campaign to promote its Super Value Menu of items with a suggested retail price of 99 cents each.
The spots, created by Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, carry the theme "Wendy's, the best place to spend your summer." Next month, Wendy's will team with Coca-Cola to sponsor a "Summer of 99" national consumer sweepstakes.


Debate Over Free Agency As N.F.L. Trial Begins
Pro football's free-agent court case got under way today as a jury of nine women was selected after both sides sifted through the 21 prospective jurors, eliminating those who were union members or football fans.
The jury heard opening arguments in the Freeman McNeil v.
The National Football League antitrust trial before Judge David S. Doty in United States District Court, a 50-minute statement by Jim Quinn, the lawyer representing the eight players, and an hourlong statement from Frank Rothman, lawyer for the N.F.L.


Enterprise Zones Are Tested, and They Work
To the Editor:
"No EZ Answer for Cities" (editorial, June 4) calls enterprise zones -- in which Government encourages job-creating investments in ghettos by offering investors tax breaks and regulatory relief -- "flawed in theory and also in practice." You are incorrect on both counts: enterprise zones are tested, and they do work.
The economic problems in America's inner cities have been building for 30 years.
Manufacturing and industry have largely disappeared from our inner cities.
With the loss of manufacturing went (in this order) good jobs, wholesale trade, retail businesses and a large source of local tax revenues.
At the same time we saw a rise in poverty, crime, drug use, homelessness and illiteracy.


Danube Faces Environmental Disaster
To the Editor:
Can the Vaclav Havel who wrote "Rio and the New Millennium" (Op-Ed, June 3) be the same man who is collaborating in the worst environmental disaster in Europe?
Next October, if everything goes according to plan, the Czech and Slovak Republic will shut off the Danube like a faucet and divert this ancient river into a concrete canal.
President Havel has given his blessing to go ahead.
The plan is as follows:


Maxwell Concerns File Daily News Claims
Two groups of the late Robert Maxwell's companies have filed claims in bankruptcy court against The Daily News, seeking to recover what they assert were more than $210 million in loans and other cash transfers to the newspaper.
But the filing is unlikely to disrupt The News's effort to find a buyer.
The paper now is entering final negotiations with several prospective buyers.


A Club Where the Heartbeat Is Soul
ON the third Thursday of every month, Connie the Empress holds court.
She piles her hair up, puts on a faux-diamond tiara and changes into her finest thrift-store outfit: a sleeveless opal-sequined minidress, white stockings and silver high heels.
Her throne is a disk jockey's platform with two turntables and a record collection the deepest shade of soul.
Behind her on the wall is a mural of Manhattan's skyline with black plastic music notes as stars.
Her subjects are the dancers on the floor, twisting and grooving at the Empire State Soul Club.


Yanks in First Place In These Standings
At $200 million, the New York Yankees maintained their position as the most valuable franchise in sports, according to an annual survey by Financial World magazine.
Lofty as the value is, the figure declined $25 million in 12 months.
Many franchises showed a similar pattern, a symptom of soaring player costs and uncertainty over labor problems and how far television revenues will fall when future national contracts are negotiated.
According to the magazine, the total market value of the 102 pro baseball, football, basketball and hockey teams decreased 2.3 percent from a year ago.
In 1991, it estimates that 23 teams lost money (largest operating loss: $11.4 million for the Milwaukee Brewers).
While the 102 teams' revenues rose 16 percent last year to $4.3 billion, operating income fell 10 percent to an estimated $560 million.
The magazine found that salaries are racing ahead of revenues in major league baseball and the National Football League.
In baseball, salaries spiked up 51 percent in 1991, outpacing a revenue gain of 12 percent.
In the N.F.L., player costs jumped 29 percent, but revenues rose 12 percent.
Some teams are seeking to lift revenues by building new arenas or stadiums and erecting skyboxes, but the key variable on revenues is what will happen with the leagues' TV contracts.
Declines in advertising and financial losses on major sports TV deals are likely to conspire to decrease the value of most leagues' future rights fees, and thus the value of the teams.
The magazine also revealed financial gamesmanship in the National Hockey League, where it contends that two sets of books exist in the league, one that shows an overall $1.2 million profit in 1990-91 because some revenues, including those from concessions and skyboxes, were excluded.
Another set of numbers, which includes some in-arena numbers, shows a $46 million profit.
Financial World's own figures show a $102 million profit.


Honors to Messier and Leetch; Islanders' Fitzpatrick Prevails
The Rangers didn't quite score a three-trophy hat trick at the National Hockey League awards ceremony last night in Toronto, but two of their four candidates walked away with major honors for their efforts in the 1991-92 season.
Mark Messier, their captain, won the Hart Trophy as the league's most valuable player.
Brian Leetch won the Norris Trophy as the league's best defenseman.


Does a Little Pay Off a Lot? T. Rowe Price Finds It Does
HO hum.
T.
Rowe Price Associates put out another one of those dullsville "investor kits" around the first of the year.
Hardly any advertising to hype the T. Rowe Price Retirees Financial Guide.
And hardly any pizazz in what little advertising they did do.
Six months later, 220,000 investors -- only a third of them from among existing customers -- have requested the kit, which includes a workbook to help retirees estimate how much they can spend each year.
And more than 5 percent of the noncustomers plunked down money for a T. Rowe Price investment after getting it.
That, in a direct-mail business where even a 2 percent response rate is respectable.


Giants Sign 2 Players
The Giants signed two more World League players yesterday, bringing to five the number of spring-league players the team has recently brought under contract.
One is CHRIS DYKO, the 300-pound, 6-foot-6-inch starting right tackle for the New York/New Jersey Knights.
The other is CHARLIE YOUNG, a runner who saw action with the London Monarchs and Montreal Machine.


RESULTS PLUS
TV RATINGS  N.B.A. Draws Good Numbers
NBC Sports' broadcast of the six-game series between the Chicago Bulls and the Portland Trail Blazers got an average Nielsen rating of 14.2 with a 27 share, the fifth highest-rated National Basketball Association final ever, the network said yesterday.
For the first time, each 1992 game received a 13.5 rating or better.
Last year's five-game final between Chicago and Los Angeles, also on NBC, did a 15.8, second only to the 15.9 CBS achieved in 1987 with the Lakers and the Boston Celtics.
A rating is the percentage of all television households in America, and a share is the percentage of television sets in use at the time.
Each ratings point represents about 921,000 homes. (AP)
COLLEGES  Brooklyn College Students Protest
About 50 students and athletes carried a protest into Brooklyn College's administration building yesterday after in a rally over the possible elimination of the school's athletic programs.
The protesters gathered in front of the office of the acting school president, James N. Loughran, on the second floor of Boylan Hall, chanting "Let us play." Loughran, who must make $5.3 million in budget cuts, would not respond, so the students moved to the door of Hilary Gold, the vice president of student affairs.
When Gold did not emerge, students taped protest signs and pom pons to the door.
A committee at the college proposed last week that $170,000 could be saved by abolishing intercollegiate athletics.
OLYMPICS  Yugoslav Team Is Rejected


Court Lets Trenton Cross School Lines
In a decision described as a significant step toward desegregating New Jersey's schools, a state appeals court has ruled that the State Board of Education has both the power and the obligation to eliminate school segregation, even across district lines.
The only immediate effect of the ruling is to clear the way for a study by the Department of Education to decide how much to combine school districts in three adjacent Bergen County towns to avoid de facto segregation.
But the state's Public Advocate called the decision "a powerful blow against racial segregation in New Jersey."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Northern Ireland misstated the position of one of the province's parties.
The largest Catholic-dominated party, Social Democratic and Labor, favors a gradual increase of Irish Republic influence in the north, possibly leading to a single state, but only if a majority of the province approves.
The other Catholic-dominated party, Sinn Fein, the political arm of the Irish Republican Army, demands union with the Irish Republic.


Toyota Unit Notes Have 5.831% Yield
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company led a group of underwriters in pricing a $300 million note issue by Toyota Motor Credit.
The noncallable notes due in 1995 have a 5 3/4 percent coupon and are priced at 99.78 to yield 5.831 percent, or about 30 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


Review/Television; A 'Third-Rate Burglary' That Still Fascinates
Tonight Mike Wallace makes an educated guess as to the identity of Deep Throat.
You remember, the shadowy Washington insider who supposedly gave information to Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein for the Washington Post articles that helped expose the whys and wherefores of the 1972 Watergate break-in.
Since the revelatory moment was blacked out in the review tape, I am unable to betray any confidences here; but CBS News says it is not Alexander M. Haig Jr. or Henry A. Kissinger.
"Watergate: The Secret Story," at 9 P.M. on CBS, has no spectacular secrets for anyone who followed the events of the time, but the true-life political thriller has lost none of its fascination.
This two-hour account, abounding in heroes, villains and political time-servers who wound up serving time, should excite troubled memories in many viewers and introduce others to what the commotion was all about.


William Hurley, 61, A Civil Rights Lawyer
William E. Hurley, an Oregon lawyer and former criminal court judge who played a role in a landmark civil rights case in Mississippi in 1968, died on Monday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Portland.
Known as Pat, he was 61 years old and lived in Portland.
He died of a stroke, according to a daughter, Anne Hurley, who lives in Manhattan.


INSIDE
2 Economic Indicators Rise
Home building and industrial output had sizable gains in May, easing fears of a faltering recovery.
Page D1.
Port Wants Outside Scrutiny
The Port Authority admitted poor control of its construction budget and sought outside review.
Page B1.
Arrest in Hotel Fires
A homeless teen-ager was charged in a rash of hotel fires in midtown Manhattan over the last 10 days.
Page B1.


Review/Film; Searching for Japan, In a Sea, in a Mind And in Metaphor
In Lucille Carra's all too short, invigorating new film, "The Inland Sea," as in the Donald Richie travel memoir on which it is based, there are two inland seas: the "nearly landlocked, lakelike body of water bounded by three of Japan's four major islands," which is the vanishing heart of ancient Japan, and the somewhat less well-known sea of the author's own inner self.
Mr.
Richie, a novelist, essayist and film historian who has lived in Japan for much of the last 46 years, is present in the film mostly as the unseen first-person narrator.
He is looking for "the real Japan," he says, not the Japan of the economic miracle but the Japan of which he has seen only glimpses in Tokyo.


Charles D. May, 84, An Expert in Pediatrics
Dr.
Charles D. May, a pediatrician and an expert on childhood nutritional disorders, died on Saturday in Grantham, N.H.
He was 84 years old.
Dr.
May died of complications from a stroke he suffered two weeks earlier, his wife, Ellen, said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Home building and industrial production advanced strongly in May.
Nevertheless, the bond market drove interest rates lower as Alan Greenspan made optimistic comments about controlling inflation.  [ D1. ]  The Fed chairman also said that if the Treasury issued bonds with the yields indexed to inflation, it would help the Fed formulate monetary policy.  [ D17. ]
The Senate Finance Committee voted to kill the luxury tax on many items and to extend a dozen special tax breaks.  [ D1. ]
How easy is it for a poor person to end up affluent?
Two research teams reached very different conclusions.  [ D1. ]
A Senate panel approved an energy bill that would encourage the development of electric cars and ease regulations on the nuclear power industry.
But it does not raise gasoline taxes.  [ D2. ] Companies
Sears, Roebuck blundered in its combative response to accusations that it overcharged for car repairs, crisis management experts said.
The company has since struck a more contrite tone, but it is not clear whether this will offset the initial damage.  [ D1. ]
Macy reported sharply lower sales and earnings, but it was disclosed that the company intends to offer $2.6 million, three-year contracts to its co-chairmen.  [ D3. ]
Tyson Foods will expand into seafood by acquiring Arctic Alaska Fisheries for $212.4 million in cash and stock.  [ D3. ]
Northwest Airlines will raise domestic fares 10 percent next week, but its competitors did not immediately follow suit.  [ D3. ]
Dow Jones and Pacific Bell are offering "voice mail news," providing headlines, a financial report and a sports update.  [ D3. ]
SmithKline Beecham has acquired the American rights to sell four vaccines against common children's diseases.  [ D4. ]
Two groups of Maxwell companies have filed claims against The Daily News, seeking to recover more than $210 million.  [ D15. ]
Playtex has shifted its $40 million advertising account to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, ending a 21-year relationship with Grey.  [ D15. ] Business Technology
Sony and Philips will soon offer new products to try to take the next big step forward in consumer electronics.
The battle will pit the recordable mini-disk against the digital compact cassette.  [ D5. ] Markets
Stock prices fell, with blue chips dropping in late selling.
The Dow lost 25.41, to 3,329.49, as futures-related selling and mounting worries about the economy produced a late-afternoon drop.  [ D6. ]  The Mexican stock market again dropped sharply.  [ D4. ]
Treasury bond prices rose despite the reported strength in housing and manufacturing.  [ D14. ]  Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit drifted lower last week.  [ D14. ]
Cotton futures prices dropped sharply as the sun began drying the soggy fields of Texas.  [ D16. ]  The dollar fell.  [ D16. ] Today's Columns
Emerson Radio's shareholders will get a chance to choose between competing approaches for restructuring the company.
Floyd Norris.
Market Place.  [ D1. ]
A strong interrelation between marijuana and alcohol may have important implications for reducing automobile fatalities.
Peter Passell.
Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
T.
Rowe Price reports an impressive response to a modest advertising campaign for its Retirees' Guide.
Advertising.  [ D15. ]


Teacher Defeats Odds To Get Preschool Pupils Ready for an Education
Six years ago, Shirley H. Hopkinson began teaching prekindergarten at Brightwood Elementary School here, where she first collided with the sad effects of drugs and divorce on children.
One child was so violent that he hit himself and attacked other students; his mother had used crack while she was pregnant, Dr.
Hopkinson learned.
Other pupils were disturbingly withdrawn.
Still others made frequent trips to the bathroom, behavior she now knows signals trouble at home.


Boston Bank Ratings Up
The Bank of Boston Corporation, rebounding from its problems with delinquent commercial real estate loans and the recession in the New England economy, was rewarded yesterday with higher debt ratings by Moody's Investors Service.
Moody's raised the banking company's rating for long-term senior debt to the investment grade category of Baa-3 from the junk bond category of Ba-2.
It raised the short-term commercial paper rating to Prime-3 from Not Prime.


Joyceans Are in Bloom Once More
Stately plump Buck Mulligan would recognize the tower overlooking Dublin Bay where the events in James Joyce's "Ulysses" began on the morning of June 16, 1904.
But Mulligan, who was modeled on Oliver St.
John Gogarty, a poet, critic, surgeon, prankster, friend and enemy of Joyce, might be inclined to wit-lash some of the ways in which Dublin marks Bloomsday -- its annual celebration of all things Joycean -- and the moves of Leopold Bloom and others in the novel.
There were commercial events celebrating the writer, who spent much of his adult life trying to borrow money, and a weeklong scholarly symposium, sponsored by Trinity College and Bailey's, the liquor company.


Summer Music Series Opens Tonight in Park
The Central Park Summerstage free-music series opens tonight at 8:30 with a performance by the Kronos Quartet at the Rumsey Playfield, Central Park at 70th Street, Manhattan.
Also appearing will be Foday Musa Suso, a West African musician who plays the kora, a 21-stringed harp.


Los Angeles Agency Bonds
A $200 million tax-exempt bond issue by the Los Angeles Wastewater System was priced yesterday through competitive bidding that was won by a group of underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
The financing is insured by the Ambac Indemnity Corporation and is rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Food Notes
Wedding-Cake Contest
Forty lavish wedding cakes will be on display tomorrow from noon to 3:30 P.M. at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street.
The cakes will be submitted by professional bakers in a contest sponsored by Domaine Carneros, the California sparkling wine made by the champagne house Taittinger.
The public is invited to vote for the ultimate wedding cake, based on appearance, to be given the "people's choice" award.
Then from 3:30 to 5:30 P.M., a panel of professional judges will cast their ballots; they get to taste the cakes.
The winners will be announced at a reception from 6 to 8 P.M., and visitors will be able to taste the wine and sample the cakes.
It costs nothing to see the cakes and vote on them, but tickets for the reception and tasting are $25, which goes to the James Beard Foundation, an educational organization.
Tickets must be reserved and will be held at the door.
For reservations: (212) 675-4984.
New Milks
Choices in milk are multiplying.
Coach Farms in Pine Plains, N.Y., has just introduced fresh pasteurized goat's milk in a number of stores in New York.
The milk tastes similar to rich cow's milk, but has a somewhat cleaner flavor and a nice creamy aftertaste.
It has none of the tanginess generally associated with cheeses made of goat's milk.
Because the fat globules in goat's milk are considerably smaller than those in cow's milk, people who have trouble digesting cow's milk sometimes have no problem with goat's milk.
Goat's milk is also somewhat higher in calcium and potassium than cow's milk.
Coach Farms goat's milk is sold at the Union Square Greenmarket on Wednesdays and Saturdays for $2.75 a quart and $4.75 a half gallon.
It is also available at Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas (Ninth Street), for $2.98 a quart; at Fairway, 2127 Broadway (74th Street), for $2.89 a quart and $4.79 a half gallon; at Todaro Brothers, 555 Second Avenue (30th Street), for $2.99 a quart, and at Canard and Company, 1292 Madison Avenue (92nd Street), for $3.90 a quart.
In Brooklyn, it is sold at Back to the Land, 142 Seventh Avenue (near Carroll Street), Park Slope, for $3.15 a quart and $5.25 a half gallon.
As for cow's milk, Farmland Dairies in Wallington, N.J., now produces a skim milk called Skim Plus, bolstered not only with more protein and calcium than regular skim milk but with the richness and body more commonly associated with low-fat milks.
It sells for about 80 cents a quart.
And for people with a lactose intolerance, the company has added two milks labeled Easylac.
One is skim, the other 1 percent fat, and both have had 80 percent of the lactose removed, making them lower in lactose than other similar brands currently on the market.
These milks are ultrapasteurized, giving them a longer shelf life than regular cow's milk.
They have good body and a somewhat sweet flavor.
Both milks cost about $1.20 a quart.
The new Farmland Dairies milks are sold at Waldbaum's, Grand Union, Kings, Food Town, Met Food and other supermarkets.
Edible Tools
Forget the chocolate golf balls for Father's Day.
Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (at Prince Street), is selling a small open wooden box that looks like a tool carrier and comes filled with dark Valrhona chocolate in the shapes of tools like hammers and wrenches.
The delicious chocolate tools are dusted with cocoa, making them look rusty, as though they had been sitting unused in some corner of the cellar for years -- which might make them especially appropriate for some golf-playing dads.
They are the whimsical creation of a superb chocolate maker, Ortrude Carstens, and come 10 to the box for $32.
They are also sold individually for $2.
Food Meets Design
The Grocery, 532 Columbus Avenue, sells very little in the way of real food.
But the toys, household goods, gift items, gadgets and other products carried in this new shop are all inspired by food.
Some are clever, some genuinely useful and some, like the rubber chicken and the underwear packed in a beer bottle, are tasteless.
Throw pillows realistically shaped and printed to look like large fish (about a five-pound salmon, for example) and packed in supermarket-style foam trays and plastic wrap, great for decorating a beach house, are $23; a package of official Star Trek freeze-dried rations, enough for a meal, is $8, and inflatable pool floats that look like giant bagels are $11.95.
The shop also carries old-fashioned penny candy, like wax lips.
CENTURIES OF SOUP WARE
MORE than 100 rare soup tureens from the Campbell Soup collection are on exhibit at the Newark Museum in Newark, N.J., through Aug. 16.
The first such showing of the items outside the Campbell Museum at the company's headquarters in Camden, N.J., features tureens dating to the 16th century, ladles and historic soup plates, including one owned by George Washington.
There are tureens shaped like chickens, rabbits and even a boar's head designed so the steam comes out of the mouth.
The museum, at 49 Washington Street, Newark, is open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is free.
There will be a talk on the exhibit tomorrow at 12:30 P.M.


Rapper Strikes Back


Newark Inquiry Focuses on Supervisors
The investigation into the shooting last week of a 17-year-old car-theft suspect has widened beyond the six police officers who have been suspended to consider the conduct of their superiors.
Police officials also confirmed that one of the suspended officers, Jose Montalvo, 23 years old, was among the five Newark police officers who chased a stolen van into neighboring Hillside last year.
The van crashed into a Hillside patrol car, and officers from both departments opened fire on the vehicle, killing two of the seven young people inside, including a pregnant teen-age girl.
Officer Montalvo was not among those who fired.


Their First Morning Together Is Spent at a Soup Kitchen


One Study's Riches, Another's Rags
Just how hard was it for somebody to climb from the bottom of the economic ladder to the top in the 1980's?
Two teams of researchers asking the same politically sensitive question -- both tracking individual households over the decade -- have reached quite different conclusions.


7.5-Million-Share Offering by Bally
The Bally Manufacturing Corporation announced yesterday that it had filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of up to 7.5 million common shares, about 20 percent of the outstanding common stock.
The offering is connected with the Chicago-based company's solicitation of consents from the holders of certain Bally debt to receive Bally common stock for interest in arrears and prepaid interest or preferred dividends in arrears.


Theater in Review
Balancing Act  Westside Theater 407 West 43d Street Manhattan By Dan Goggin; directed and staged by Tony Parise and Mr.
Goggin; scenery by Barry Axtell; costumes by Mary Peterson; lighting by Paul Miller; sound by Craig Zaionz; musical direction, Michael Rice; orchestrations by Mr.
Rice and David Nyberg; wig design by Carole Morales; production stage manager, Paul Botchis.
Presented by the N.N.N.
Company, in association with George Graham.
WITH: J. B. Adams, Nancy E. Carroll, Diane Fratantoni, Suzanne Hevner, Christine Toy and Craig Wells.


SmithKline to Market 5-in-1 Children's Vaccine
SmithKline Beecham, the big British-American drug maker, said yesterday that it had acquired the American rights to make and sell four vaccines, which it plans to include in a one-shot mega-vaccine against common children's diseases.
The vaccine would combine the current diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus shot with a flu immunization and a vaccine, which SmithKline already makes, against hepatitis B.


Drug Combinations
Drugs that are individually quite safe as well as beneficial can become a serious health threat when taken together.
This is especially true, a new study has shown, for elderly patients.
The study, by Dr.
Thaddeus H. Grasela Jr., associate professor of pharmacy at the State University of New York at Buffalo, examined reports of adverse drug reactions in 48 elderly patients who were taking two drugs simultaneously: the antibiotic ciprofloxacin, for diseases of the lower respiratory tract, and theophylline, a drug that eases breathing in patients with pulmonary disease.
Adverse reactions to the combinations ranged from confusion and nausea to seizures and, in three cases, death.
Dr.
Grasela, who reported his findings in The Archives of Internal Medicine, said that other drugs called quinolones, which are in the same family as ciprofloxacin, can have similar effects when combined with theophylline.
He said that theophylline levels in the blood get much higher in elderly patients than they do in younger healthy volunteers, on whom most drugs are tested for safety.
Dr.
Grasela explained that in the sick and elderly various physical and chemical factors can impair drug metabolism and result in toxic reactions.


Miscellany
*
Greenstone Roberts Advertising, Melville, L.I., reported that net income for its second fiscal quarter rose 45.6 percent, to $331,048, from $227,326 in the comparable 1991 period.
Revenues for the period, which ended on April 30, totaled $3.2 million, up 33 percent from $2.4 million.


House Panel Passes a Weakened Cable Bill
Deciding that it would be smarter to run and fight again some other day, the House Energy and Commerce Committee voted today, 31 to 12, in favor of a bill that would impose tough new rate regulation on most cable television systems but is much weaker than a measure passed by the Senate in January.
The thrust-and-parry strategy marked an attempt by the panel's chairman, Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, to sidestep the deadlocks and jursidictional squabbles that have stalled House action on the bill for months.


Shaping a New Agenda
Although the biggest news out of this week's summit meeting was the agreement to sharply reduce American and Russian nuclear arsenals, the centerpiece turned out to be economic relations between the two former rivals.
In effect, these two days marked the moment when the currency of American-Russian relations shifted from warheads to dollars.
Stripped to its essence, what President Boris N. Yeltsin did this week was promise Mr.
Bush that Russia would trash thousands of warheads in exchange for long-promised trade privileges, a bilateral investment treaty, removal of cold-war trade barriers and the hope of lucrative American investment and quick Congressional approval of a Russian aid package.


When Your Beadwork Needs Work
PEOPLE have used beads to decorate objects, clothing and themselves for thousands of years.
"Beads are compelling," said Lois Sher Dubin, author of "The History of Beads From 30,000 B.C. to the Present" (Abrams, 1987).
"They feel good to touch, and your eyes are attracted because light bounces off them."
The earliest beads were things like bear teeth, bits of shell and water-worn pebbles with natural holes.
They were usually talismanic, believed "to give you that extra measure of help out on the hunt," Ms.
Dubin said.
Countless cultures have devised their own styles of beading, right up to the beadwork on modern evening dresses and wedding gowns.


Ulster Protestants and Dublin Aides Plan First Talks Since '73
The Government said today that for the first time since 1973, its representatives will meet on Friday with officials of both Catholic and Protestant political parties from Northern Ireland.
The meeting, to be held in London, will be the first between the Protestant-dominated parties, who insist that the province remain united to Britain, and the Irish Government since talks by moderate Unionists and Dublin at Sunningdale, England, in 1973.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  YELTSIN CONQUERS WASHINGTON
The Russian President swept through the capital, hearing chants of "Boris, Boris, Boris!" from Congress and winning trade incentives to help his nation's economy.
He told Congress that he was deactivating the most powerful missiles aimed at the United States.
A1  THE GREENBACK SUMMIT
News analysis: Arms agreements were the biggest news, but the centerpiece of the summit turned out to be economic relations between the former rivals.
A1
Mr. Yeltsin spoke again of the possibility of captive Americans.  A17
President Bush and Mr. Yeltsin signed trade agreements.  A19
Another agreement was signed on cooperation in space.  A19
Mr. Yeltsin's speech thrilled even his Congressional critics.  A19
Reporter's Notebook: Some Americans say, "Mikhail who?" A19  A SIEGE WITHIN A SIEGE
Dobrinja, a suburb of Sarajevo, has undergone an ordeal similar to that of the Bosnian capital.
Its 35,000 people have been surrounded by Serbian troops, tanks and artillery for 10 weeks.
A1  GERMAN HOSTAGES FLY HOME
The last two Westerners known to have been held by Lebanese militants returned to Germany, where the Government said it had not made a deal for their release.
A3  U.S.
AND MEXICO BACK OFF
The countries moved away from confrontation as Mexican officials said they had received assurances that Washington would not kidnap criminal suspects on their territory.
Mexico said it would withdraw its vow to freeze action by American drug agents.
A3  IRELAND'S TURN FOR UNION VOTE
The Irish vote today on a referendum on the Treaty on European Union.
Many feel a "no" vote, after Denmark's rejection, would be a fatal blow to the treaty.
A6
The Irish Government will talk with Northern Ireland politicians.
A7  TURNING TO MORAL POLLUTION
As the glamour of the Earth Summit fades quickly, the President of Brazil is facing a corruption scandal viewed as his two-year-old Government's most serious crisis.
A10  DRAWING DOWN IN EUROPE?
Secretary of Defense Cheney has approved a policy change that would give the military the latitude, for the first time, to reduce forces in Europe below the 150,000 ceiling set by President Bush, officials said.
A15  Czech and Slovak leaders agree on a new government -- for now.
A5  China and an American company will seek oil in disputed waters.
A8  Thailand's top military leaders defend the violent crackdown.
A9  Austrians, where Hitler once spoke, rally against the Nazi past.
A12  Political unrest spreads to the second-largest ex-Soviet republic.
A16  Eilabun Journal: Israeli politicians court Arab votes.
A4  National A20-25, B10-12, D23  ACCORD ON URBAN AID
After a month of political posturing and tough bargaining, White House and Congressional negotiatiors agreed on a $1.3 billion urban aid package.
A1  WEINBERGER'S DIARIES
At the heart of the perjury case against former Defense Secretary Weinberger are thousands of pages of his private notes, nearly indicipherable and the subject of contradictory interpretations.
A1
Weinberger legally took classified documents as he left office.
B10  PEROT AND THE PROCESS
Political Memo: As a man of enormous wealth, Ross Perot offers himself as the one Presidential candidate who would not be beholden to special interests.
At the same time, he denounces public financing of elections.
Does this mean he thinks only the rich should be able to run for President?
Not at all, his camp says, though acknowledging that he has offered no detailed idea for any alternative.
A1
The U.A.W. didn't need any more headaches; Perot poses one.  A24
Clinton said he would cut 100,000 Federal jobs by attrition.  A24
A Bush campaign trip brought more environmental criticism.  A24
On the Trail: Quayle's spelling was the talk of late-night TV.
A25  QUAYLE AIDE UNDER SCRUTINY
After putting his stock holdings in trust to deflect accusations of conflict of interest, Allan B. Hubbard Jr., one of the Vice President's chief campaign aides, is again under investigation for possible violation of conflict-of-interest laws.
B12  NAVAL AVIATORS CANCEL MEETING
The Tailhook Association, the group of naval aviators whose convention last year was the scene of sexual assaults against 26 women, called off this year's convention because of the resulting furor.
B11  'WE DIDN'T KNOW'
Representatives of Disneyland arrived in South-Central Los Angeles two weeks ago to hold interviews for 200 summer jobs, a goodwill gesture born of the riots.
Like many Americans, the interviewers had been bomarded by television images of South-Central.
What they found was something very different.
"They were wonderful kids," said one, "outstanding kids." A20  Huntsville Journal: Magnolias, newcomers and a murder case.
A20  Metropolitan Digest, B1 END OF OBSTACLE COURSE
For seniors at Boys and Girls High in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, the long, precarious obstacle course through inner-city adolescence was over.
And they had made it.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Home Section C1-11  At home with Don Henley.
C1  The Kodak Brownie: Fond memories come in little boxes.
C1  Many widows are choosing not to marry again.
C1  Sports B13-19  Baseball: Mets' streak ends at one.
B13  Yanks lose to Red Sox again.
B15
Basketball: Barkley goes to the Suns.
B13  Column: Chass on Baseball.
B13  Golf: Watson returns to scene of triumph.
B13  Obituaries D22  Frederick E. Exley, author.
Dewey Balfa, fiddler and singer.
Arts/Entertainment C13-20  New life for old High School of Performing Arts.
C13  Music: "Boheme" opens opera in the Park.
C13  Dance: An outburst of pop at City Ballet.
C13  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  Braver new world.
Kidnap?
Sure, says Court.
Topics: History in a footnote.
Letters A26  William Safire: The new hard line.
A27  Anthony Lewis: Black and white.
A27  Richard Brookhiser: Quayle is serious; why aren't we?
A27  David C. Hendrickson: Over a barrel in Yugoslavia.
A27


Mickelson Springs Surprises
Phil Mickelson, who earlier this month captured a third National Collegiate Athletic Association title, is a professional at last.
As he prepared for the start of the United States Open that begins here Thursday morning, Mickelson announced today that he had agreed to be represented by Cornerstone Sports, a Dallas-based management company.
He also said he had signed a contract with Yonex, a Japanese equipment company, to use their clubs with graphite shafts.


Smucker (J.M.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Gradco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Block (H &amp; R) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Year to April 30


Theater in Review
She Who Once Was the Helmet-Maker's Beautiful Wife  The Performing Garage 33 Wooster Street SoHo Manhattan Written and directed by Peter Halasz and Seth Tillett, with "The Upper Road," "The Lower Road" and "The Clearing" by Peter Langer; music by Johann Strauss; producer, Laura Barnett; sound and lighting design, Ruud van der Akker.
Presented by the Performing Garage.
Cora Fisher, Peter Halasz, Agnes Santha and Seth Tillett.
A life so grim it becomes hilarious and finally comforting unfolds in "She Who Once Was the Helmet-Maker's Beautiful Wife" by Peter Halasz and Seth Tillett.
People familiar with the work of Mr.
Halasz, the Hungarian-born director, actor and founder of Squat Theater and Love Theater, always expect bizarre, exquisitely imagined plays from him.
But he has never more magically transformed his sometimes cruel vision into affectionate understanding than in this startling memoir of his Hungarian grandmother (played by himself).


2 Top Officials of Mirror Group Quit
The board of Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C., one of the flagship public companies of Robert Maxwell's publishing empire, announced today that the company's chairman and chief financial officer had both resigned.
While the investigation of the theft of money from Maxwell companies and their pension funds is continuing, there has been no suggestion that either of the two executives is suspected of wrongdoing.
The two, Ernest Burrington and Lawrence Guest, are believed to have confronted Mr.
Maxwell when they discovered that money was missing.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; ISSUES FIRST, BASKETBALL LATER
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he would be more than willing to play basketball with Vice President Dan Quayle, but only if Mr.
Quayle agreed to talk about issues first.
"The games are fun and there will be time for fun after you deal with the substance," Mr.
Cuomo said, speaking to reporters in Manhattan.


U.S. Army Gets Flexibility on Europe Troop Levels
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has approved a policy change that would give the military the latitude for the first time to plan to reduce its forces in Europe below the 150,000 ceiling set by President Bush, Pentagon officials said today.
A senior Pentagon official emphasized that the Bush Administration has no immediate plans to reduce military forces in Europe further.
He acknowledged that the change was made at the request of Army officials who are concerned that budget constraints will make it difficult to maintain two armored divisions and an armored cavalry regiment in Europe for the remainder of the decade.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Criticized Over Visit to Recycler
Days after President Bush angered participants in the Earth Summit at Rio de Janeiro, environmentalists are attacking him again for traveling Thursday to an oil-recycling company that has criticized the Administration's environmental policies.
On the first stop of a three-day campaign trip to California and Texas, Mr.
Bush plans to tour Evergreen Oil Company, in Newark, Calif., which has been praised by environmentalists as being on the cutting edge in recycling used motor oil.


If Aardvarks Ruin the Plants, Don't Get Tabasco on the Elves
FOR a couple of years now, I've been a subscriber to three on-line computer services that link me through a modem to electronic bulletin boards on several topics, including gardening.
I occasionally participate, asking or answering a question, but mostly I just eavesdrop on conversations among people who represent a cross section of the gardening world.
The level of discourse is often knowing, even sophisticated, and by private electronic mail I've made friends with gardeners across the country.
But there's a persistent theme that crops up on the bulletin boards.
I call it fear and anxiety in the garden.
Many messages take this form: "Please help, there's something in my garden that I'm afraid of, and I need to know how to get rid of it."


Citing Scandal, Navy Group Cancels Annual Convention
The organization that sponsored a convention of naval aviators in Las Vegas last year where 26 women were assaulted said today that it had canceled its 1992 convention in San Diego because of the controversy over the event.
Steve Millikin, a spokesman for the Tailhook Association, a private group of retired and active-duty naval aviators, said the organization's board voted late Tuesday to cancel this year's convention because of disciplinary proceedings pending against about 70 Navy and Marine Corps officers.
The convention, held each year since 1956, was to take place Sept. 18-19.


Lamonts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Nimby and Economics Kill Plans for Wood-Powered Plant
Here in this northwestern Connecticut city surrounded by the forested foothills of the Berkshires, a plan to build a wood-fired power plant might seem as natural as throwing a few more logs on the fireplace.
But residents, fearing that such a plant would cause air pollution, successfully fought plans to build it in what many here viewed as a struggle between a grass-roots movement and an outside developer.


Essay; The New Hard Line
In olden times, we hard-liners said: Don't trust the Russians.
Fight them every step of the way until the free human spirit wins.
The soft-liners said: Accommodate.
Try to understand their fear of us, and some peaceful day the two systems will converge.


2 German Hostages Are Freed in Beirut and Fly Home
The last two Westerners known to have been held hostage by Lebanese militant groups, two German aid workers, were flown home today by their Government, which said their freedom was "a victory of justice over injustice" and not the result of any deal.
Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel thanked the leaders of Iran, Syria and Lebanon for their cooperation in obtaining the release of the two men, and German officials made clear they believed that Western countries could move to normalize trade and diplomatic relations with all three countries now that hostages no longer troubled the atmosphere.


School Board Appointed Six Illegally, Report Says
Leaders of a Bronx school district forged documents and "engaged in deliberate misconduct" to push the appointment of six favored principals before newly elected board members took their seats, according to a report released yesterday by school investigators.
The report, issued by the city Department of Investigation's school corruption unit, says that Superintendent Alfredo Mathew and the lame-duck majority that controlled Community School District Board 12 in the south-central Bronx violated board procedures when they installed their candidates in December before one member of the majority, Lucy Cruz, left the board in January to join the City Council.
Campaign Workers


Brooklyn Ambush Kills 2, Injures 4
Two people were killed and four others wounded yesterday morning in an ambush in a Brooklyn bodega, when a man strolled into the store and without a word pulled out a semiautomatic handgun and opened fire, the police said.
The shooting at the bodega began just after 11 A.M., detectives said, when the gunman entered the store and opened fire with a 9-millimeter semiautomatic.
A store employee grabbed the owner's licensed .357 revolver and shot back, said Lieut.
Eugene T. Albright, commander of the 73d Precinct detective squad.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the family of John Demjanjuk, who was tried and convicted in Israel for war crimes committed by the man known as Ivan the Terrible, referred incorrectly to the availability of comments from his son, John Jr., about efforts to reopen the case.
John Demjanjuk Jr. was unavailable for interviews last weekend but does speak with the press.


Quayle Is Serious. Why Aren't We?
American electioneering is so scorned for its emptiness and frivolity, for its ignorant armies clashing by sound bite, you'd think that a major political figure who addressed serious issues in a serious way would be thanked for his efforts.
Instead, Vice President Dan Quayle has been treated like a rabble-rousing rube.
He may have trouble spelling potato, but here are four points he has raised which we should all ponder, whatever we finally conclude.
The American family has changed drastically over the last quarter century.
Quayle hunters accuse him of denying this reality.
But he began by assuming the reality of change.
In his Murphy Brown speech in San Francisco, he pointed out that 68 percent of black families were headed by married couples in 1967.
By 1991, less than half -- 48 percent -- were.
But the Vice President had another statistic: Among families headed by married couples, fewer than 1 in 17 are poor, while the poverty rate among families headed by single mothers is 1 in 3.
Mr.
Quayle knows it's a big, and changing, country.
He simply asked us to question whether all the changes have been for the better.


Werner Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Market Place; Designing Tools For the Designers
IN the $1.63 billion market for mechanical computer-aided design software, the Parametric Technology Corporation, with just under $50 million in 1991 revenues, barely makes the top 10 vendor list.
But in the four years since Parametric shipped its innovative Pro/Engineer product, the company has helped rewrite the rules in the critical high-tech arena known as CAD/CAM, or computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing.
During the same period, it experienced explosive growth in revenues and profits.


Juror Joins a Huddle at N.F.L. Trial
One of the nine jurors on the all-woman panel hearing testimony in the National Football League antitrust trial reportedly told Judge David S. Doty and the attorneys for both sides today that she did not think she could render a fair decision because she was prejudiced against the players who had brought the suit.
The juror was not taken off the jury and returned to finish hearing the last hour of testimony from Randy Vataha, an agent who represents two of the plaintiffs in the case, Don Majkowski of Green Bay and Dave Richards of San Diego.


NMR of America reports earnings for Year to March 31


Next Item, Lindros: Do I Hear 4 Players?
Eric Lindros rumors are like Elvis Presley sightings.
Even if they are totally a product of imagination, they seem so real, at least in the minds of the true believers.
This week, as the National Hockey League gathers for its annual congress and draft, the whispers around the Radisson Gouverneurs hotel here have Lindros soon becoming a Philadelphia Flyer.
Or a Toronto Maple Leaf.
Or a Detroit Red Wing.
Or a New York Ranger.
Or a New Jersey Devil.


Sprucing Up for Summer


Pier I Imports reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Transnational Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Juniper Features Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Japan Had to Join in U.N. Peacekeeping Effort; Asia Isn't Ready
To the Editor:
Your June 2 editorial should have pointed out that opposition inside Japan has kept the country from any military role overseas.
Many Asians would strongly disagree with you that this residual public pacifism, which now has to accept a peacekeeping force under pressure from Japan's ruling party and the United States (front page, June 16), "makes Asian fears of renewed Japanese militarism seem unrealistic."
Under American protection in the cold war, Japan has not known how to gain the trust and good will of Asians.
On the contrary, Asian resentment has been exasperated by Japan's lack of admission of guilt, minimal retribution for war crimes, token reparations, open revision of history books, growing denials of war atrocities (Ishihara Shintaro claims almost no one among the ruling Liberal Democrats believes that there was a 1937 Nanjing Massacre) and accumulation of bomb-grade plutonium.


British Investors Caught in New York Red Tape
To the Editor:
While Mayor David N. Dinkins was in Britain pitching New York City as a great place in which to invest (news article, June 1), some British investment advisers in New York were on the phone to London telling their colleagues to try Illinois instead or California or Texas or Massachusetts.
With more than $120 billion of British investment in the United States at stake, New York City and New York State are not getting the best possible reviews.
One reason is a personal overdose of government red tape.


Penwest Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Krabbe Is Caugh In a Race to Nowhere
You are leafing through a magazine when suddenly your eyes are drawn to a flashy advertisement extolling the virtues of Olympic coins.
There in silver-plated, long-legged bas-relief under the inscription, Barcelona, is Katrin Krabbe.
You are looking at a collector's item.


Council Seeks to Block Limiting Of Its Power Over Landmarking
Fearing that its power over landmarking decisions was severely limited by a recent court ruling, the New York City Council said yesterday that it would seek to have the decision overturned.
At stake, Council leaders say, is the Council's power to make changes in City Landmarks Preservation Commission decisions without entirely rejecting the landmark designation.


Mishap Over Bond Payment
A day's delay in repaying a debt can be irritating, but when the debt involves hundreds of millions of dollars, it becomes a matter of grave concern that can upset investors' plans to buy other securities and even result in financial loss.
Those problems occurred this week when the money for repaying $300 million in New Jersey notes arrived in New York too late to be paid to investors on Monday, the due date.
The payment was pushed back to Tuesday.


Seles Shuns Yugoslav Affiliation
MONICA SELES will not play under the Yugoslav flag when she bids for her first Wimbledon title at the championships starting Monday.
A Women's Tennis Association spokeswoman, GEORGINA CLARK, said that Seles, the No.1-ranked women's player, who will be top-seeded, would play as Monica Seles of Sarasota, Fla.
Seles now lives in Sarasota and requested that she not be listed as a Yugoslav to avoid making any apparent political statement.
Clark said: "So that she can concentrate on playing tennis and not be caught up in a political situation way beyond her control, she has decided to take this step so nobody can say she is supporting one side or the other."


Review/Dance; For City Ballet, an Outburst of Pop
Mikhail Baryshnikov comes across as Fred Astaire, Al Jolson and Mickey Mouse all rolled into one in "Three Preludes," a recent solo choreographed by Mark Morris for his own company and presented as a piece d'occasion by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night.
American popular culture is wittily and tersely distilled in this seven-minute piece, set to George Gershwin's Three Preludes, played on the piano at the New York State Theater by Richard Moredock.
Moreover, Mr.
Baryshnikov's performance suggests a true-life scenario, a Russian ballet star identifying with the American myth as transmitted through Hollywood's icons.


Theater in Review
Bobby Sands, M.P.
Irish Arts Center 553 West 51st Street Manhattan By Judy GeBauer; directed by Nye Heron; original theme composed by Brian O'Neill Mor; original music composed, arranged and produced by Mr.
Mor and Nicholas Kean; set and lighting by Rick Butler; costumes by Carla Gant; production stage manager, Kurt Wagemann.
Presented by the Irish Arts Center, Jim Sheridan, chairman; Mr.
Heron, artistic director; Marianne Delaney, executive director; produced by Ms.
Delaney and Donald Kelly.
WITH: Brenda Daly, Robin Howard, Brian Mallon, Fionna McCormac, Seamus McDonagh, Barry McEvoy, D. J. O'Neill, Donal J. Sheehan and Jimmy Smallhorne.
In 1981, after a 66-day hunger strike, Bobby Sands died in a Belfast prison.
Convicted of illegal possession of arms, Sands had protested that he was treated as a criminal rather than as a political prisoner.
The death of this member of the Irish Republican Army sent shock waves through Britain and elsewhere, and they are evoked again in Judy GeBauer's play, "Bobby Sands, M.P.," at the Irish Arts Center.


Plan for Ice Rink and TV Studio on Chelsea Piers
New York State selected a development group yesterday to build ice-skating rinks, film and television studios and a marina on the Chelsea Piers as part of a plan to revitalize Manhattan's decaying Hudson River waterfront.
The group, Chelsea Piers L.P., submitted the lowest bid of three finalists seeking to develop the aging piers between West 18th and 23d Streets.
But officials of the State Department of Transportation, which owns the piers, said the group was selected because its $25 million plan would fit best into a proposed ribbon of riverfront parkland and businesses envisioned by city and state officials.


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Books of The Times; After TV, What? An Eden of Art and Individualism?
Life After Television  By George Gilder 126 pages. W. W. Norton. $14.95.


Casey's General Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


China Signs U.S. Oil Deal for Disputed Waters
In an aggressive move to take control of disputed territory in the South China Sea, the Chinese Government has signed an oil exploration contract with an American company for a stretch of the sea that is also claimed by Vietnam.
The contract marks the first time in many years that any country has acted unilaterally to develop the rich mineral resources in the southern part of the sea, which is the subject of overlapping claims by China, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Taiwan and Brunei.


Quayle Aide Faces New Conflict Charge
After putting his stock holdings in trust to avoid conflict-of-interest accusations, a top aide to Vice President Dan Quayle is again under investigation for possible violation of criminal conflict-of-interest laws.
The subject of the inquiry is Allan B. Hubbard, an Indiana investor who is deputy chief of staff to the Vice President and the chief organizer of Mr.
Quayle's campaign travel.


Poles Learn the Hard Way; Schools Are Hurt by Reform
The only decoration in the physics lab at Copernicus High School is a large display of the molecular structure of cement.
In the chemistry classroom next door, a cracked, sun-beaten poster of the Polish-born Nobel laureate Marie Curie looks over lopsided tables and chairs.
Broken cupboards reveal only chipped and stained flasks.
The appearance of one of Warsaw's most elite schools is revealing enough, but the state of education is even worse than these dilapidated classrooms would suggest.
While the country's economy is at a critical point, it is education here, as in many other countries, that is suffering most.


The Izaak Walton League Meets the Slumber-Party Set
FISHING and fashion rarely intersect.
But thanks to the Plano Molding Company, the two have converged, giving teen-age girls one more must-have accessory to buy.
Among other products, the 60-year-old company makes tackle boxes that are highly prized by anglers for the numerous compartments that hold hooks, sinkers and all the other little important stuff that fishermen need.


Accounts
*
Red Lobster, Minneapolis, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, New York for network and syndication television buying.
The account, estimated at $55 million, was previously handled by Grey Advertising, New York.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Denmark and Sweden Gain Semifinals  There was a Scandanavian sweep at the European soccer championships yesterday as underdogs Denmark and Sweden moved into the semifinals with 2-1 victories.
Lars Elstrup, a substitute, scored with 13 minutes left to give Denmark the victory over France, while Tomas Brolin scored a spectacular goal to lift Sweden over England.
Denmark was a last-minute replacement for Yugoslavia after that country was banned from the tournament because of sanctions stemming from the civil war.
The police and Swedish news media reported that more than 30 people, both English and Swedish, were arrested as youths battled with sticks, bottles, fists and feet in various parts of Stockholm following England's defeat.
Four people were reported hospitalized from beatings and about 100 windows were broken.
Today, the defending champion, the Netherlands, meets the World Cup holder, Germany, and the Commonwealth of Independent States faces Scotland. (AP) TENNIS  Wheaton Upset by Eltingh at Manchester  Third-seeded David Wheaton was upset by Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands, who served 16 aces to beat Wheaton, 6-4, 6-4, in the second round of the Manchester grass-court tournament, a Wimbledon tune-up.
Three of the aces came in the last game as Eltingh served out the match at love.
Wheaton reached the Wimbledon semifinals in 1991, losing to Boris Becker.
He is seeded 16th this year.
"I'll just keep on training hard the rest of the week," Wheaton said.
"It's going to take four or five days' hard work to get my game to where it should be." Second-seeded Brad Gilbert coasted to a 6-3, 6-2 victory over Gary Muller. (AP) Fernandez Advances: Second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez moved into the quarterfinals of the Eastbourne grass-court tournament with a 6-3, 6-3 victory over Patricia Hy of Canada.
Fernandez, ranked seventh in the world, fell behind by 1-3 in the first set but then took control, rushing the net.
Lori McNeil eliminated third-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain, 6-0, 6-3, in just 53 minutes.
The result was not a significant upset since McNeil is a fast-court specialist and Martinez excels on clay.
Linda Harvey-Wild, who upset top-seeded Martina Navratilova on Tuesday, battled for 2 hours 19 minutes for a 3-6, 7-6 (8-6), 6-4 victory over Larisa Savchenko-Neiland of Latvia. (AP) BOATING  Frenchwoman Safe After a Capsizing  Florence Arthaud, the 33-year-old French yachtswoman who was a favorite to win the solo Europe 1 Star trans-Atlantic race, capsized and was rescued at sea by a passing ship.
Patricia Demoustier, Arthaud's personal assistant, said yesterday from Newport, R.I., that Arthaud was knocked unconscious Tuesday as the 60-foot trimaran, Premier 1er, turned upside down in the water.
Arthaud reported that when she woke up, she found herself in the center hull cabin.
"She started shouting for her brother, and asking if there were people on board," Demoustier said.
"She was prepared to wait for two or three days to be rescued." Demoustier talked yesterday by telephone to Arthaud on the Faust, the United States car-carrier vessel that picked up the French sailor within five hours of her boat's capsizing.
Crew members saw her standing on the overturned hull of her boat and waving.
Arthaud was sailing at 29 knots, a top speed for multihulls, when the boat flipped over.
She was in 15th place in the race, which began June 7 in Plymouth, England, and was about 400 miles from the finish line in Newport.
Of the 68 solo sailors who entered the race, nine have dropped out.
A Frenchman, Loick Peyron, is expected to cross the finish line first by arriving today in Newport.
EQUESTRIAN  Matz Excels in Olympic Trials  Michael Matz posted perfect rounds on both his horses yesterday at Gladstone, N.J., in the fourth of six show-jumping qualifying trials for the United States Olympic team.
Matz, who leads the overall rider standing aboard Heisman with four faults and is second on Olisco with 8.5, could occupy two of the five qualifying spots for the Olympic team after the final trials today and Saturday.
Matz would then qualify on only his higher-ranked horse.
Anne Kursinski, a member of the 1988 silver medal team, could also place two horses among the top five.
She is No. 3 aboard Top Seed with 12.5 faults and No. 5 on Cannonball with 20.
Alice Debany of Bedford, N.Y., won yesterday's event in a jump-off with Jeffrey Welles, both of whom also completed faultless rounds.
Matz did not compete in the jumpoff to rest his horses.
Debany, riding The Natural, finished the seven-fence jumpoff course in 37.64 seconds.
Welles, aboard Serengeti, crashed into a fence in the jumpoff and withdrew.
"I doubt I will make the Olympic team," said Debany, ranked No. 12 with 24.25 faults.
Norman Dello Joio, David Raposa and Welles currently hold the other qualifying spots.


Bridge
Very few players can claim to have attended a regional championship, played in three events and won them all.
Albert Rahmey of Brooklyn joined this select club in April by winning two regional pair titles and one regional Swiss team title at the Southeastern Championships in Miami Beach.
On the diagramed deal Rahmey sat South and climbed to four hearts.
When the dummy appeared, he could see that it would be easy to make 10 tricks if the hearts divided evenly.
However, West's take-out double following an original pass strongly suggested a singleton in one of the red suits, and there was a considerable danger of losing two trump tricks and a trick in each minor suit.


Paul J. Hartman, 81, An Expert on Tax Law
Paul J. Hartman, professor emeritus at the Vanderbilt School of Law, died on Monday at the Helen Pate-Bain Health Care Center in Nashville.
A resident of Nashville, he was 81 years old.
The announcement from Vanderbilt said he had died after a lengthy illness brought on by two strokes and a heart attack.


Review/Music; Accordionists' Patron Saint
I leave it to historians more learned than I to decide whether "Opera Fisarmonica" is the first opera written about a musical instrument.
On the other hand, I stand confident in my assertion that it is the first whose hero is an accordion.
To be more accurate, there is a man attached to the device: Pietro Deiro, an Italian immigrant who earlier in this century served as a pioneer of the new piano accordion (a right-hand keyboard replacing the customary buttons) and who has been a patron saint for accordionists ever since.
A two-person team at Anahid Sofian Studio on Saturday night negotiated the studio's small, rectangular dance space, using music, dance, narration, chanting and singing to sketch Deiro's life and musical investigations.
William Schimmel was the perambulating accordionist, playing his own music and Deiro's in a headlong, highly emotional virtuoso style.
His cooler counterpart was Micki Goodman, whose dancing, movement and manipulation of basic props created a kind of surreal storytelling of its own.
The two did it all: as performers, producers, stage managers, even as their own lighting technicians.


Caspen Oil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many children, midwinter dreams of spending summer vacation just hanging out are quickly replaced by feelings of boredom, as the summer drags on with nothing exciting for them to do.
The problem is far from trivial, especially for children whose parents work outside the home.
According to a Federal Census Bureau study conducted in August 1986, the last time such a study was conducted, 13.2 percent of children between the ages of 5 and 14 had no adult supervision that month while their parents worked outside the home during the day.
The percentage of young children who are left unsupervised may be even higher this summer.


Glavine Becomes First to Reach 10
Braves 4, Dodgers 3
ATLANTA, June 17 (AP) -- Tom Glavine survived a shaky start to pitch a five-hitter and become baseball's first 10-game winner as the surging Atlanta Braves defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers, 4-3, tonight.
It was the Braves' season-high seventh victory in a row and 16th in 18 games.
The Dodgers have lost seven straight games and 12 of 15.


Stocks Fall As the Dow Loses 41.73
Stock prices fell sharply yesterday, shaken by domestic political concerns, big falls in markets abroad and tremors linked to the expiration of options tomorrow.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 41.73 points, or 1.3 percent, to 3,287.76, its lowest close since April 13.
On top of a 25-point drop on Tuesday, the Dow is now down 2 percent in two days.


Knicks Go Shopping for Veteran Guard
David Checketts and Ernie Grunfeld have a list of four shooting guards they would like to acquire for the Knicks.
Consider it an early Christmas list, but remember that there is no major gift-giving holiday during the summer.
The four guards, according to Knick insiders, are Orlando's Dennis Scott, Sacramento's Mitch Richmond, Dallas's Rolando Blackman and Charlotte's Dell Curry.
Scott and Richmond are the two preferred players.


LTX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Braver New World
The picture leaped off the front page yesterday, extraordinary in its folksiness.
There on the White House lawn, like old business buddies relaxing after shaking on a deal, exuberant Boris Yeltsin wrapped his arms around George and Barbara Bush in shirt-sleeved conviviality enhanced by the presence even of the Bushes' dog.
The deal was more extraordinary.
It promises the longest step yet away from fear and toward real security.


Holyfield Hits His Weight
As Evander Holyfield stepped off the scale at the weigh-in for his heavyweight title defense against Larry Holmes here Friday, his promoter, Dan Duva, smiled.
"There are three things in this life that are certain," said Duva.
"Death, taxes and Evander Holyfield coming in at 210 pounds.


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Abroad at Home; Black and White
The episode of Bill Clinton and Sister Souljah may seem a passing curiosity in a long campaign.
But it is in fact something more: a metaphor for the difficulty of politics in a divided country.
Sister Souljah, a young rap singer who mixes social commentary with her songs, was interviewed last month by David Mills of The Washington Post.
On the subject of the Los Angeles riots, Mr.
Mills asked: "Even the people themselves who were perpetrating that violence, did they think it was wise? Was that wise, reasoned action?" She replied:


BeautiControl Cosmetics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Key West Won't Waive Fee for an Institute
The five-member City Commission voted unanimously Tuesday night to reject the San Carlos Patriotic and Educational Institute's appeal of a $35,000 municipal fee.
The vote gave the newly renovated institute, a Key West landmark and the birthplace of the revolution that led to the end of Spanish rule in Cuba, 60 days to pay the fee or face closing.


Cooper Development Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a guest list yesterday for the White House dinner in honor of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia misidentified the current Commerce Secretary in some editions.
She is Barbara Franklin; her predecessor was Robert Mosbacher.


Review/Opera; An Emperor's Concubine in Her Cups
At irregular intervals over the last dozen years, New Yorkers stimulated by a visit of the Beijing Opera to the Metropolitan Opera House have had access to further examples of Chinese opera.
But they have not been able to explore this colorful genre in any systematic way.
Now they can, thanks to the Taipei Theater, which completed its superb first season of Chinese opera over the weekend with an appearance by Wei Haiming and her troupe.
The program, like others in the series, was varied, to give a well-rounded view of the typically heady blend of music, drama, dance, mime and acrobatics.


Aztec Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


LDB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Club Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; QUAYLE MAKES JOB EASIER FOR COMEDIANS
It didn't take long for jokes about Vice President Dan Quayle and his misspelling of "potato" at a spelling bee in Trenton to make late-night television.
Jay Leno, Tuesday night: "Maybe the Vice President should stop watching 'Murphy Brown' and start watching 'Sesame Street,' " reported The Hotline, a daily digest of political information.
"But Quayle taught the kids a valuable lesson: if you don't study, you could end up Vice President."


Police-Issued Gun Ruled Out in Newark Shooting
The bullet that wounded a 17-year-old car-theft suspect here last week was not fired by a standard-issue Newark police weapon, the acting Essex County prosecutor, James Mulvihill, said today.
Surgeons removed the slug from the victim, Howard Caesar, Tuesday morning.
In a brief statement this afternoon, Mr.
Mulvihill, who heads the investigation into the incident, said a preliminary examination had determined that the bullet had not been fired from a 9-millimeter handgun.
That is the only weapon Newark's 1,100 police officers are authorized to carry.


Blount Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. Output Per Hour On the Rise
After two years of stagnant sales, relentless belt tightening and waves of white-collar layoffs, the productivity of American businesses is on the rebound.
Output per hour in businesses other than farms grew at a robust annual rate of 2.7 percent last winter, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.
That is the biggest spurt in two years.


Noted Author Was Mistaken For Bush's Dog
Sometimes it is hard to tell the difference between the President's dog and a best-selling author.
Reuters acknowledges that the happy spaniel standing at attention on the White House lawn in a photograph on the front page of The New York Times yesterday was not the President's dog Ranger, as the caption said, but the First Lady's dog Millie.


Theater in Review
The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant  85 East Fourth Street East Village Manhattan By Rainer Werner Fassbinder; translated by Denis Calandra; directed by Brian Jucha; set design, Sarah Edkins; lighting design, Roma Flowers; music direction, Roberto Pace; costumes, Kasia Walicka-Maimone; Presented by Via Theater, Anne Bogart and Mr.
Jucha, co-artistic directors.
WITH: Sheryl Dold, David Kellett, Tamar Kotoske, Anne McKenna, Tina Shepard, Karla Silverman, Megan Spooner, Reet Roos Varnik and Lisa Welti.
Before it was a film, Rainer Werner Fassbinder's "Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant" was a play, and to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the German film maker's death, Via Theater is reviving the stage version.
The movie is better.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
First Union Corp. is offering $250 million in 8 1/8 percent subordinated notes due in 2002 at a price of 99.871 to yield 8.144 percent through First Boston.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.
*
Sprint Corp. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $500 million in debt securities and warrants.
Common  *
Broadway &amp; Seymour Inc., Charlotte, N.C., a provider of information technology to the financial services industry, is making an initial public offering of 1.3 million common shares at $8 a share through Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
*
Envirogen Inc., Lawrenceville, N.J., an enivronmental biotechnology company, has filed for an initial public offering of 1.2 million common shares through Allen &amp; Co.
*
First Commerce Corp., New Orleans, is offering one million common shares at $47.50 a share through Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc.


YELTSIN CHEERED AT CAPITOL AS HE PLEDGES ERA OF TRUST AND ASKS FOR ACTION ON AID
On a day that the United States gave Russia a set of trade incentives to boost its struggling economy, President Boris N. Yeltsin swept through official Washington like a conquering hero today and announced that he was deactivating the most potent nuclear missiles aimed at America.
Amid chants of "Boris, Boris, Boris!" reverberating through the House of Representatives chamber, Mr.
Yeltsin stirred Congress to 13 standing ovations as he vowed that the "idol of Communism" had "collapsed, never to rise again."  [ Excerpts, page A18. ]


For Watson Since 'The Shot,' It's Been 10 Years and Change
It has been exactly 10 years since Tom Watson hit "The Shot," the one that won him his only United States Open, the one that broke Jack Nicklaus's heart and the one that officially put him into the lineup of golf's all-time greats.
The most electronically replayed moment in golf history was produced by Watson on Pebble Beach's 17th hole in the final round of the 1982 championship.


In Moscow, Capitalist Wheels Roll
Just inside the main entrance of Detsky Mir, a Government-owned department store, the vast lobby has been turned into a glass-enclosed showroom for shiny new Fords.
What is striking is not the display -- there are a dozen like it in Moscow -- but that owning a foreign car has suddenly become so acceptable in Russia that even the state encourages the practice.
Aside from providing this new prestige, the influx of foreign cars along with many other imported items is helping to satisfy consumer demand, easing social tension at a time when Russian production is falling and domestic goods are in painfully short supply.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON ACCUSED OF POSTURING
A rap singer yesterday accused Gov.
Bill Clinton of posturing on racial matters "like a lot of white politicians." Appearing on NBC's "Today" program, the singer, Sister Souljah, responded to a question by saying Mr.
Clinton was racist.
"Yes, absolutely," she said.
"I think Bill Clinton is like a lot of white politicians: They eat soul food, they party with black women and play the saxophone, but when it comes to foreign policy they make the same decisions that are destructive to African people in this country and throughout the world.


Shopsmith Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Case Against Weinberger: Written in His Own Hand
At the heart of the perjury case against Caspar W. Weinberger lies a mysterious stack of small note pads, thousands of pages covered with the former Defense Secretary's nearly indecipherable handwritten scrawl.
They are Mr.
Weinberger's private diaries.
Few people apart from prosecutors and defense lawyers have read them, and already they are the subject of starkly contradictory interpretations.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CRITICS of vinyl siding decry its lack of esthetic appeal and caution that, if improperly installed, it can foster decay in the building beneath the siding. (Both criticisms also apply to aluminum siding.) But there is no denying vinyl's advantages: durability and low maintenance.
Cleaning every year or two can keep vinyl siding looking like new for years.
The simplest method is to wash it by hand, using any nonabrasive household detergent mixed with water.
Follow the manufacturer's directions for heavy-duty cleaning; generally, about one-half cup of detergent to one gallon of water is sufficient.
With a long-handled bristle brush, scrub the vinyl with the soapy solution.
Rinse by spraying with plenty of clean water.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MARKING GRADUATION AND SURVIVAL
In Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, where the streets constantly conspire against success, the more than 400 graduating seniors at Boys and Girls High are the survivors.
They have resisted the temptations, avoided the violence and heeded the pressure to stay in school when the "in crowd" drops out.
Now, as the final days of high school hurtle toward graduation next Thursday, the seniors at Boys and Girls are preparing for that ritual leap out of childhood.
A1.
PORTRAIT OF AN ARSON SUSPECT
The homeless teen-ager accused in a string of recent fires in midtown Manhattan hotels was a troubled young man, in and out of schools and foster homes in the Philadelphia area before arriving here six months ago, educators and social workers who knew him in Philadelphia said yesterday.
B3.


CHRONICLE
Can it be that PAUL McCARTNEY is turning 50?
The composer and former Beatle celebrates his half-century birthday today.
He received an unexpected surprise this week from QUEEN ELIZABETH II.
She sent him a personal check for his drive to raise 13 million pounds (about $24 million) to transform his old secondary school in Liverpool, England, into a performing arts school.
The amount was not disclosed, and a spokesman for Buckingham Palace said the the donation was not meant to be a birthday gift, and the timing was a coincidence.


Top-Drawer Mondays
SOME people like to organize the week in advance, day by day, down to the last pair of underwear.
Some even need help in doing so.
Both types might find a semainier, or chest of seven drawers, by Jean Paul Viollet, useful.
Mr.
Viollet, a French designer and cabinetmaker working in Brooklyn, makes tables, chairs and other furniture besides the two semainiers, one of which is of amboyna burl wood, the other of darker redwood burl.


On Leaving Office, Weinberger Took Along 13,000 Documents
Caspar W. Weinberger legally removed 13,000 classified documents from the Defense Department when he resigned as Secretary in 1987, according to a report made public today.
The report criticized the practice of letting departing Presidential appointees decide what to take with them and then control access to it.
The papers that Mr.
Weinberger took, and then donated to the Library of Congress, include 1.700 pages of notes from a personal diary that recorded his discussions with other Reagan Administration officials about arms sales to Iran.
Aides to Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor investigating the Iran-contra affair, discovered the documents, which provided the basis for Mr.
Weinberger's indictment on five felony charges on Tuesday.


Sprinter Not Swayed By Schedule Change
Two days before the start of the United States Olympic track and field trials here, one American 400-meter runner, Michael Johnson, was told the Olympic time schedule had been changed to help him, and another, Butch Reynolds, was told he must wait until Friday.
Johnson was an early favorite for gold medals at 200 and 400 meters, which were both scheduled for the same day in Barcelona.
The International Amateur Athletic Federation, the world governing body for track and field, announced today in London that the Olympic 200-meter final, scheduled for Aug. 5, had been put back to Aug. 6.
However, Johnson said Monday that he would run only in the 200, and he reaffirmed that decision today.


Vincent-Michael Meeting Delayed Until Next Week
After unilaterally disclosing that he had been summoned to see Commissioner Fay Vincent in the latest George Steinbrenner inquiry, Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, did not appear for the session yesterday.
The meeting was canceled because of a flap over lawyers, then rescheduled for next week when Michael is expected to appear with a different lawyer from the one he wanted to accompany him yesterday.
Michael, who disclosed Tuesday evening in Boston that Vincent had summoned him, actually had wanted to have two lawyers with him when the commissioner was to ask him if he knew anything about communications Steinbrenner might have had with club officials in the past 22 months.
But Vincent vetoed both -- David Sussman because he is the Yankees' in-house counsel and Robert Costello because he handled the lawsuit against the commissioner filed by Leonard Kleinman, the Yankees' former chief operating officer.


SCS/Compute Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Boston Digital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Executive Changes
CHILTON ENTERPRISES, New York, a publishing unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., named David S. Loewith president.
COMMONWEALTH EDISON CO., Chicago, named Thomas J. Mainan, Robert J. Manning and Donald A. Petkus senior vice presidents.


Pro Bono
*
To acquaint consumers with measures taken by tuna companies to spare dolphins from being slaughtered, a nonprofit organization, Earthtrust of Kailua, Hawaii, is introducing a print campaign to encourage consumers to look for a "Flipper Seal of Approval" on tuna cans.
One of two pro bono ads, created by Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York, carries the headline "Save dolphins. Hunt for seals."


Kelly Is Sent Down, So Barfield Can Come Up
The Yankees today demoted second baseman Pat Kelly, the player they have long considered a linchpin of their future, and shelved their rotating infield for the time being.
Kelly was sent to the Class AAA Columbus Clippers to open a roster spot for outfielder Jesse Barfield, back from an injured wrist.


Pact on Joint Space Flights
Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin agreed today to more cooperation between the world's two major spacefaring nations, including arrangements for American and Russian astronauts to fly aboard the other nation's spacecraft and for studying how Russian technology can be incorporated into the proposed international space station and other projects.
The United States and Russia decided to complete plans for an astronaut exchange, which had been agreed upon before the collapse of the former Soviet Union but has been in limbo since.
They also agreed to begin planning for a United States space shuttle to meet and dock with the Russian space station Mir in 1994 or 1995.


Suspect in Manhattan Hotel Fires Known as a Youth With a Troubled Past
The homeless teen-ager accused in a string of recent fires in midtown Manhattan hotels was known as a troubled young man, in and out of schools and foster homes in the Philadelphia area before arriving here six months ago, educators and social workers who knew him in Philadelphia said yesterday.
But many of them said they had little to remember him by because he never remained in one place very long.
And though little has been uncovered about his childhood, emerging details of his experiences in the last year begin to draw a picture of the confused and rootless life of a youth who the police say got a kind of "gratification" in setting fires.


Graduating From a High School To Go On to Be an Arts Center
"We went through five chancellors, three cultural commissioners and two Mayors to make this dream come true," Linda LeRoy Janklow said yesterday about her group's nine-year effort to turn the once crumbling, fire-gutted former High School of the Performing Arts at 120 West 46th Street into a school-and arts-center for public-school pupils.
The legendary 99-year-old building near Times Square, the inspiration for "Fame," both the movie and the television series about the High School of Performing Arts, was vacated by the school in 1984 and abandoned entirely by the Board of Education after a 1988 fire.
But last night it came alive again, newly gleaming and close to completion, as the headquarters of Arts Connection, an organization founded by Ms.
Janklow in 1979 to bring arts education into the city's schools at a time when budget cuts were stripping the schools of music and arts teachers.
Arts Connection now brings programs to 170,000 students in 80 schools each year, making it the largest arts-and-education organization in New York City.


Hunt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Express Cash International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Eilabun Journal; Israel Is Listening as the Arab Voter Is Serenaded
A heavy downpour, rare during the parched Israeli summer, lashed the hillside homes of this Galilee village as Defense Minister Moshe Arens arrived to drum up Arab support for the governing Likud Party in national elections next week.
Mr.
Arens's visit was telling evidence of the potentially critical importance of the Israeli Arab vote in the balloting next Tuesday.


Buffalo Congressman Is Planning to Retire
Representative Henry J. Nowak, the Buffalo Democrat who used his seat on the House Public Works Committee to help transform his hometown from a symbol of decay into a revitalized gateway to Canada, announced today that he would not seek a 10th term.
Mr.
Nowak is the sixth member of New York's Congressional delegation to announce his retirement this year.
Sixty-six representatives from other states have also decided to retire or have been defeated, insuring the greatest turnover since World War II.


Froemming to Undergo Heart Procedure
The National League umpire, BRUCE FROEMMING , has been hospitalized in New York and will undergo a heart procedure tomorrow, the league said.
Froemming, 52 years old, will have an angioplasty, which is usually employed to remove blockages in the area around the heart.
The league said Froemming's condition was discovered during his annual physical examination and that he was resting comfortably.
It was not known when he will be able to return. (AP)


'What? Me Marry?' Widows Say No
AS a growing number of people opt for customized family arrangements and life styles, single motherhood being the most publicized of late, another nontraditional pattern is being observed.
An increasing number of middle-aged and older widows are choosing not to remarry.
Dr.
Meredith Ruch, a clinical sociologist in Princeton, N.J., noted that more older widows have "a real hesitation" about remarrying.


A Setback for Pay-Per-View
An amendment passed last night by a Congressional committee would essentially prevent the four major leagues from pursuing pay-per-view telecasts of their championship games.
The amendment to a bill in the House Energy and Commerce Committee, co-authored by Representatives GERRY SIKORSKI of Minnesota and EDWARD J. MARKEY of Massachusetts, both Democrats, was formulated in the wake of the recent Stanley Cup finals between the Chicago Blackhawks and Pittsburgh Penguins.
The Hawks' home games were available only to subscribers who paid a premium.


Court in Mixed Ruling In Trucking Bankruptcy
In a decision that could affect many companies, a Federal appeals court in San Francisco ruled yesterday that trustees of bankrupt trucking companies could pursue limited claims against shippers that were given discounts by the truckers.
But the court closed off other claims that could have cost shippers billions of dollars.
The Interstate Commerce Commission, which has sought to limit the claims, can still ask the Supreme Court to review the decision.
But some lawyers involved in the case said yesterday that the decision, by Judge John R. Noonan Jr. of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, would be allowed to stand by the Court.


Thermwood Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Soaring Taxes Steal Cafes' Sizzle
ON a wall at Louis' Lunch here, a sign proclaims: "Prices subject to change according to customer's attitude."
But customers' attitudes may have a lot less to do with the future of Louis's hamburger prices -- and indeed Louis' itself -- than a tax increase that is making the restaurant's owner consider leaving town.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.74
5.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.63
5.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.69
3.72
5.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.80
6.82
8.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.81
7.83
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.72
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.55
6.56
7.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


International Absorbents Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Japan Had to Join in U.N. Peacekeeping Effort
To the Editor:
The Japanese parliament has at last approved Japan's participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations (front page, June 16).
It is more important than ever that your simplistic interpretation of opposition to the legislation in "Japan's Healthy Military Allergy" (editorial, June 2) not be allowed to stand unchallenged.
The Governments of Prime Ministers Toshiki Kaifu and Kiichi Miyazawa have wisely sought to begin a process that would slowly diversify and normalize Japan's security relations multilaterally.
The reason is not difficult to grasp.
The status quo in East Asia rests largely on the United States-Japan security arrangement, in which the United States provides a defense umbrella for Japan.


Home Shopping Network reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Roberto Hernandez, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Matt Merullo, catcher, to Vancouver.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Jesse Barfield, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Pat Kelly, infielder, to Columbus of the International League.


James H. Traynor, 55; Owned Car Dealership
James H. Traynor, an automotive consultant and former owner of the Traynor Motors car dealership in Fairfield, Conn., died on Monday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Bridgeport, Conn.
He was 55 years old.
Mr.
Traynor was killed when the motorcycle he was driving was struck from behind by an automobile, said a son, Scott Traynor.


CHRONICLE
The prestigious Four Freedoms Awards of the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute were presented on Saturday to a distinguished list of winners before a crowd of 900 in Nieuwerkerk, an abbey in Middelburg, the Netherlands.


Events: The Inside Story of City Hall
Seat of Power  The New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at 77th Street; (212) 873-3400.
Mary Beth Betts, associate curator of architectural collections at the society, will discuss the building of City Hall at 6:30 P.M. on Tuesday.
Tickets, $7 ($5, members).
There will be a walking tour of the City Hall area at 2 P.M. on June 28.
Tickets, $15 ($12, members).
Reservations are required: ask for extension 246.
Starting a Garden  Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.


Review/Dance; Is It a Beach or a Ballet?
A ballet studio resembled a beach when the New York City Ballet presented Jerome Robbins's "Afternoon of a Faun" on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
The work depicts an implicitly romantic meeting of two young dancers in a studio.
But when Albert Evans, making his debut in this work, stretched out on the floor, his movements were so languid that he could have been spending a lazy afternoon lolling at the seashore.


Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 18


Heilig-Meyers reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Shady Challenge
Q.
I have a mature holly tree about 25 feet tall.
But nothing grows under it, not even weeds.
Does the soil have to be reconditioned?
What plants will survive there? -- Ellen N. Phillips, Brooklyn
A.
Hollies are handsome evergreens whose dense shadow can make under-planting a challenge.
If the tree is growing well, the soil is very likely fine.
But you can make the area beneath the tree more hospitable to plants by scratching into the top inch or so a shovelful or two of dehydrated cow manure and compost mixed with several handfuls of perlite.
The manure will help enrich the soil, while the perlite will lighten it sufficiently for new plants to become established more easily.
Since the area calls for shallow-rooted, shade-tolerant species, you might try dead nettle (Lamium maculatum), European ginger (Asarum europeaum), ground ivy (Glecoma hederacea), Boston ivy (Parthenocissus tricuspidata), hardy English ivy (Hedera helix Baltica), barrenwort (Epimedium species), violets (Viola species) and small ferns.
Saving Tulips
Q.
What's your position on keeping hybrid tulips for more than a year? -- Jeffery C. Sugarman, Brooklyn
A.
It's not a great idea.
Since bulbs are herbaceous perennials, they should theoretically return.
But many of spring's most beautiful tulips are a result of intensive hybridizing, and the bulbs rarely have strength for a second year.
Left in place, they eventually revert to one of their hybrid parents, if they flower at all. (Species tulips do return, however.) To be sure of a colorful spring display, I treat my hybrid spring tulips as annuals, planting anew each fall.
--------------------
Address questions to Garden Q. &amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Trial With Link to D'Amato Begins in San Juan
Testimony began today in the trial of a Puerto Rican advertising executive charged with arranging illegal campaign contributions to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in an effort to win Federal housing grants for projects in San Juan.
Prosecutors say the defendant, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, arranged for contributions to Senator D'Amato in other people's names, though Mr.
Lopez Ballori supplied the money.
Under Federal law, contributors are limited to a maximum of $2,000.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential candidates have scheduled these television appearances this week:  Gov.
Bill Clinton
TODAY: 9-10 P.M., Cable News Network, "Larry King Live," interview and telephone question-and-answer session.
President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.


Review/Opera; 'Boheme' Greets Summer in the Park With Clear Skies and 70,000 Fans
With 25 seasons down and a new one just begun, the Metropolitan Opera's series of free park concerts must surely qualify as an entrenched summertime tradition.
And if the opening of the 26th season on Tuesday evening jumped the gun on summer by five days, who could complain?
After several years in which the company's offerings have been rained upon regularly, this year's opening had the benefit of a cool, dry, cloudless night.
The Parks Department estimated that 70,000 people staked out a place on the Great Lawn of Central Park to picnic and hear "La Boheme," a notable improvement over last year's crowds, which varied from 3,000 to 60,000.


Foodarama Supermarkets reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Hughes Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Perot Running on His Money And Against Other People's
In his unending search for elements that wreak havoc on the political system, Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire, seems to have discovered another villain: other people's money.
Mr.
Perot's undeclared bid for the Presidency has been fueled in part by widespread public disgust with the influence wielded by corporate and labor political action committees that underwrite so many election campaigns, particularly at the Congressional level.
By promising to spend $100 million or more of his own money on his campaign, Mr.
Perot holds himself out as the one candidate who will not have to genuflect before the altar of special moneyed interests.


Growing
THE winners of the All-America Rose Selections were announced last week at an elegant luncheon at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, but the old roses in the restored Cranford Rose Garden (which has 5,000 bushes blooming or getting ready to bloom) stole the show.
It was a bit like listening to earnest little girls playing Clementi sonatinas at an afternoon recital while all the concert pianists in the world were having a jam session next door -- celebrating the sheer joy of their existence.


Shoes, Cars and Pills Of the Champions
Endorsements by sports stars are stronger than ever.
This week's spate of new examples include Derrick Coleman, the 24-year-old professional basketball player who has just agreed to anchor a $10 million campaign for British Knights athletic shoes and apparel.
The contract calls for Mr.
Coleman, whose shoe size is 17, to wear BK sneakers during all New Jersey Nets games.
A British Knights spokesman confirmed that the specially made sneaks would be given to Mr.
Coleman.
Derrick Coleman averages 18.3 points a game and two pairs of sneakers a week during the regular season.


Dewey Balfa, Folk Fiddler, Is Dead at 65
Dewey Balfa, a fiddler and singer who helped create the Cajun music revival and became one of America's leading traditional musicians, died on Wednesday at Moosa Memorial Hospital in Eunice, La.
He was 65 years old and lived in Basile, La.
He died of liver cancer, said a longtime associate, Marc Savoy.


Gary Cordial, 39, Dies; Danced With the Met
Gary Cordial, a dancer with the Metropolitan Opera Ballet and a former member of American Ballet Theater, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old.
He died of AIDS, said Deborah Allton, his companion.


Sea of Suspicion Laps Closer to Brazil's Leader
With the glamour of the Earth Summit fading rapidly, President Fernando Collor de Mello now faces a corruption scandal viewed as the most serious political crisis of his two-year-old Government.
A congressional inquiry appears to be leading to indictments of the President's campaign manager and of his former personal secretary on tax evasion charges, with witnesses citing names, bribes and contracts in daily testimony.


Superintendent Is Suspended, But Keeps Job
The New York State Education Commissioner has ordered a one-month suspension for a Manhattan school district superintendent who failed to disclose a 1974 drug conviction to the city's Board of Education.
The decision is a victory for the popular superintendent, William Ubinas, who faced losing his job.
He in turn said it was "a great victory for parents in our community and for decentralization and local control."


Officer Charged With Beating Teen-Agers
A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday on charges that he pistol-whipped one teen-ager and punched another because he believed that they threw rocks at his car, forcing him to drive into a fence on the Lower East Side.
The officer, Ronald Moore, 26 years old, was indicted on second- and third-degree assault charges in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
He pleaded not guilty and was released without bail.


Value Merchants reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


Sea Gull? There's No Such Bird as That
To the Editor:
"Seagull Slaughter at Kennedy Airport" (Op-Ed, May 30), deplores the shooting of laughing gulls from the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge who cross into Kennedy International Airport airspace.
The headline, however, is inaccurate.
There is no such bird as a sea gull.
True, gulls are often called sea gulls, but many species live inland far from any ocean.


Advanced Micro in Setback
In a blow to Advanced Micro Devices Inc., a Federal district court jury ruled today that the company does not have rights to the microcode in the Intel Corporation's 80287 chip.
Microcode is software embedded in a processor that controls the execution of basic functions.
The ruling is critical to Advanced Micro because it will hinder the company's ability to develop and sell clones of succeeding generations of Intel's chips.
The 80287 is no longer a primary product for Advanced Micro, and the 80386 clone is not immediately affected because the company won the rights to the chip as part of a separate case decided in arbitration.


'They Were Wonderful Kids'
Disneyland job interviewers who visited South-Central Los Angeles found something very different from the area's televised image.
Page A20.


Sea Gull? There's No Such Bird as That; Takeoff Incident in '75
To the Editor:
"Seagull Slaughter at Kennedy Airport" (Op-Ed, May 30) by Alexander Brush of the New York City Parks Department argues that the birds should be scared away, not shot by the Department of Agriculture at the request of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
The article omits the greatest-ever loss of an aircraft to gulls at Kennedy International Airport or elsewhere.
In 1975, an Overseas National Airways DC-10-30 was destroyed as the result of ingesting several gulls into one of its engines during its takeoff roll at Kennedy Airport.
The resultant catastrophic explosive disintegration of the engine caused the wing and side of the aircraft to burn intensely even before the aircraft came to rest beyond the end of the runway.


Pathe Computer Control reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Money Market Fund Yields Continue Downward Trend
Yields offered by money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down in the latest week.
Walter S. Frank, IBC/Donoghue's chief economist, said several events in the tax-exempt sector, happening almost simultaneously, were driving yields lower.


Tyson Gives First Prison Interview
MIKE TYSON, in his first interview since going to prison for rape, said he was railroaded by a racist prosecutor and a scorned woman who agreed to have sex with him.
"I'm normal and slightly arrogant," Tyson told ED BRADLEY of CBS in an interview to be aired tonight on "Street Stories."


Kidnap? Sure, Says the Court
The Supreme Court's astonishing Mexican extradition decision upholds national power at the expense of national honor.
The United States, says the Court, may kidnap foreigners in their own countries and, over their countries' protest, drag them here for a criminal trial.
To understand how this ruling offends Mexico -- and 102 other nations the U.S. has extradition treaties with -- one need only imagine how Americans would feel if Mexico, or France or India, broke their word and snatched an American citizen off a New York street for trial abroad.


Biodynamics International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: Reporter's Notebook; The 'Burly' Yeltsin Acquires a New Kind of Stature: Major World Figure
A mere two days in Washington, and Boris N. Yeltsin already has some Americans muttering, "Mikhail who?"
This Russian-American summit meeting has in many ways been Mr.
Yeltsin's cotillion -- his debut as a world leader -- and in the minds of many here he has demonstrated that he knows all the steps mastered by the President of the old Soviet Union, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
In the process, he seems to have gained a purchase on the title that Mr.
Gorbachev inherited, but which Mr.
Yeltsin has had to earn through hard labor: that of a global figure.


Corrections
A sports picture on Saturday about the Olympic gymnastic trials referred incorrectly in some editions to the gymnast shown.
She was Shannon Miller, not Kim Zmeskal.


Alas, the Mets' Winning Streak Is Stopped at 1
Softball is back.
For the Mets, who had ended their stretch of unsound baseball with a triumph Tuesday night, there were errors, poor decisions on the base paths, inadequate pitching and an abject failure to hit in the clutch last night against the Montreal Expos.
There was also another defeat, 5-2, and another step back in what is becoming an exhausting retreat in the National League East.
The organization's marketing slogan -- Hardball is Back -- was once more a bad joke on a night of sandlot baseball sequences.


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Frederick E. Exley, 63, Author Who Told of His Own Troubles
Frederick E. Exley, whose trilogy of books about his troubled life won critical praise, died yesterday at the Edward John Noble Hospital in Alexandria Bay, N.Y.
He was 63 years old and lived in Alexandria Bay, in the Thousand Islands region.
He died after two strokes, his family said.


Rare Patent Models Assembled for Return Home


Topics of The Times; Pistol-Whipped
The State Legislature's battle over how to arm New York City police officers has ended in a compromise that actually constitutes a partial victory for union bullying.
In the 1980's, many law enforcement agencies shifted from six-shot revolvers to 9-millimeter semiautomatics that fire more rapidly and carry large clips.
New York City officers envy the Transit Police, whose chief authorized the semiautomatics as a morale booster.
Union officials have pressed the issue on supposed safety grounds: Criminals carry weapons with large clips, putting officers at a disadvantage when forced to reload.


Agreement on Casting of 'Will Rogers'
The Actors' Equity Association signed an agreement yesterday with the producers of "The Will Rogers Follies" in a dispute over minority casting in the production, which was last season's Tony Award-winning musical.
Last year, this actors' union filed a grievance with the League of American Theaters and Producers charging that the show had failed to hire minority-group actors.
Some critics had noted that the musical, about a man who had championed minorities, had none in its cast.
The producers said they had auditioned dozens of minority actors, but none were acceptable.


Bright Day for Suns: They Get Barkley
In a bold move that will have a drastic impact on the franchise, the Philadephia 76ers traded All-Star forward Charles Barkley to the Phoenix Suns yesterday.
In exchange, the 76ers received guard Jeff Hornacek, forward Tim Perry and center Andrew Lang.
It was a risky deal for the 76ers, who parted with one of the top players in the National Basketball Association.
Barkley, who is 29 years old, is a six-time All-Star who averaged 23.1 points and 11.1 rebounds per game last season.
He is a unique impact player -- a ferocious rebounder, a superb inside scorer and an excellent ballhandler whose uncanny combination of strength and agility make him one of the league's most effective and intimidating players.


Outlook Graphics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


American Greetings reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Statistical and anecdotal evidence is mounting almost daily that the recovery is gathering momentum, dispelling fears that the flameout that occurred in the second half of 1991 will reoccur.  [ D1 ]  In the latest such report, output per hour in nonfarm businesses grew at a robust annual rate of 2.7 percent last winter.  [ D2. ]
Ford and Chrysler are producing cars at a lower basic cost than their Japanese rivals, according to a new study.
But other analysts said the report may have overstated the case.  [ D1 ]


Medicaid Warning Ignites New Trenton Fiscal Crisis
Less than a day before the Republican legislative majority was to unveil a budget $1 billion smaller than the one suggested by the Governor, the fiscal planning process was thrown into yet another crisis today by a letter from the State Treasurer warning the Republicans not to count on $450 million in Federal Medicaid reimbursements.
Working hastily to close a budget gap before a joint session of the Legislature on Thursday, the Republicans responded by shifting $200 million of the shortfall to this budget year, which ends in 13 days, according to Republican legislative aides.
Deeper Cuts and Layoffs


Russia Is Given Most-Favored Status
President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin flung open the door today to increased trade and investment, signing a package of commercial agreements that brush aside barricades put up during the cold war to block commerce between the United States and Russia.
In a major trade development, the United States granted Russia most-favored-nation status in trade relations for the first time in more than four decades, giving it the same low tariffs that it gives other friendly nations.


Economic Memo; The Tea Leaves Are Ready
With the American economy about to wrap up its fifth straight quarter of expansion, the economic priests who consecrate the beginnings and ends of business cycles are likely to convene sometime this summer to declare the nation's ninth postwar recession officially over.
Many economists believe the dating committee will declare recovery to have begun as long ago as the spring of 1991.
But it is only now that the evidence of sustained upturn can be said to look persuasive enough to invite confident declaration.


Governor Deejay
On cue: three, two, one . . .
Welcome once again everybody to "Weicker in the Morning," where wacky, caustic morning deejay Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. interviews New York radio jock Don Imus, who is pretending to be Governor of Connecticut for a day, while both men are in turn interviewed live on network television by Connie Chung, playing herself, presumably, and playing along with the joke.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on Monday, about advertising for Gucci products, misstated Gucci's ownership.
Maurizio Gucci and Investcorp own 50 percent each.


THAI COMMANDERS BACK CRACKDOWN
Thailand's two most senior military commanders have insisted that the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators last month, in which scores of civilians were gunned down by Thai soldiers, was the only appropriate response to the public uprising.
In unrepentant statements issued on Tuesday by a team of Government investigators, the two commanders -- Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojananil, and Gen.
Issarapong Noonpakdee -- suggested that outside agitators were responsible for many of the deaths.


YELTSIN DESCRIBES A LIST OF MISSING
President Boris N. Yeltsin today bolstered his assertion that American prisoners of war were transferred to the Soviet Union from Vietnam, saying Russia had a list of names under investigation that included United States servicemen captured in Indochina.
His statement introduced more confusion into the debate over Americans unaccounted for from half a century of conflicts involving the former Soviet Union and its allies.
Administration officials and Congressional leaders said this was the first time they had heard of such a list.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Les Tetes Brulees
S.O.B.'s 204 Varick Street, at Houston SoHo
The rhythmic tension of three-against-two is the mainspring of music from West Africa and its offspring around the world.
Few bands anywhere wind it tighter than Les Tetes Brulees, from Cameroon via Paris, who performed last Thursday night at S.O.B.'s.
Les Tetes Brulees (the Hotheads) draw their favorite rhythm, a rapidly galloping six-beat pattern, from the bikutsi music of Cameroon's rain forests.
Traditional xylophone lines have been adapted to electric guitar, bass and keyboards, skipping and trickling and stuttering in minimalistic webs that can be dizzying.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN EXPRESS CO., New York, and Banco Santander announced a joint venture in Spain to issue co-branded Personal, Gold and Corporate cards.
CAPSTEAD MORTGAGE CORP., Dallas, agreed in principle to acquire Tyler Cabot Mortgage Securities Fund Inc., Dallas.


City's Survivors, With a Diploma to Prove It
Falasha Spruiell and Charisse Lenoir wearily circled the graffiti-covered high school track, sweating and breathing heavily.
The track season was winding down, like high school itself.
Only the championships remained -- and graduation.
For Ms.
Spruiell and Ms.
Lenoir, seniors at Boys and Girls High in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, the long, precarious obstacle course through inner-city adolescence was over.
And they had made it.


Howe? They're Still Talking
Discussions between union and management officials trying to resolve a dispute over the suspension of Yankees pitcher Steve Howe are expected to resume today.
"We spoke to the union today, but there's nothing new to report at this point," Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner, said late yesterday afternoon.


Getty Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Tokyo Stock Market Falls to Its Lowest Level Since 1986
Japanese stock prices fell sharply again today, following a steep selloff on Wednesday that pushed the Tokyo stock market down to its lowest levels since late 1986.
The rapid decline in the stock market, which had seemed to be stabilizing for two months, has prompted new concerns about the health of Japan's financial system.


Skyline Chili Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 10


Quotation of the Day
"Reason begins to triumph over madness. We have left behind the period when America and Russia looked at each other through gunsights, ready to pull the trigger at any time." -- PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN.  [ A18:4. ]


GOLF: Sports of The Times; Will Anybody See Couples at the Open?
EVER since Fred Couples was last seen wearing his Masters green jacket, it's as if he were a golf ball lost in the trees.
Of nine PGA Tour events, he entered only four, finishing tied for 22d, tied for 59th and missing the 36-hole cut twice.
Of his 12 rounds only one was under 70, a 67.
He earned a total of only $13,242 in prize money, hardly enough to pay his caddie.


Roberts Named in Civil Suit
A Miami man filed a civil suit yesterday against William Roberts of the Giants, seeking damages for a beating he said he received after he was accused by Roberts of stealing the lineman's two Super Bowl rings.
The man, Dornel Robinson, charged that Roberts and three other men pummeled him with a tire rim, handcuffs and a shovel last Friday morning.
He is seeking $4 million in compensatory damages and $1 million for false imprisonment.


2 Wrights Equal an Ellington
WHILE most people think they need more money, Richard Haas, an artist known for his illusionistic murals, thinks they need more currency.
He has designed four new bills, including $25 and $200 denominations.
They will "fill in important monetary gaps owing to inflation," Mr.
Haas said.
All four feature prominent American cultural figures instead of statesmen.
The fronts are in various colors, but green is still the dominant shade on the backs.
Mr.
Haas's banknotes were commissioned by Martin Filler, editor of Design Quarterly, the journal of Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, for the summer issue.


Drought Unites South Africa and Neighbors
Past withered cornfields and sun-cracked river beds, freight trains packed with grain have been rolling across the parched farmland of the Transvaal, carrying relief to South Africa's once hostile northern neighbors.
With southern Africa parched by the worst drought in recent memory, South Africa, with its modern harbors, railway network and highways, has emerged as the region's lifeline for grain imports, even as it struggles with its own drought problems.


New York Lets Insurers Join Forces
Approving what could be a model for troubled life insurance companies, New York State regulators gave the go-ahead yesterday to the largest merger in history of two mutual life insurance companies, allowing the creation on July 1 of the Phoenix Home Life Mutual Insurance Company, with combined assets of more than $10 billion.
Industry experts say that if successful, the merger may be copied by other mid-size mutual insurers around the country.
Many of them have been losing market share to companies that are larger or have higher financial ratings.
The companies announced their merger in December and were waiting for State Insurance Department approval.


Galaxy Foods Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aequitron Medical reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


New Jersey Budget Cuts Imperil Latino Centers
To the Editor:
New Jersey state legislators looking for cuts for the 1993 budget have targeted the Division on Women.
Many of these lawmakers mistakenly think the agency's services are duplicated by other departments.


American Air Expects to Show Loss
American Airlines, which most analysts thought would be profitable in the second quarter, said yesterday that it would probably have a loss instead because of lower fares, rising fuel prices and sluggish traffic.
Donald J. Carty, executive vice president for finance at the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, said in a statement that the carrier would "almost certainly post a loss" for the quarter, which ends June 30.


Sparta Surgical Corp. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Review/Jazz; Aching To Break The Walls Of a Tune
About half-way through Billy Harper's first set at Fat Tuesday's on Tuesday night, the tension between Mr.
Harper's compositions and the band's improvisation started to build.
Mr.
Harper, a tenor saxophonist who has been sadly overlooked for the last decade, writes complicated tunes that usually build on some sort of musical motif.
Most of them have rhythmic patterns, or a series of musical ideas that are kept constant through the piece.
When improvisers get going, and the band is itching to follow them, the pressure to break down the walls of a composition creates real drama.
Mr.
Harper's ideas are audience friendly; at times he and the trumpeter Eddie Allen engaged in curt polyphony, where Mr.
Allen, the wittier of the two, would throw out funny ideas that Mr.
Harper might or might not take up.
His pieces shift emotions quickly; from section to section, improvisers were forced not only to change musical direction, but emotional direction as well.
On the last tune of the set, Mr.
Harper and Mr.
Allen performed a repeating melody that dropped notes on cue until it nearly vanished.
And he and Mr.
Allen set up riffs to punctuate the form of a song, along with stop-time figures and other ploys.


Rax Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to April 26


Forget Road Warriors: Meet the Weary Yanks
The grueling road trip the Yankees dreaded is getting drearier and more painful as the games progress.
Though their 14-game journey is not even half over, their suitcases are getting heavier and their faces are looking longer.
Their play?
It came up short again as the Red Sox bolted to a 4-3 victory tonight at Fenway Park.
It was the third consecutive one-run defeat for the Yankees against the Red Sox and their 11th loss in the last 14 games.


Japan Had to Join in U.N. Peacekeeping Effort; The Best Chance
To the Editor:
In opposing Japanese participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions (editorial, June 2), you argue in effect that Japan should not take normal responsibilities in maintaining world peace because it cannot yet be trusted.
Some Japanese say the same.
Probably more oppose involvement in peacekeeping out of feeling that problems abroad should not be Japan's concern or, at most, should be handled with money.
The long-term danger of Japanese militarism, if there is one, is with those on the right and left in Japan who believe their country should remain apart from the outside world except for trade, with ultimately enough military power to go it alone.


Saatchi Sells Yankelovich
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., the London-based communications giant, has sold its American public opinion and market research firm, Yankelovich Skelly White/Clancy Shulman Inc., to a group of investors led by Wand Partners Inc.
The terms, announced yesterday, include an immediate cash payment of $4.6 million and an interest-bearing principal note of $4.5 million due at the end of 1997.


Vertex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


YES Clothing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cybermedic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Labor; Union Leaders Seek to Keep Auto Workers From the Arms of Perot
Already buffeted by weaknesses in the auto industry, layoffs at aerospace plants and setbacks in Washington, the United Automobile Workers Union now has a political headache: an independent Presidential candidate enticing its members to break ranks with the union's endorsed candidate.
Yet a recent survey suggested there were insurgent stirrings among union members in support of Ross Perot, and U.A.W. leaders meeting here are publicly taking steps to counter them.
They are predicting that support for Mr.
Perot will fade as he and his ideas become better known, and they are planning to publicize what they say is his history of anti-union activity.


After New Testing, Parents Worry About Levels of Lead at School
With a private laboratory test having shown dangerous levels of lead at a century-old elementary school in Greenwich Village, parents at the school are anxiously awaiting the results of tests ordered by the Schools Chancellor to determine if their children have been exposed to poisonous levels.
Results of the new tests, which were conducted yesterday, should be available today, said James S. Vlasto, a spokesman for Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.


Not Cricket, Baseball Is Off Base in London
Sticky wicket for the London Baseball Association.
After complaints that too many youngsters and too many baseballs were spoiling the pastoral calm, organized youth baseball has been kicked out of a London park.
The decision by the Corporation of London to bar games from Hampstead Heath, a sprawling grass and woodland about four miles north of central London, has left the 15-year-old league, whose members are mostly American youths, with nowhere to play next season.


Adobe Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


For Bonilla, Is It Two Strikes You're Out?
Are the Mets, who have contracted to pay Bobby Bonilla $29 million through 1996, being shortchanged by National League umpires?
It's an explosive question.
It's a question the league's supervisor of umpires termed "ridiculous." It's a question Bonilla, the right fielder for the Mets, refuses to address publicly.


Brown-Forman reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Dance; An Old Friendship Fraying
Kristen Caputo is a musically ambitious choreographer.
Each work offered by her company, Kristen Caputo Dance, on Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church had live accompaniment.
The varied scores were evidence of an eclectic taste.
But Ms.
Caputo proved less far ranging as an inventor of steps.
Her works were often based upon glidings, twistings and arm wavings.


Digging Out and Digging In; Debate Over Dredging Sharpens as Port Channels Deepen in the Kill Van Kull
The Rev.
John H. Walsted tiptoed around a clicking seismograph in the sanctuary of his church, Christ Episcopal on Staten Island.
Since the blasts began in November, granite blocks have shifted; a fissure opened in the majestic church's north wall; a crack split the belly of the baby Jesus in a stained glass window too precious to replace.
All this, he believes, has rumbled up from work on a waterway 3,500 feet from his 88-year-old church -- part of a dredging project billed as vital to the economy of the New York region.
Like most dredging projects, this one is as massive as it is mundane: workers are blasting at the bedrock in the Kill Van Kull and Newark Bay to deepen the shipping channels from 35 to 40 feet.


Steinbrenner Wasn't Set Up
THE word of the week is "squirm," as in Commissioner Fay Vincent is making George Steinbrenner squirm.
It's all over television and radio, and it's in the newspapers: Fay Vincent is making George Steinbrenner squirm.
The Steinbrenner camp believes this.
When it learned that Vincent had postponed announcing the owner's return to the Yankees next season, its reaction was predictable: The commissioner had set up Steinbrenner by holding onto information he had, then leaking it at a time that would make the owner squirm.


Where Olympians Once Stayed, Bosnians Are Living Under Siege
In the two months that Sarajevo has been under siege by Serbian nationalist troops, a still more pressing drama has been developing, mostly unwitnessed by outsiders, in a high-rise suburb of the city that was originally built to serve as the athletes' village for the 1984 winter Olympics.
Dobrinja, less than four miles from the city center, has been the site of a siege within a siege, a suburb of about 35,000 people that has been surrounded by Serbian troops, tanks, and artillery for more than 10 weeks.


HEI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


2 Charged With Making Up Traffic Tickets
A New York City traffic-enforcement agent and a man who resigned as an agent last year were arrested yesterday and charged with fabricating traffic tickets, in a ruse to cover up times when they should have been working but were not, officials said.
The agent, Arthur Rosenzweig, 28 years old, was accused of writing five "phantom" summonses that were filled in and sometimes submitted to supervisors but not left on the windshield of a car, the Department of Investigation said.
In some cases the cars or trucks did not exist and in others they were parked legally.


Yeltsin Speaks, and Congressional Wall Tumbles
With oratory that thrilled even Congressional critics of aid, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia appeared today to have virtually eliminated an important obstacle to passage of an aid program for the former Soviet republics.
After his speech at a joint meeting of Congress interrupted by standing ovations, legislative leaders said they thought that Mr.
Yeltsin had persuaded even skeptical lawmakers of his determination to help find missing American servicemen, and had thus won vital votes for the American portion of a $24 billion international assistance package for former Soviet republics.


CSP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


INSIDE
Bullet Mystery in Newark
The bullet that wounded a 17-year-old car-theft suspect in Newark was not fired by a standard-issue police weapon.
The finding deepened the mystery surrounding the shooting.
Page B1. 2 Hostages Leave Beirut
Two Germans, the last Westerners known to be held, were freed.
Bonn said no deal had been made.
Page A3.
U.S. and Mexico Back Off
Mexican officials said Washington promised not to kidnap criminal suspects in Mexico.
Mexico said it would not restrict drug agents.
Page A3.
The Arab Vote in Israel
Israeli politicians are courting Arab voters, who may prove pivotal in the national election next week.
Page A4. 5 Years, One Fare Increase
A plan to increase mass transit ridership in the New York region offers an array of discounts and limits subway and bus fare increases.
Page B1.


Heroux Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Peter Murphy  Roseland Ballroom 239 West 52d Street Manhattan
At Roseland on Friday night, the British singer Peter Murphy set about proving just how deep he really was.
The show opened with a projection of Mr.
Murphy's most recent album cover, "Holy Smoke" (Beggars Banquet/RCA), onto a screen at the front of the stage.
An invisible keyboardist played a surreal instrumental introduction.
Mr.
Murphy stepped in front of the screen, and as the band struck up "You're So Close," from "Holy Smoke," he began a weird little interpretive dance.
He held his arms straight out, crucifix-style, and wiggled them like waves.
He stuck out his chest like a ship's figurehead.
He moved his face in and out of the light like a mechanical fish.
If Mr.
Murphy hadn't seemed so deadly serious, he might have made a very funny Monty Python skit.
As it was, Mr.
Murphy became increasingly pretentious as the show wore on.
The former lead singer of Bauhaus, the early-80's group whose morose theatrics are generally regarded as the apotheosis of the goth movement, Mr.
Murphy has allowed his music and stage presence to lapse into a pale imitation of his former self.
His band played an edgeless, unremarkable brand of dance-pop, with occasional bursts of guitar distortion; his lyrics dragged out such lame lovespeak as "Roll yourself away from me/Unveil me from your layers." Even Mr.
Murphy's bottom-range baritone seemed more cartoonish than chilling.


Worldwide Collections Fund reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


VSI Enterprises reports earnings for Year to March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about Gov.
Bill Clinton's appearance on MTV rendered the name of the chairman and chief executive of MTV Networks incorrectly in some copies.
He is Tom Freston.


Ford and Chrysler Outpace Japanese in Reducing Costs
Ford and Chrysler have increased the efficiency of their factories and workers so much in recent years that their basic cost of producing a car is now less than that of their Japanese rivals, according to a study published today.
Auto analysts have long recognized the productivity improvements at the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation.
But the assumption within the industry has been that a production-cost gap remains between Detroit's second- and third-largest auto makers and the Japanese car companies, especially the Toyota Motor Corporation, generally regarded as the low-cost producer worldwide.


Stork Club Memories
THE small table lamp of the 1940's supper clubs is making a comeback.
Although Philippe Starck's version (left) has a retro look, it is thoroughly modern in construction.
It has an injected molded plastic base and a clip-on plastic translucent shade instead of all those metal, crystal and fabric lamp parts of days gone by.
Mr.
Starck's nightclub lamp made its debut in 1990 on the tables of the dining balcony at the Paramount Hotel on West 46th Street in Manhattan.
The prototype lamp played no more than a supporting role in his design for the hotel's interiors.
But now it is going solo, under the model name Miss Sissi.
It is manufactured by Flos and sells for $99.95 at Lee's Studio, 1755 Broadway (56th Street).


Ryan-Murphy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


COMPANY NEWS: High-Tech Darwinism; Evolution of the Mouse: Now It Comes With Ears
When the computer scientist Douglas Engelbardt invented the computer mouse in the 1960's as a pointing device for his pioneering information retrieval system, he certainly had no idea that one day three decades later someone would create one with ears.
But today mouse mania is getting out of hand.
Yesterday, Logictech Inc., the Fremont, Calif., company that is the world's largest mouse maker, introduced a version of its Kidz Mouse for the Macintosh.
While the mouse originally got its name because it reminded users of the animal, the latest device takes that to extremes.
Kidz Mouse, which is intended for use by children, is smaller than most palm-size conventional mice and has a pointed nose -- but not whiskers -- and two button "ears."


Amoros Is Placed on Respirator
SANDY AMOROS, a hero of the Brooklyn Dodgers' 1955 World Series victory, was on a respirator in the intensive care unit of Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami yesterday after being stricken with pneumonia.
He was listed in serious condition.


A Classical View of the Hudson
IN 18th-century England, no ramble through a garden or park was considered complete without a stop to enjoy the view from a belvedere.
Now the Battery Park City Authority in Manhattan has built its own classical belvedere (right) in its new eight-acre Hudson River Park, just north of the World Financial Center.
Opened earlier this month, it is already a popular place from which to enjoy views of the Hudson and the city; and it doubles as a small stage.


AUSTRIANS RALLY AGAINST NAZI PAST
In one of Austria's largest demonstrations against its Nazi past, tens of thousands of people gathered tonight beneath the same balcony from which Hitler proclaimed Austria's annexation to hear Elie Wiesel, the Holocaust historian, urge them to look to the future.
"I know that in 1938 this Hero's Square was filled with more people," Mr.
Wiesel told a crowd estimated at 60,000, most of whom were young people.
"Your forbears were more exuberant, more triumphant and jubilant than you are. However you are here and you are sending a message to the whole world that that era is over -- the era of falsehood, lies and deceptions. You are telling the older generation that you want to live in truth."


G.M. Names President For Its Japan Division
The General Motors Corporation has named J. Michael Durrie president of GM Japan, handing him one of the toughest assignments at the world's largest auto maker: expand sales in Japan roughly tenfold in the next decade.
In an interview from a hotel in Tokyo, Mr.
Durrie, who is 54 years old, conceded that he faced formidable obstacles.
The cars that General Motors sells in Japan -- including the Cadillac Seville, Pontiac Grand Am, Chevrolet Camaro and Buick Park Avenue -- carry a premium of between 20 and 50 percent over their price in the United States because of the costs of transportation, inspection and distribution.


BUSH AND CONGRESS REACH AN ACCORD ON AID FOR CITIES
After a month of hard-nosed bargaining and political posturing, White House and Congressional negotiators agreed today on a $1.3 billion urban aid package including loans and grants for summer jobs for youths and disaster relief for people whose homes and businesses were destroyed in the Los Angeles riots.
The compromise fell far short of what the nation's big-city mayors and some Democratic lawmakers were seeking, and it also excluded law-enforcement and investment programs that President Bush wanted passed quickly in the aftermath of the riots.


Furiously Carves Out Another Victory Notch
In baseball, he would be called the "phenom," the rookie who unpacks and starts hitting home runs.
In tennis, "the whiz kid," the teen-ager who shows up and starts hitting aces.
In horse racing, "the next Secretariat," the colt who arrives, runs and wins -- all the time.
The only question being: Exactly how good is he?


Job Opportunities Bring Out Young People (and Their Idealism) in Riot Area
When Disneyland came two weeks ago to the First A.M.E.
Church in South-Central Los Angeles to hold interviews for 200 summer jobs, it was a good-will gesture born of the riots.
When more than 600 young men and women, many in coats and ties or dresses, showed up, the Disney officials were taken aback.


AT HOME WITH: Don Henley; In His Mulholland Drive Wilderness
Don Henley, the rock star and environmentalist, ambles through the urban wilderness he calls a backyard at his home in the hills along Mulholland Drive, rhapsodizing about the creatures that inhabit his eight-and-a-half-acre estate.
"I've got a family of red-backed eagles nesting up there," he said, gesturing toward a towering Italian cypress as the birds, Hollywood fashion, began to flutter about like stars.
"There's a family of owls, and quails, lizards, doves, big fat squirrels, deer, coyote and a good crop of rattlesnakes living here."


Topics of The Times; Weicker in the Morning
State and local politicians discovered radio and TV call-in shows long before Ross Perot did, but none exploit them with more flair than Gov.
Lowell Weicker of Connecticut.
Every few weeks Mr.
Weicker calls in to a New York City drive-time radio show, delighting commuters who might otherwise be fuming about whatever that man in the State House had done to them lately.
The show's host is Don Imus, a Connecticut resident himself who has opinions on everything.
His "Imus in the Morning" program on station WFAN is four-plus hours of gab and interviews, a perfect outlet for the plain-spoken Governor.
They've become so friendly that Mr.
Weicker proposed swapping roles -- which they did yesterday.


Mexicans Mollified Over Drug Ruling
Mexico and the United States backed away from a diplomatic confrontation today when Mexican officials said they had received assurances from Washington that there would be no more kidnappings of criminal suspects from their territory.
In Washington, the Bush Administration continued to avoid any explicit promise to refrain from such kidnappings, while the State Department repeated its pledge to extend "full respect for the sovereign rights and prerogatives" of Mexico.


Guilty Plea in Theft Of Graduate Funds
The former director of the Graduate Division of the New Jersey Institute of Technology pleaded guilty today to stealing more than $326,000 in financial aid from the school and from students, the State Attorney General, Robert J. Del Tufo, said.
Dino S. Sethi, director of the division from 1982 to 1990, admitted in Superior Court that he stole grant money over five years, stashing checks written in students' names into more than 50 bank accounts in 13 states and in Switzerland, Mr.
Del Tufo said.
He said Mr.
Sethi, 42 years old, of Brooklyn, also admitted taking $46,000 from 29 students by forcing them to give back up to one-half of their tuition assistance grants.


Irish Voters Ask, Are We to Be Truly European?
For the first time since Ireland became independent 70 years ago, there is a sense, on the eve of a referendum on the Treaty on European Union, that this country is about to make a decision affecting not only its own destiny but also Europe's.
Voters in Denmark, a relatively rich country, have rejected the treaty.
If Ireland, one of the European Community's poorest members, also rejects it on Thursday, there is ample opinion that the vote will be a fatal blow.


Inquiry on Fires Considers Idea of a 2d Arsonist
In the wake of the arrest of a homeless teen-ager on Tuesday in six of a dozen fires in mid-Manhattan hotels over 10 days, investigators yesterday were looking into the possibility that a second arsonist set at least two of the other six fires, a senior police official said yesterday.
The Chief of New York City Detectives, Joseph R. Borrelli, said it was possible that the teen-ager, Raymond C. Dunford, a 17-year-old who moved to New York from Philadelphia, was involved in four other fires, but Chief Borrelli acknowledged that Mr.
Dunford was in jail on June 10, when two fires were set at two different hotels.


Raphael Totah; Executive, 81
Raphael Totah, a retired international rice trader and former executive of the Continental Grain Company in New York, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan and Southampton, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Vasiliki Johnides, 92; Ran L.I. Restaurant
Vasiliki Johnides, who founded a Long Island restaurant popular with food critics and celebrities, died on Tuesday at Southampton Hospital in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Johnides, known as Mama Bessie, celebrated her 92d birthday the day before.
She lived in Sagaponack and died of a stroke and heart attack, her family said.


Nobility Homes reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


M.T.A. Plan: One Fare Rise Over 5 Years
The head of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday proposed a broad new financial plan that would raise the fare on New York City's subway and buses only once in the next five years, while offering an array of new discounts.
Under the plan by the M.T.A. chairman, Peter E. Stangl, subway and bus fares would probably increase 25 cents, to $1.50, in 1994.
The authority would also try to attract new riders with a monthly pass allowing unlimited trips for subway and bus passengers.
And it would offer discounts for commuters who take a bus and the subway, paying two fares, and for suburban commuters who ride Metro-North or Long Island Rail Road and then take a subway or bus in the city.


Review/Television; Hardship and Change in the Arctic
The heat getting to you?
Try "Survive Siberia." The final program in ABC's "World of Discovery" series, at 8 tonight, makes it chillingly clear that survival is not easy up there in the Arctic, where 58 degrees below zero is normal in the dead of the long winter.
The climax of this steadily interesting hourlong documentary focuses on the efforts of a nuclear-powered icebreaker, the Arctic, to help an icebound food convoy break through to the port town of Pevek, whose people depend on the sea as their highway for vegetables and fruits.


I Came. I Saw. I Bathed.
IN the second century A.D., Romans were
very
clean.
As Fikret Yegul, an architectural historian, writes in a new book, "Baths and Bathing in Classical Antiquity" (Architectural History Foundation and M.I.T. Press, $65), the Romans used 300 gallons of water per person a day in that era; New York City's daily per-capita consumption in 1990 was a spartan 192 gallons.
Mr.
Yegul points out that the public baths of ancient Greece, Rome, Asia Minor and North Africa were significant cultural institutions.
During the Roman Empire, people went there to exercise, read in the libraries, converse and soak.
The grander ones, like the Thermae of Diocletian in Rome (right), built in A.D. 305, had soaring arches, domes and glittering mosaic tile.


Home Video
The Cost of Hits
"People used to take chances on unknown movies or films that never saw the inside of a movie theater, but no more," said Steve Gabor, a video dealer since 1979 and the owner of three Odyssey Video stores in Los Angeles.
"Now it's just the hits."
Now more than ever, it seems, dealers can't wait for big films to finish in the theaters so they can get them into the stores.
To meet the constant demand, the studios and video distributors are beginning to provide big titles more quickly than they used to.
There is already speculation about "Batman Returns" from Warner Brothers, which opens in theaters tomorrow.
Studios usually don't announce video plans until well into theater runs, but reports are circulating that the new Warner movie will be released on tape in November.
Warner has no comment.
Hit fever favors chain stores, which are stocking many more copies.
Mr.
Gabor said: "In the old days within a couple of miles in a big city you'd find 300 'J. F. K.'s.' Today there are 800."
Years ago, he said, his stores stocked dozens of new titles a month, of all kinds of films.
Now, because he has to buy more copies of a few hits, his selection has sharply narrowed.
"It's just not as exciting as it was," he said.
Restored Early Silents
The first four titles in a series of newly restored silent films are available from Milestone Film and Video, a New York distributor.
Together the four make up a sort of travelogue of exotic corners of the earth.
Often the action is fast and furious.
"Grass," made in 1925, is a documentary of a trek across Arabia and Persia by 50,000 nomads in search of fodder for their hundreds of thousands of animals.
Man and beast stream across rivers and clamber up and down mountains in one long and stupendous brawl with the unforgiving terrain.
The film makers, cheerful observers throughout, are Merian C. Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack, who went on to make "King Kong."
Another title in the series is "Tabu" (1931), a dramatic feature about mysticism in the South Seas.
The film, which won an Academy Award for cinematography, is by F. W. Murnau ("Nosferatu") and Robert Flaherty ("Nanook of the North").
The third film is "90degrees South," an account of Capt.
Robert Scott's fatal march to the South Pole.
The documentary, made in 1913, has been restored by Britain's National Film Archive.
The fourth title is the photographer Edward S. Curtis's "In the Land of the War Canoes" (1914), a drama about the Kwakiutl Indians of Vancouver, British Columbia.
Information: (212) 865-7449. NEW VIDEO RELEASES
The Addams Family  1991.
Paramount. $94.95.
Laser disk, $34.95. 2 hours.
Closed captioned.
PG-13.
There's not much plot, but little is needed in Barry Sonnenfeld's spirited, visually adventurous movie based on the Charles Addams drawings and the 1960's television series.
Anjelica Huston makes a slinky Morticia, mistress of the apple-pie-normal house of doom, and Raul Julia is an elegant Gomez.
But as adept as the performances are, the mission is little more than to create a look and set up the next gag.
That understood, the casting is ingenious, the design droll and the camera tricks dazzling in a "lavish, funny revival that goes well beyond the limits of its original sources" (Janet Maslin).
Europa, Europa  1991.
Orion. $79.98. 1:55.
German and Russian with English subtitles.
CC.
R.
A quick-witted Jewish youngster stays alive during the Holocaust by passing himself off as a Nazi.
Agnieszka Holland's film is the true story of Solomon Perel (Marco Hofschneider), whose impersonation was so convincing he was made a member of the Hitler Youth.
In a way, though, the lad's survival is too much the stuff of rousing movie adventure.
While certain episodes sustain the horror in original ways, a blithe directorial style often makes truth seem stranger than fiction in settings that look more suited to a French romance.
The result is a "less ironic or complex film than must have been intended" (Maslin).
Let Him Have It 1992.
New Line. $89.95. 1:35.
CC.
R.
Peter Medak's eerie, meticulous film looks at the life of Derek Bentley (Chris Eccleston), a slow-witted teen-ager who despite a jury's recommendation of mercy was executed as an accessory to murder in Britain after World War II.
Taken into a gang by his younger friend Chris (Paul Reynolds), a streetwise hoodlum who pulled the trigger but was too young to be executed, Derek takes to a life of crime despite the efforts of a loving father (Tom Courtenay).
As he did in "The Krays," Mr.
Medak "contrasts the obliviousness and overprotectiveness of parents with the temptations faced by their children" (Maslin).
Kuffs  1991.
MCA/Universal. $94.98.
LD, $34.98. 1:42.
CC.
PG-13.
Christian Slater and his smirk, so devastating to teen-agers, are all that can be said about this film expressly turned out for the star's fans and others who like big guns that fire lots of bullets.
As George Kuffs, Mr.
Slater helps clean up a crime-ridden San Francisco neighborhood.
That amounts to little but gratuitous violence and hip behavior in an exercise that "comes to resemble the bastard child of 'Miami Vice' and an especially bad movie of the week" (Caryn James).
OLD TITLES AT $19.98
Next week MGM/UA is to release older titles at $19.98 each.
Here are some of them.
None are rated or closed captioned.
THE SEARCH.
After World War II, a mother (Jarmila Novotna) searches for her lost son (Ivan Jandl) and finds him in the care of an American soldier (Montgomery Clift). 1948. 1:45.
THE TRAIN.
As a French Resistance fighter, Burt Lancaster heads off a trainload of stolen art being transported to Germany by a Nazi, Colonel Von Waldheim (Paul Scofield). 1965. 2:13.
THE BADLANDERS.
In Delmer Daves's remake of "The Asphalt Jungle," a gang of outlaws (Alan Ladd, Ernest Borgnine, et al.) schemes to steal gold and rob one another. 1958. 1:23.
THE FUGITIVE KIND.
A drifter shakes up the womenfolk in a small Southern town.
Marlon Brando, Anna Magnani and Joanne Woodward star in Sidney Lumet's adaptation of Tennessee Williams's "Orpheus Descending." 1959. 2:15.
ALL FALL DOWN.
In William Inge's screenplay of the James Leo Herlihy novel, Warren Beatty is the self-centered rake with a worshipful little brother (Brandon de Wilde) who eventually outgrows him. 1962. 1:50.
THE GALLANT HOURS.
James Cagney stars in Robert Montgomery's documentary-style biography of Adm.
William Frederick (Bull) Halsey from the World War II. 1960. 1:50.
THE PRIZE.
As an unlikely American writer, Paul Newman goes to Stockholm to receive a Nobel Prize and gets mixed up in a spy plot.
Edward G. Robinson, Elke Sommer and Leo G. Carroll also star. 1964. 2:16.
TOMORROW IS FOREVER.
As a soldier deformed by war, Orson Welles returns unrecognizable to a wife (Claudette Colbert) who, thinking him dead, has remarried. 1946. 1:45.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Promises to Trim 100,000 Jobs
Gov.
Bill Clinton pledged today to eliminate at least 100,000 Federal employees by attrition in eight years if he is elected President.
He said the move would streamline government and make it more responsive.
In a speech to 5,000 delegates at a convention of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, the Arkansas Governor put the blame for government paralysis at the door of mid-level Federal workers, not the employees of state and local governments.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Little Joe y la Familia
S.O.B.'s 204 Varick Street, at Houston SoHo
After more than 30 years of performing and 40 albums, capped by a 1992 Grammy Award, Little Joe y la Familia are by no means newcomers.
But they performed at Tuesday night's New Music Seminar at S.O.B.'s as part of the seminar's Latin Agenda series of Spanish-language rock showcases.
Little Joe y la Familia are luminaries of Tejano music, a modernized version of what's called Tex-Mex music in Texas and norteno in Mexico; Little Joe and his band are Texans.
Tejano is Mexican-American border music, drawing primarily from country-and-western music and from Mexican waltzes and polkas, while borrowing far and wide.
In the course of his set, Little Joe (whose last name is Hernandez) sang his own material, some of it with lyrics in both English and Spanish, along with a Waylon Jennings hit and, as a finale, "The Star-Spangled Banner." His guitarist could dispense country twang, but also sounded like a hard-rocker in one song and Carlos Santana in another.


Kettle Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Grateful Dead Giants Stadium East Rutherford, N.J.
Even during the most flaccid Grateful Dead show, there are moments worth waiting for.
At Giants Stadium on Sunday, in the first of two sold-out shows, the band spent most of the time playing soggy, waterlogged music.
Then, during the rest of the show, the rhythm section and the lead guitarist Jerry Garcia arose from their deep sleep, and those moments came where improvisation, the group's distinct sound and the audience all melded.
The Dead's two drummers, aided by synthesizers, had just performed a duet.
Using speakers placed all around the stadium, the pair, Mickey Hart and Bill Kreutzmann, moved chunks of sound around the stadium, phasing it from side to side.
Lights coming from the stage sent patterns swirling randomly against the human backdrop.
It was like coming across a lighthouse spinning away mindlessly on a dark night; the music and the lights created a mechanical atmosphere where the machine, once started, wouldn't stop.


Topics of The Times; History in a Footnote
In today's upside-down world, what would have been major news not many months ago is often relegated to the bottom of a column-long report.
The talk of Jerusalem this week was Mikhail Gorbachev, who arrived as a welcome guest to receive a peace prize and two honorary degrees.
The riveting footnote was this: At a formal dinner given by the President of Israel, the former Soviet leader shook the hand of Natan Sharansky.
Mr.
Sharansky endured years of solitary confinement in the Soviet gulag.
His persecution began in 1973, when he applied for an exit visa to Israel.
He was interrogated for 16 months; a K.G.B. team compiled 50 volumes of "evidence" to prove he was a U.S. spy.
He was sentenced to 13 years, and served 9.
No prisoner of conscience more symbolized Communism's cruelty.


Corrections
A report yesterday in the Pop Life column about an AIDS benefit at Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, Manhattan, misstated the day of the event.
It will be held at 10 P.M. on Saturday, not Friday.


A Supermarket Of Sounds
THIS weekend Manhattan turns into a music supermarket.
Its streets and avenues, clubs and stages will overflow with bands of every size, shape, model and flavor: garage bands, rap bands, folk bands and country bands.
There are industrial beats, avant-garde structures, noisy guitars and quiet voices; bands made up of 20-year-olds, 70-year-olds, natives and visitors.
They come from New York, Los Angeles, Memphis, Jamaica, Japan, Finland, New Zealand and hundreds of other places on the map.
The musical consumer can have a field day shopping for sounds this weekend.
The full range of sonic possibilities is encased under Manhattan's roof.


Inkling of Future: Astros Sign Nevin
PHIL NEVIN, the No. 1 pick in baseball's amateur draft, took a lucrative break from working out with the United States Olympic team yesterday to sign a contract with the Houston Astros.
The third baseman from California-Fullerton reportedly received a $700,000 signing bonus.
Contract terms were not announced.
"I'm playing with the U.S. Olympic team and I didn't want any distractions, so I'm glad to get this done," Nevin said.
This past regular season, Nevin hit .391 with 20 home runs and 71 runs batted in.
He then led his team to the final of the College World Series, where the Titans lost to Pepperdine.
BILL WOOD, the Astros' genenral manager, said Nevin would be likely to get his first pro experience in the Astros' instructional league after he has finished playing in the Olympics. (AP)


Victim's Aunt Seeks Ouster Of 6 Officers
The aunt of a Newark teen-ager who was wounded after emerging from a stolen car here June 9 appealed today for the dismissal of six police officers who were suspended after the incident, arguing that they tried to cover up their involvement.
At the same time, leaders of the local police union called for the reinstatement of the six, contending that they had committed no crimes.
Each side seized on yesterday's disclosure that the bullet that critically wounded the youth, Howard Caesar, 17 years old, was not fired from a police-issue gun.
Mr.
Caesar's aunt, Edna Williams, charged that a police cover-up of the shooting was deepening and appealed to Gov.
Jim Florio to appoint a special prosecutor in the case.
The union leadership argued that the six officers' only wrongdoing was a violation of police department regulations about filing reports.


Pentagon Takes Over Inquiry on Pilots
In the latest development in a scandal that has embarrassed the Navy and its leadership, the Pentagon today took over the investigation into the assault of 26 women at a convention of naval aviators in Las Vegas, Nev., last year.
Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d asked the Defense Department's chief investigator, the Pentagon inspector general, to review the Navy's inquiry into the incident and to provide its own judgment of what occurred at the convention.


Calipari of UMass Signs 4-Year Deal
JOHN CALIPARI, who coached Massachusetts to a 30-5 record last season, yesterday signed a four-year contract with the school.
The pact, worth up to $700,000, increases Calipari's annual base pay from $77,000 to $120,000, school officials said.
Other benefits, including revenue from a summer camp and broadcast deals, could lift Calipari's annual pay to $175,000, the coach said. (AP)


Infertility Chain: The Good and Bad in Medicine
For couples stranded in the desert of infertility, Dr.
Geoffrey Sher's clinic in the green hills 10 miles north of San Francisco is an oasis.
People considering in-vitro fertilization and other advanced treatments can leaf through an album filled with photos of babies conceived through Dr.
Sher's program, Pacific Fertility Center.
"To all our miracle workers at P.F.C. . . .," wrote one grateful patient in the album.


At the Movies
In 1946, partly to lure tourists back to the Riviera after World War II, the French Government and the film industry held a film festival at Cannes.
The rest is history.
That history will be celebrated at the Museum of Modern Art, beginning today with the opening of "Cannes 45 Years: Festival of International Film." The series, which runs through Oct. 22, consists of 140 films, from classics to rarely seen works that had their premieres at the Cannes International Film Festival.


Farish Is New Churchill Downs Chairman
WILLIAM S. FARISH, a Kentucky thoroughbred breeder, yesterday was selected as chairman of Churchill Downs during a meeting of the track's board of directors.
He succeeds WARNER L. JONES Jr., who did not seek re-election to the post he had held since 1984. (AP)


Parents Say Boy Shot on Bus Is Improving
The 6-year-old boy who was shot in the head last week while riding a school bus here is recovering but is not speaking in complete sentences and has not talked about the shooting, his parents said today.
"I thank God for this miracle that my son is surviving and for the way he has touched our lives," the boy's mother, Mercedes Escobar, said at the parents' first news conference.


Police Investigative Unit Is Charged With Laxness
The Internal Affairs Division of the New York City Police Department, created to fight police corruption amid scandal two decades ago, now finds itself an object of criticism about how well it has done its job.
Since 1972, when the Knapp Commission recommended that the department centralize its internal policing efforts in a unit modeled after an agency of the Internal Revenue Service, Internal Affairs has become a model for other police departments trying to root out corruption and misconduct.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday with an article about a televised policy broadcast by Gov.
Bill Clinton misidentified the scene shown.
It was a news conference in Washington, not the taping of the broadcast in Pittsburgh.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday about the coming Israeli elections misidentified the location of Nazareth.
It is in Israel, not the West Bank.


Bringing Madison Avenue Polish to Bush's Campaign Ads
MARTIN PURIS, the president and chief executive of the Ammirati &amp; Puris agency and the man who heads George Bush's media team, is not quite sure how he is going to create a winning advertising strategy for the President's re-election campaign.
"George Bush is not perfect," Mr.
Puris said during a recent interview in his agency's sleek offices at 100 Fifth Avenue.
"He's made mistakes. But we have to make people understand that he cares very much about this country. We have to dispel the myth that he is only concerned with foreign affairs."


Diner's Journal
Sfuzzi Downtown
The chain of kinetic restaurants called Sfuzzi, with outlets in Southampton, Dallas, Washington, Boston, Denver and other cities as well as near Lincoln Center, has dropped anchor at the riverfront World Financial Center.
Facing the marina in the spectacular Winter Garden atrium, it attracts diners from the bibulous after-work crowd at the sprawling office-and-retail complex.
Sfuzzi downtown is not so airy or comfortable as the multi-tiered uptown restaurant.
If you dine outside in the busy atrium cafe, the echoes can be noisy, especially if an event is in progress.
Inside is boisterous and slightly cramped, with conversations rebounding off the artfully bordered wooden walls.


Yes, He Does Windows


The Rev. Daniel J. O'Hanlon, 73; Jesuit Theologian and Ecumenist
The Rev.
Daniel J. O'Hanlon, a Jesuit priest who was a nationally known theologian and ecumenical leader, died on Wednesday at Highland Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
He was 73 years old and lived in Berkeley, Calif.
His death resulted from multiple injuries suffered Tuesday night when he was hit by a car while crossing a street in Berkeley, said a friend and colleague, the Rev.
John Huesman.


Critic's Notebook; 'Chimes at Midnight,' Welles's Own Shakespeare
As an actor and a director, on stage and in films, Laurence Olivier set piercingly high standards for intelligence and craft and created his own grand classical traditions.
Sometimes, though, the standards and traditions blinded the critics, if not the public.
Whether Olivier intended to or not, the English-speaking theater's last great actor-manager had a bulldozer's way of demolishing all opposition.
Among those left behind in the rubble and dust: Orson Welles.
Olivier's elegant and stately screen adaptations of "Henry V" (1944), "Hamlet" (1948) and "Richard III" (1956) had an overwhelming impact on the taste and imagination of their day.
They are the principal reasons why it has taken so long for us to recognize the exuberance and liberating mastery of Welles's Shakespearean cinema.
By this I mean his "Othello" (1952), which was rereleased here in a restored version in March, and now the dazzling "Chimes at Midnight" (1966), opening at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in Manhattan today for a two-week engagement in a fine new print.  (The controversial Welles adaptation of "Macbeth," released in 1950 after much fiddling with the soundtrack, is not at the moment available.)


Pop/Jazz; JVC Inspires Competition But Not With Its Classics
Every year when the JVC Jazz Festival rolls into Manhattan, many music aficionados complain and imagine that they could do better.
There has been a tradition of what have been called rump festivals, alternative shows, ever since 1960, when Charles Mingus, Max Roach and Allen Eager pulled away at Newport and started their own jazz festival.
This year's JVC Festival has brought forth two other festivals, and combined with the JVC behemoth opening today, they offer an extraordinary bounty.
And that's not counting the exceptional jazz-and-dance film festival beginning today at Film Forum.
One could easily go broke and deaf, and not sleep for the next week or so.
For George Wein, who programs the JVC Festival, this is all old news.
Mr.
Wein has often graciously included people who were on the fringes.
But for JVC the response has almost always been unanimous: audiences don't come out for musical events outside the mainstream.
This year's festival is his safest in years.


SOCIALIST CHOSEN FOR HELM IN ITALY
After 10 weeks of political wrangling and spreading financial scandal, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro asked the deputy leader of the Socialist Party today to try to form a majority coalition in Parliament.
The nomination of the Prime Minister-designate, Giuliano Amato, a 54-year-old law professor, was an important step in bringing Italy out of its governmental crisis.
But it is not yet clear when he will complete negotiations with the country's 16 political parties on a government line-up, which will then have to secure a confidence vote in the volatile Parliament.


Morgan's 66 Leads Wave Of Low Scores at Open
For Gil Morgan, a 45-year-old doctor of optometry in his 15th United States Open, today's 66 was the lowest round he has ever shot in the Open.
It also was the the lowest round ever shot by any golfer at Pebble Beach in the Open.
The six-under-par round by Morgan was so low in fact that it gave him a one-stroke lead over Curtis Strange, which was nothing to sneeze at.
Strange, who won consecutive U.S.
Opens in 1988 and 1989 but nothing since, got off to his best start in 14 U.S.
Opens with a 67.


COMPANY NEWS
BORDEN INC., New York, sold its Crecspan snacks business in Spain to Unichips Finanziaria S.p.A., Barcelona, for undisclosed terms.
BSD BANCORP INC., San Diego, said it would incur a significant loss during the second quarter because of restructuring costs associated with the merger of its El Cajon-based American Valley Bank and Long Beach-based Coast Bank into The Bank of San Diego.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 595 money market mutual funds increased by $730.2 million, to $497.11 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 219 institutional funds increased by $1.96 billion, to $184.33 billion.
The assets of the 283 general-purpose funds fell by $1.23 billion, to $172.74 billion.
The 93 broker-dealer funds increased by $2.7 million, to $140.05 billion, the institute said.


Chief Hopeful as Irish Vote on Europe
As Ireland voted on the Treaty on European Union, which will significantly affect the future of this country and the rest of Europe, Prime Minister Albert Reynolds said today that he thought a majority of his compatriots were voting yes.
"I'm still confident there will be a decisive victory," he said in Dublin after voting in favor of the treaty in his hometown of Longford.


A Dispute Where Art Pays the Rent; As Loft Law Nears Expiration, Landlords and Tenants Battle
Bragging about real-estate deals is to most New Yorkers what brandishing a fistful of wild animal pelts once was to the pioneers.
It shows an ability to triumph over adversity and can humble the most bitter of rivals.
But this week, residents of SoHo, TriBeCa, Chelsea and parts of Brooklyn went strangely quiet on the subject.
"Uhm," mumbled Mac Adams, a sculptor who has lived in a sprawling TriBeCa loft since 1970, "can't you just say my rent is average?"


For Holyfield, Success Is Hardly Hit or Miss
Evander Holyfield has always been a fighter who got hit.
Michael Dokes, Alex Stewart, George Foreman and Bert Cooper all jarred him with good licks.
Never mind that Holyfield is the undisputed, undefeated heavyweight champion.
In the minds of men like Larry Holmes, the 42-year-old former champion who is challenging Holyfield for the title on Friday at Caesars Palace, the heavyweight champion can be hit and therefore can be had.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON TO REMAIN VISIBLE DURING CONVENTION
Breaking with tradition, the Clinton campaign is planning to let its candidate out of his hotel suite during the early part of the Democratic convention in New York City.


Saberhagen Fails Painful Test of Finger
The treatment of Bret Saberhagen goes on.
The wait for the right-hander's return goes on.
And the concern about it all for the Mets deepens.
Saberhagen, sidelined since May 15 with tendinitis in his right index finger, failed in his latest attempt to throw and instantly received a second cortisone injection.
"Obviously, it's frustrating," he said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON DISAVOWS IDEA OF MIDDLE-CLASS TAX CUT
Remember the middle-class tax cut?
An early and central feature of Gov.
Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign, the idea seems on its way to dying an inconspicuous death.
"I'm not backing away from the idea of tax fairness," he told a breakfast meeting of reporters when he was asked if he was abandoning the proposal.
"I may want to -- I'm in the process now of doing what I promised to do in New Hampshire."


Sounds Around Town
She's Still Going Strong
Dorothy Donegan, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleeker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
Dorothy Donegan is one of the true originals of jazz, a pianist who combines great virtuosity with a wildly comic sensibility and an exuberantly swinging drive that can lift an audience out of its seat even while she is weaving subtleties through her performances.
She has been at it for a long time now -- since the mid-1940's in Chicago -- and she hasn't slowed down.
With one of her favorite drummers, Ray Mosca, who knows the ins and outs of her musical thinking, and supplemented by Jon Burr on bass, she plays tonight and tomorrow at 10 P.M., midnight and 1:30 A.M.; there is no third show on Sunday.
There is a $15 music charge, plus a $6 minimum.
Byron's Latest Jam
Byron Stripling Quintet, Park Avenue Plaza, 55 East 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 308-0643.
The trumpeter Byron Stripling is one of a growing number of post-Basie stars -- musicians who joined Count Basie's band after he died in 1984 and have developed in the years since then under Thad Jones and, currently, Frank Foster.
Mr.
Stripling is now in the pit band of the Broadway musical "Jelly's Last Jam." He will lead his quintet at the last of the spring season of three afternoon tea dances (both tea and dancing are free) at the intimate Park Avenue Plaza.
The dance, sponsored by Chartwell Booksellers and the New York Swing Dance Society, is tomorrow from 3 to 6 P.M.


Executive Changes
ALLEGHANY CORPORATION, New York, appointed John J. Burns Jr. chief executive, succeeding F. M. Kirby, who remains chairman.
AMERICAN EXPRESS COMPANY, New York, named Bernard Hamilton senior vice president and general auditor, succeeding William Warrick who resigned.


Lloyd's Plans To Limit Risk For Members
The Lloyd's of London insurance market announced a plan yesterday to limit the potential losses of its members, a fundamental departure from the way the 304-year-old institution has done business.
Until now, Lloyd's has gathered its capital from wealthy individuals, known as "names," who have pledged their entire fortunes to pay off claims.
Many members have been hit by huge losses recently, and many have filed suit and publicly criticized the market.


The Spoken Word
SYMPOSIUM, Kenkeleba Gallery, 214 East Second Street, Manhattan.
"Bannister's World: 19th-Century African-American Art and Culture," a symposium that is to cover photography, art and the work of Edward Mitchell Bannister, a 19th-century black painter.
Sunday, from 2 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $7 in advance, $10 at the door.
Information: (212) 674-3939.
STORYTELLING, Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Manhattan.
A German variant of the traditional tale of "Puss in Boots" will be told by Marcia Lane, a storyteller.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 685-0008.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, is offering $200 million, up from $150 million, of 8 percent subordinated notes due in 1999 at par through Salomon Brothers.
Noncallable, the notes are rated Baa-3 by Moody Investors Service Inc. and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Household International Inc., Prospect Heights, Ill., is offering $100 million of 5 3/4 percent notes due in 1994 at 99.649 to yield 5.94 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Noncallable, the notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


M'DONALD'S TO EXPAND TESTING OF INDOOR PLAYGROUNDS
The McDonald's Corporation will expand testing of its Leaps and Bounds indoor playgrounds by opening 15 more in the next year.
The company plans to open its second Leaps and Bounds in Westmont, Ill., a suburb of Chicago, next month.
McDonald's opened the first one last year in Naperville, Ill.
The play centers, which feature tunnels, slides and mazes, charge $4.95 a child.
Food is sold at Leaps and Bounds, but it is not McDonald's fare.


CHRONICLE
DIZZY GILLESPIE is unable to attend a concert tonight honoring his 75th birthday, but that does not mean that the tones of his legendary trumpet won't reverberate through Carnegie Hall.
"He is homebound," said GEORGE WEIN, founder and producer of the JVC Jazz Festival at the hall.
"He has a problem with diabetes following surgery. So he taped a little speech and then asked the audience to 'sing along with me.' Then instead of singing, he plays the trumpet. It is extremely touching."


Fraud Charges Considered By U.S. Against Grumman
The United States Attorney's Office in Brooklyn is weighing criminal action against the Grumman Corporation, one of the nation's biggest military contractors, and its former chairman, John O'Brien, charging that the company defrauded the Navy in a series of 1980's contracts, lawyers involved in the inquiry said.
Investigators working on the case, which developed from the nationwide Pentagon corruption investigation in 1988, have recommended that United States Attorney Andrew J. Maloney seek criminal fraud charges against Grumman and Mr.
O'Brien, the lawyers said yesterday.
It is now up to Mr.
Maloney to decide whether to go along with this suggestion or file a civil lawsuit, the lawyers said.
Mr.
Maloney, whose jurisdiction includes Grumman's headquarters in Bethpage, L.I., could also decide to drop the matter, but the lawyers said this was highly unlikely.
Focus on No-Bid Jobs
The investigation focuses on a series of no-bid Navy subcontracts Grumman awarded to companies controlled by James T. Kane, a Long Island businessman and political force who died in 1990.
Investigators have been trying to determine whether Mr.
Kane got the contracts after giving cash and expensive gifts to Grumman executives and whether these costs were then passed on to the Navy.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  U.S. INTERCEDING FOR RUSSIA
Shifting its approach, the White House urged the International Monetary Fund to ease demands for harsh reforms and approve an aid accord once Russia commits itself to broad economic changes.
A1  PERMANENT U.N.
FORCE IS URGED
The Secretary General has asked member countries of the U.N. to provide the Security Council with a permanent armed force to deter aggression and serve as "peace enforcement units." A1  WICHITA WARMS TO YELTSIN
Russia's President swept through Wichita like one of the tornadoes that have made Kansas famous from Moscow to Oz.
A8  FALSE LEAD ON MISSING G.I.
In the flurry raised by President Yeltsin's statements about prisoners of war, investigators flew to a Siberian labor camp where one American was reportedly sighted.
Indications are that it was a false lead.
A8
No papers to prove or disprove that Soviets held U.S. servicemen.
A8  MASSACRE IN SOUTH AFRICA
Mobs of armed attackers shot and hacked their way through a black township, leaving at least 39 people dead and setting back talks on South Africa's political future.
A7  TURNING POINT FOR VIETNAM
Free of domination by distant powers for the first time since 1858, Vietnam is emerging from the umbrella of the old Soviet Union and seeking a new niche in a rapidly developing region.
A3  IRISH VOTE ON EUROPEAN TREATY
Two weeks after Danish voters rejected a treaty on European union, the Continent waited anxiously as people in Ireland went to the polls.
Results are expected today.
A10  ENVOY TAKES YUGOSLAVS TO HEART
The crisis that has torn Yugoslavia asunder is also a crisis for Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, who must balance his long friendship for the country with American national interests.
A6  The White House won't let two aides testify on policy toward Iraq.
A14  After 10 weeks, Italy finally has a Prime Minister-designate.
A10  National A16-25, D19  JACKSON-CLINTON RIFT GROWS
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson charged that in an effort to win the backing of alienated white voters, Governor Clinton had "again exposed a character flaw." A1
Hurt by Perot, the Clinton camp is badly in debt.  A24
Across from the White House, Clinton chatted with Yeltsin.  A24
On the Trail: Clinton all but disavowed a middle-class tax cut.  A25
At a California rally, Perot appealed for racial harmony.  A25
Bush vowed to ride out "a hurricane blowing out there." A24  VICTORY FOR TV NETWORKS
The F.C.C. decided to allow broadcast television networks to buy cable systems, a move that could hasten the realignment of the television industry.
A1  JUSTICES RULE ON RACE AND JURIES
Six years after deciding that prosecutors may not exclude people from serving on juries on the basis of race, the Supreme Court extended the same rule to criminal defense lawyers.
A1
Excerpts from the ruling.  A22
The Court upheld California's uneven property-tax system.  A23
Backers of the California property-tax uprising rejoiced.
A23  WOMEN AND THE PRIESTHOOD
A Gallup poll found that two-thirds of American Catholics favored opening the priesthood to women.
That was an increase of 20 percentage points since 1985.
A16
Catholic bishops engaged in a divisive debate on women's role.
A16  ACCORD ON GEORGIA JUDGES
The Governor of Georgia and the leading plaintiffs challenging the way state judges are selected reached an agreement that would change the system from elective to appointive and bring an immediate and dramatic increase in the number of black judges.
A18  NEW INQUIRY IN NAVY SEX CASE
At the behest of the Navy Secretary, the Pentagon's inspector general will look into the sexual assault on 26 women at a convention of aviators and the Navy's own resulting investigation.
A20  CONGRESS PASSES URBAN AID BILL
Both houses approved a compromise $1.3 billion urban aid bill.
There were also indications that White House and Congressional negotiators were narrowing their differences on related legislation to increase private investment and law enforcement in inner cities.
A20  Bush took a step to assist military contractors.
A20  The toll of death from Midwest tornadoes kept rising.
A16  Law Page B8  A court battle over a question of African royalty and black pride.
Massachusetts looks at its courts through its newest citizens' eyes.
At the Bar  Metropolitan Digest, B1 INQUIRY INTO POLICE
Federal law-enforcement officals are investigating allegations of drug-dealing by police officers in one New York City precinct and suspect that there are pockets of corruption in several other precincts, state and Federal investigators say.
A1  U-TURN IN BUDGET
News analysis: The budget unveiled by the Republican legislative majority in Trenton represents a stark repudiation of nearly two decades of moderate to liberal government under both Democratic and Republican administrations.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Weekend C1-28  A supermarket of sounds.
C1  Rapper defends boycotted album.
C24  For Children C20  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2 Film: "Batman Returns." C1 Architecture: A Louis I. Kahn show at the Modern.
C1  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Mets stumble again.
B9  Yankees slip past Red Sox.
B11  Concern deepens about Saberhagen.
B11  Column: Lipsyte on boxing.
B9  Golf: Morgan takes first-round lead at U.S.
Open.
B9  Olympics: A new age at track and field trials.
B9  Obituaries D18  Peter Allen, singer and pianist.
Rev. Daniel J. O'Hanlon, Jesuit priest.
Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  Look who's adding missiles.
Weinberger's handwriting.
Freed in Lebanon.
The subways need Albany.
Letters A26  A. M. Rosenthal: Sixteen million slaves.
A27  Leslie H. Gelb: Israel's military superiority.
A27  Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil: Elite of the world, unite!
A27  John B. Oakes: Last stand for the Adirondacks?
A27


As Bishops Meet, Catholics Voice Differences With Church's Doctrine; Little Hope Seen for Letter on Women
The chairman of the committee of Roman Catholic bishops that has worked for nine years to draft a pastoral letter on women said after a divisive debate among the bishops today that it would take a miracle to pass the letter when it came up for a final vote in November.
"We're going to give it a try, but that's going to be a miracle," said the chairman, Bishop Joseph L. Imesch of Joliet, Ill.


Georgia Agreement Promises to Add Black Judges
The Governor of Georgia and the primary plaintiffs in lawsuits challenging the method of selecting state judges reached an agreement today that would change the system from elective to appointive and pave the way for an immediate and dramatic increase in the number of black judges.
Under the agreement, judges in the state's main trial courts would be appointed by the Governor from a list recommended by an advisory group.
Candidates for those posts now must run for election in the 45 state judicial districts.


Woman and 2 Girls Are Found Slain; 2 Suspects Charged
A mother, her 12-year-old daughter and a 12-year-old neighbor were found stabbed to death in their apartment in Brooklyn yesterday morning, the police said.
Late last night, the woman's 18 year-old son and his 17-year-old friend were arrested and charged in the killing, which the police said was sparked by a family dispute.
The victims were found shortly after 7 A.M. in a ground-floor apartment at 2832 West 23d Street in Carey Gardens, a city housing project in Coney Island.


Quotation of the Day
"Be it at the hands of the state or the defense, if a court allows jurors to be excluded because of group bias, it is a willing participant in a scheme that could only undermine the very foundation of our system of justice -- our citizens' confidence in it." -- JUSTICE HARRY A. BLACKMUN.  [ A1:5. ]


Supreme Court Rules Defendants Can't Use Race to Exclude Jurors
Six years after ruling that the prosecution cannot exclude people from serving on juries on the basis of race, the Supreme Court today extended the same rule to criminal defendants.
The 7-to-2 decision, based on the constitutional guarantee of equal protection of the laws, requires the defense to provide a "racially neutral explanation" for any pattern of challenges to potential jurors that suggests a racial motivation.
Prosecutors were put to the same test by the Court's 1986 decision in Batson v.
Kentucky, and last year the Justices extended the same principle to both sides in civil cases.
Redefining Challenges
The ruling today thus effectively completes a redefining by the Court of the age-old concept of the peremptory jury challenge, under which each side in a trial was free to remove a set number of jurors without giving any explanation.  [ Excerpts from the decision, page A22. ]


White House Is Refusing to Allow Testimony by Aides on Iraq Policy
Confronting Congress over its investigation of Administration policy toward Iraq before the Persian Gulf war, the White House has rejected a request to allow two Presidential aides to testify before the House Judiciary Committee.
This rebuff is likely to lead the committee to request the appointment of an independent counsel, who would also be asked to investigate allegations of a coverup by the Administration of its Iraq policy after the gulf war, including Congressional charges that the Administration delayed the prosecution of officials of the Atlanta branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, which made illegal loans of $5 billion to Iraq.


On My Mind; Sixteen Million Slaves
Congress had the right to cheer, to share the pleasure and pride with Boris Yeltsin when he said that the idol of Communism would never rise again in his country.
Over the decades, America applied military, political and economic pressure to the rulers of the Soviet Union.
America helped the world understand what went on behind the walls of the Soviet national prison.
It had earned the right to rise and cheer.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Americans Advance  Mary Joe Fernandez led an all-American advance yesterday into the semifinals of the Eastbourne grass-court tournament in England.
Fernandez, seeded second, beat No. 7 Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 6-4, and will face Lori McNeil in the semifinals.
It was Fernandez's second victory over Sukova in the last two weeks.
McNeil, seeded 11th, survived a match of 21 service breaks to edge No. 6 Nathalie Tauziat of France, 7-6 (7-2), 6-7 (4-7), 7-5.
Linda Harvey-Wild, who upset Martina Navratilova in the second round, will play a South African-born Californian, Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer, in the other semifinal.
Harvey-Wild, a 21-year-old from Hawthorn Woods, Ill., defeated Rennae Stubbs of Australia, 6-1, 6-1, in just 65 minutes.
Fairbank-Nideffer upset No. 4 Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia, 6-1, 6-3. (AP)
Herrera Upsets Gilbert: A qualifier, Luis Herrera of Mexico, upset second-seeded Brad Gilbert of the United States, 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (8-6), in the quarterfinals of the Manchester grass-court tournament in England.
MaliVai Washington, at No. 5 the last remaining seeded player, advanced with a 6-4, 7-5 victory over Simon Youl of Australia and will play Herrera.
The second semifinal will be between Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands and Australia's Wally Masur. (AP) YACHT RACING  Peyron Touches Land  Loick Peyron of France, a 32-year-old professional sailor, won the Europe 1 Star single-handed trans-Atlantic race yesterday, crossing the finish line off Newport, R.I., after 11 days 35 minutes at sea.
Peyron's elapsed time fell short of the race record of 10 days, as he sailed his 60-foot trimaran, Fujicolor II, at an average speed of 10.77 knots.
"I'd say this race was 30 percent pleasure," Peyron said on shore.
"The rest was a matter of avoiding the traps, like pushing the boat too hard, being tempted to put up too much sail and being tempted to think I had done it."
Of the 68 sailboats, both monohulls and multihulls, that left Plymouth, England, on June 7, 9 have dropped out so far.
CYCLING  Furlan Is First  An Italian cyclist, Giorgio Furlan, won the second stage of the 1,116-mile Tour of Switzerland yesterday and remained the overall leader.
The three-time Tour de France winner Greg LeMond finished 11th and moved up in the overall standing to 16th from 23d. (AP) SOCCER Not a Total Loss  The Netherlands, which won the European championships in 1988, advanced to the semifinals yesterday with a 3-1 victory over Germany in Goteburg, Sweden.
But Germany, the defending World Cup champion, got the other Group Two semifinal berth anyway when previously scoreless Scotland shocked the team representing the Commonwealth of Independent States, 3-0.
EQUESTRIAN  Matz Is Riding High  Michael Matz posted his third consecutive clean round aboard Heisman yesterday to remain atop the standing of the show-jumping trials for the United States Olympic equestrian team.
Matz, who was competing yesterday in Gladstone, N.J., was also perfect at trials Wednesday in Gladstone and May 30 in Devon, Pa.
In all, he has committed only four faults through five of six qualifying events.
Matz is also in second place aboard Olisco with 12.5 faults, although team rules state a rider can qualify only one horse, the higher-ranked one.
Anne Kursinski and Norman Dello Joio also moved closer to landing berths on the five-member team.


Appointment At Times Co.
Elise J. Ross was appointed a corporate vice president by The New York Times Company yesterday.
Miss Ross will fill a newly created position with responsibility for developing information systems and new technology strategy.
She has been senior vice president of systems and technology for The New York Times.


M.I.A. Claims Confuse Russian Aides
President Boris N. Yeltsin's statements about Vietnam War-era American prisoners supposedly held in the former Soviet Union have raised considerable confusion among the Russians dealing with the issue, who say they have found no evidence to support such an assertion.
In the flurry raised by Mr.
Yeltsin's unexpected statement, a planeload of investigators from the United States and Russia flew off this morning to a labor camp in the heart of Siberia where one American was reportedly sighted.
The group included members of Mr.
Yeltsin's staff and officials from the Foreign Ministry, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security, the former K.G.B.


Look Who's Adding Missiles
The world has barely absorbed the stirring summit news that the superpowers have agreed to drastic cuts in their fearsome nuclear arsenals.
The West can now truly look to the ex-Evil Empire with hope instead of horror.
So what are America's allies France and Britain doing?
Increasing their nuclear arsenals.
With U.S. help.
The British and French decided to modernize their nuclear weapons starting years ago, long before Mikhail Gorbachev resigned and the Soviet Union dissolved.
Unless both countries now move quickly to reconsider and retrench, they'll remain the captives of dangerous, mindless momentum.


Books of The Times; Eyesight Returned, Musical Ear Lost
The Strange Case of Mademoiselle P.  By Brian O'Doherty  228 pages.
Pantheon Books. $19.
It's hard to read Brian O'Doherty's first novel, "The Strange Case of Mademoiselle P.," without thinking of one of the most famous novels of the last decade: D. M. Thomas's "White Hotel."
In this case, the doctor isn't a fictional Freud, but a fictional version of Franz Anton Mesmer, a Viennese doctor whose theories of "animal magnetism" enjoyed a vogue during the 1770's.
The patient under his treatment is one Marie Therese Paradies, a young blind pianist known as Mlle.
P., who, in real life, became friends with Mozart and founded an institute for music education in Vienna.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.68
3.72
5.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.60
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.69
3.69
5.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.76
6.80
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.79
7.81
8.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.75
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.54
6.55
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sounds Around Town
Velocity Girl's Love-Hate
Velocity Girl, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J. (201) 798-4064.
Like its opposition between brutal guitar noise and dainty pop melodics, Velocity Girl's songs examine the duality of emotions: anger toward someone beloved, the frantic desire for something that causes pain.
The lead singer, Sarah Shannon, sounds more indifferent than defeated, but her voice is always crowded by an almost baroque effulgence of guitar: searing chords, tiny repetitive phrases, layers of distortion that push each song to a crisis.
Tomorrow night's show, part of the New Music Nights Festival, starts about 11 P.M.
Admission is $7.
Three Faces of Country
Jimmie Dale Gilmore, Kevin Welch, and Angel Dean and the Zephyrs, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
Three sides of country, each as different as the Texas plains, the Nashville skyline and an urban honky-tonk.
Jimmie Dale Gilmore is a songwriter with such a gift for imagery that he seems to inscribe the details of the world with mysterious beauty; he once, in a song, asked a lover to treat him like a Saturday night.
His voice is like jute, rugged and taut.
Kevin Welch is a bit more conventional, but also able to lend luster to the most commonplace moments.
The singer Angel Dean has the pipes of a mountain hillbilly and the toughness of a city slicker.
All this, plus the roots-rockers Beat Rodeo and the singer and songwriter Joe Henry, as part of the New Music Nights Festival.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $10.


Art in Review
Andre Kertesz  Staley-Wise Gallery 560 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through July 3
Andre Kertesz (1894-1985) has long been acclaimed as a central figure of modernist photography.
But as this survey of his work from 1912 to 1985 demonstrates, he brought an unusual delicacy to the strict formal certainties that characterized photography in the first half of this century.
Kertesz, born in Hungary, moved to Paris as a young man and then to New York in the mid-1930's.
In each place he took part in the leading movements of the photographic avant-garde; unlike that of many of his contemporaries, though, his work is characterized by a surprisingly gentle sweetness.


Expansion Teams Pick Leftovers
The Tampa Bay Lightning went for veteran defensemen and toughness.
The Ottawa Senators chose balance, featuring a well-known forward and a goalie with possible marquee value.
Over all, both teams got 21 marginal players in what amounted to a multimillion-dollar rummage sale this evening when the National Hockey League's two expansion teams stocked their rosters in a special draft.


Art in Review
Lisa Beck and Peter Dudek  Stephanie Theodore Gallery 580 Broadway, at Prince Street SoHo Through tomorrow
This gallery's compact space is well suited to the lively pairing of the two artists showing here.
Lisa Beck's blocks of Mylar-covered Masonite combine the effects of small abstract paintings and mirrors.
In a piece called "No Title Yet," four of the "paintings" sit on the floor attached to the end of long steel cables that pierce the plaster wall as if tapping into a hidden source of energy.
In "Replacement," a single Mylar painting hangs at eye level from a cable that begins as a messy coil on the floor, runs up to the ceiling, stretches across it and descends several feet away bearing a different painting, this one with a nebulalike swirl on a dark ground: a shrewd play, it would seem, on such art-world concerns as hanging a show and networking a career, not to mention bringing the mediums of painting and sculpture together in a novel synthesis.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
West End Avenue between 72d and 79th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the West Side Basketball League street fair.
SUNDAY
Second Avenue between 96th and 68th streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Second Avenue street fair.


Restaurants
Let the rakish trattorias around town get all the fashion plates and media mentions.
Night after night, Il Mulino is packed more tightly than the box seats at Shea Stadium.
And what is this unassuming 11-year-old place's enduring appeal?
Certainly not the decor.
Il Mulino is a nondescript place with crepuscular lighting, a small bar up front and tables close together in its small wallpapered dining room.
The last time Il Mulino was reviewed, in 1988, management had an arrogant habit of making nearly everyone wait 15 minutes or more for a table, even with confirmed reservations.
Happily, that seems to have stopped.


Philip Reisman, 87, Artist Who Offered Views of New York
Philip Reisman, a Social Realist painter and printmaker known for his views of New York City street life, died on Wednesday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 87 years old, and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his wife, Louise.


Critic's Choice/Music; Medieval to Modern: A Church Choir With a Difference
Corpus Christi Church, a Roman Catholic church at 529 West 121st Street in Morningside Heights, Manhattan, has long had an ambitious music program, both within the context of its services and as a presenter of ensembles.
The centerpiece is its first-rate choir, which can be heard 52 weeks a year at Mass and occasionally in the church's Sunday afternoon concerts.
The eight-voice choir's specialties are 16th- and 17th-century music and Gregorian chant.
The choir also includes 20th-century music in its services, and the church has commissioned about 20 pieces in recent years.
Some of the most recent commissions -- works by Louise Talma, Jackson Hill and Harvey Brugett -- are to have their premieres at a special Mass in honor of Msgr.
Myles Bourke, the church's retiring pastor, on Sunday at 11:15 A.M.
They will also be performed at an open rehearsal tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Louise Basbas, the choir's director, is to conduct the rehearsal, and all three composers are to be present to discuss their works.


The Airline That Roared: Cayman Battles American
Cayman Airways, the flag carrier of the Cayman Islands, started a war of words yesterday against American Airlines, whose 97,000 employees are almost four times the total population of the tiny British colony in the Caribbean.
At issue is American's recent addition of a second daily flight between Miami and the islands.
Because its fleet of four 737's would be no match for American's fleet of more than 600 planes, Cayman Airways wisely decided against an aerial dogfight.
Instead, the weapon it chose was an advertisement in The Wall Street Journal yesterday, reproducing a letter it sent last week to Robert L. Crandall, American's chief executive.
The letter appealed to American to discontinue its second daily flight at the risk of jeopardizing the jobs of Cayman Airways' 360 employees.


Corrections
A chart on the Education page on Wednesday about the search for university presidents at Chicago, Columbia, Duke and Yale referred incorrectly to a woman who was listed among possible candidates for all four institutions, and misidentified her employer.
She is Adele Simmons, president of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.


Jerry Della Femina Likely To Leave His Ad Agency
Ending more than a year of feuding, Jerry Della Femina has apparently reached an agreement to have his contract bought out by Euro RSCG, the French parent of Della Femina McNamee Inc.
At a news conference scheduled for today in New York, Mr.
Della Femina is expected to announce that he is leaving the advertising agency.
Mr.
Della Femina, chairman of Della Femina McNamee, would not comment last night.
Louise McNamee, the president of the agency, is expected to stay on and run it.


Freed in Lebanon, Without Dishonor
With the release this week of two German captives, all the surviving Western hostages in Lebanon are now free.
A sordid game seems to have ended without dishonor to the West.
But Americans and Europeans now have to show that their concern extends to other victims of persecution in Lebanon and Iran.
Heinrich Strubig and Thomas Kemptner, both aid workers, were seized in May 1989 to force Germany into freeing two Lebanese brothers convicted of terrorism.
Bonn says no such concession was made, and that it did not pay a rumored $12 million ransom.
Germany may have agreed to allow more family visits and to transfer the brothers to the same jail, scarcely a discreditable bargain if both serve their sentences.


Gorbachev Is Skeptical on P.O.W. Claim


A Musical Journey on the 'Downhome Corner'
Drummers pounded out a dizzying beat as singing revelers shimmied across the red-brick courtyard-cum-dance floor of Rincon Criollo, a Puerto Rican style wooden shack in the Melrose section of the Bronx.
Men tossed back small cups filled with pitorro, a moonshine liquor that hits you like a sharp smack on a conga drum, while behind the shack a man hacked away with a machete at a crispy roast pig.
Victor Rafael Hernandez, a singer from Puerto Rico, gave a bemused smile as he scanned the crowd of bobbing heads, where musicians from his native land celebrated with their New York counterparts, many of whom were born on the island but migrated north decades ago in search of opportunities.
It was, he thought, both a fitting homecoming and a geography lesson.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Government officials who take classified personal papers with them on leaving office misidentified the organization that prepared a report critical of the practice.
It was the Center for Public Integrity, not Investigative Reporters and Editors.


The Subways Need Albany, Too
Peter Stangl, the chairman of New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority, has proposed an innovative five-year strategy to create a transit system that builds ridership by genuinely serving riders.
He deserves warm praise.
But his bold plans will wither unless Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the state's Legislature can, with equal boldness, find ways to pay for them.
Under Mr.
Stangl's plan, subway and bus fares would remain frozen at $1.25 until 1994.
At that point they would rise, probably to $1.50.
To further encourage mass transit use, tolls on bridges and tunnels would increase beginning next January by 50 cents, to $3.


U.S. Finds Retaliation Against White Woman Who Charged Bias
In an unusual discrimination case, a Federal agency has found that a former manager at a New York City health clinic was retaliated against after she filed a charge that she faced discrimination at work because she is white and Jewish.
The agency -- the civil rights office of the United States Department of Health and Human Services -- has also reopened the original discrimination complaint by the woman, Rita Arno.
Mrs.
Arno contends that she was harassed at work for years, subjected to threatening phone calls, demoted and finally forced into early retirement after Wayne C. Wiltshire, who is black, was named as the administrator of the Cumberland Neighborhood Family Care Center in 1983.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"BROTHERLY LOVE," American Theater of Actors, 314 West 54th Street, Manhattan.
A drama by John Fedele about two Italian-American brothers.
Last show: Sunday at 3 P.M.
Also tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $12 and $15.
Information: (212) 581-3044.
"THE EXTRA MAN," Manhattan Theater Club, Stage I, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
A drama by Richard Greenberg about a man who manipulates two friends into having an affair.
With Adam Arkin, Boyd Gaines, Laila Robins and John Slattery.
Last show: Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Also tonight at 8 and tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Review/Opera; Tania, Cinque and the Super Bowl
How can an opera possibly make the 1974 kidnapping of Patricia Hearst believable?
An heiress to a great fortune is abducted by a group calling itself the Symbionese Liberation Army; the ransom demands include the release of terrorist prisoners along with the donation of food to the needy.
Then Patty Hearst is seen on videotape, robbing a bank, dressed to kill.
She has adopted a new name -- Tania -- and a new role: revolutionary.
Anthony Davis, in turning to this subject for his opera "Tania," which received its premiere at the Plays and Players Theater here on Wednesday night as part of the American Music Theater Festival, must have recognized the difficulties in doing justice to reality's inventiveness.


Amoros Listed in Critical Condition
SANDY AMOROS, hero of the Brooklyn Dodgers' 1955 World Series victory by making a game-winning catch in Game 7, took a turn for the worse yesterday after being hospitalized with pneumonia, a hospital spokeswoman said.
"He is now in critical condition in intensive care," said MARIA ROSA GONZALEZ at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
The 62-year-old Amoros had been listed in serious condition Wednesday and was thought to be improving until early yesterday morning, she said.
Gonzalez said she could not release further details without the family's permission. (AP)


Maxwell's Sons Arrested on Charges of Fraud
Kevin and Ian Maxwell, sons of the late Robert Maxwell, and an American investment manager for Mr.
Maxwell were arrested today on charges of stealing from employee pension funds and one Maxwell company and of conspiring to defraud banks.
Investigators think that $1.6 billion in assets were taken from the pension funds and the Maxwell Communication Corporation and Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C., before Mr.
Maxwell's mysterious death off the Canary Islands on Nov. 5.


Music Expands the Borders of Puerto Rico and Brings Its Past North


Candidates on Television
The candidates have scheduled these television appearances (all times Eastern daylight):  Gov.
Bill Clinton
TODAY: 2-3 P.M.
C-Span.
Live simulcast from KARN radio station in Little Rock.
President Bush
SATURDAY: 4:45 P.M.
C-SPAN.
Speech to the Texas Republican Party Convention in Dallas.
Vice President Dan Quayle
TODAY: 7-8 P.M. MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour. PBS.
Ross Perot
No appearances.


Years to Search Soviet Archives
Russia's chief archivist said today that most Soviet documents covering the Vietnam War era have yet to be found and declassified, and it could be years if not decades before conclusive evidence is available to prove or disprove whether American prisoners of war were transferred from Hanoi to Soviet territory.
Rudolf G. Pikhoya, a history professor who heads the Russian Committee on Archival Affairs and is a member of President Boris N. Yeltsin's Cabinet, stopped short of saying Mr.
Yeltsin spoke without evidence when he referred repeatedly this week to the transfer of Americans and the possibility that some might still be alive in former Soviet republics.


Caspar Weinberger's Handwriting
Responsibility for the reverberating Iran-contra scandal still needs sorting out five years later.
Now comes the indictment of Caspar Weinberger, the former Secretary of Defense, who was one of the saner figures in the controversy.
He was also, according to the independent counsel, Lawrence Walsh, part of a criminal cover-up.
Mr.
Weinberger, an opponent of the bizarre scheme to swap weapons for hostages, denounces the charges as retribution for refusing to falsely incriminate his President.
Mr.
Walsh's main contention, however, is that Mr.
Weinberger concealed knowledge of the arms shipments and misled Congressional and criminal investigators.


A Dispute Over Courtroom Attire, and Principles
An objection from a judge about a lawyer's choice of attire has become the talk of legal circles in Washington, raising questions about where a lawyer's personal freedom collides with court procedures and whether clothing can influence a jury.
The questions arose after a lawyer, John T. Harvey 3d, was removed from a case last week by a judge after a dispute over Mr.
Harvey's wearing of a striped stole made out of a colorful African fabric known as kente cloth.
The judge, Robert M. Scott of the District of Columbia Superior Court, had said that the stole might unduly influence jurors' cultural sensitivities.


Foreign Affairs; Israel's Military Superiority
Israel is more secure today than ever in its brief and turbulent history.
The sense of security could erode quickly should ties to the U.S. fray further or Islamic fundamentalists topple Arab conservatives.
But for the next three to five years, the Israeli military expects to enjoy unprecedented military superiority over its Arab neighbors.


CONGRESS PASSES BILL TO AID CITIES
The House and Senate today passed a compromise $1.3 billion urban aid bill amid indications that White House and Congressional negotiators were narrowing differences on other measures to increase private investment and law-enforcement in inner cities.
The House debate frequently split urban and rural lawmakers.
Some conservatives contended that Congress was poised to spend more money for what they said were poorly conceived social programs.
But increasingly, lawmakers sense that there is an urban crisis that they cannot ignore.


Backers of '78 Tax Revolt Hail Ruling
Backers of the California property tax revolt that was upheld today by the United States Supreme Court rejoiced in what they said was an affirmation of the citizen's right to keep down taxes.
"The question was, 'Do people have a right to control their own destiny regarding taxation?' And the answer is: yes," said Joel D. Fox, president of the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association.


Broadway Should Put Some of the Profits Into Its Restrooms
To the Editor:
I was pleased to learn that Broadway had a record season (Arts pages, June 4).
As someone whose memories of great theater go back to "The Skin of Our Teeth," "All My Sons," "Watch on the Rhine," "Oedipus" with Laurence Olivier and "The Visit" with the Lunts, I was delighted to know that New York theaters are again enjoying great prosperity.
Unfortunately, I didn't get to see the first act of some of these memorable productions because I could not then afford even the cheapest seats -- the 55-cent ones in the last row of the balcony.
I was, however, sometimes able to catch the remainder of the show by mingling outside with the intermission crowd and then filing in with it when the bell rang.


F.C.C. ACTS TO LET THE NETWORKS BUY LOCAL CABLE UNITS
The Federal Communications Commission voted today to allow broadcast television networks to buy local cable television systems, a move that could hasten a basic realignment of the television industry.
Rather than having one local over-the-air affiliate station in a city, for example, a network could operate a local cable system, offering dozens of channels of programming.
That is likely to alter, and perhaps terminate, the traditional relationship between the networks and local affiliates.


Bucking Traditions in Trenton: G.O.P. Budget
No government document is more political than a budget, and the one unveiled by the omnipotent new Republican legislative majority in Trenton today represents a stark repudiation of nearly two decades of moderate to liberal government under both Democratic and Republican administrations.
Riding a tide of anti-tax anger in New Jersey, the Republicans rescinded or gutted a host of social and other programs for the poor and middle class endorsed not only by their archenemy Jim Florio, the Democratic Governor, but also by his Republican predecessor, Thomas H. Kean.


U.S. Trade Gap Widened to $6.97 Billion in April
The long-predicted plunge in American exports to the slowing economies of Japan and Western Europe finally took place in April, and the trade deficit widened to $6.97 billion, the Commerce Department reported today.
Only a modest increase in exports to poor and middle-income countries and a drop in imports from Japan and Canada prevented the overall deficit from expanding even further, from $5.58 billion a month earlier.
Sales of American goods in Japan dropped 18.1 percent from March, while sales to Western Europe tumbled 13.6 percent.


CHRONICLE
Once again, world politics intrudes into athletics.
MONICA SELES, the top-ranked women's tennis player, will be listed as hailing from Sarasota, Fla., rather than her native Yugoslavia, when she competes in the Wimbledon championships in England, a tennis official announced in London yesterday.
Georgina Clark, senior tour director of the Women's Tennis Association, said Ms.
Seles wanted to steer clear of political controversy in the tournament, which starts on Monday.
"It's a very sensitive situation and she would like to be known from the country where she's been living," Ms.
Clark was quoted by The Associated Press.
Ms.
Seles is the top-seeded female player at Wimbledon.


Supercollider Contractors Criticize Vote to Halt Work
Halting work on the supercollider in Texas would have little near-term economic impact on the leading suppliers of components to the project, but the country could pay dearly in the long run, industry executives say.
The House of Representatives voted on Wednesday to block continued construction of the superconducting supercolliders.
Suppliers to the $8.4 billion project contend that it is a means to develop the skill and capacity to build high-tech materials like superconducting magnets in large volumes and to demonstrate their reliability.
The payoff, they say, would be in commercialization of such technology in a variety of applications in transportation and energy production and distribution.


Searching for America's 'Big Money'
The casino buses arrive every two hours from 9 A.M. until 11 P.M. at the Confucius Statue on the Bowery in Chinatown.
Men and women in tattered coats and worn sneakers scurry out of bakeries and snack shops, jostling to get on the bus.
After a week of hard work, they are off to risk their week's pay at the blackjack and baccarat tables of Atlantic City.
These natives of China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Southeast Asia, who arrived in New York hoping to make the "big money" America had given their friends and relatives, live in communal apartments to save money.
They work 12 hours a day, six days a week, in restaurants and sewing factories, making $300 to $450 a week.


TV Weekend; Caught in a Storm Over Abortion
"A Private Matter," having its premiere tomorrow at 8 P.M. on Home Box Office, is the kind of made-for-television movie you won't find in network prime time.
For one thing, the subject is abortion, and today that subject is highly emotional and divisive, hardly the stuff of advertiser needs.
For another, "A Private Matter" is complicated, its unmistakably pro-abortion rights stance snarled in issues and personalities not conducive to tidy upbeat endings.
Anchored securely in unflinching performances from Sissy Spacek and Aidan Quinn, this is a fact-based story involving Sherri and Bob Finkbine.
The scene is Scottsdale, Ariz., in 1962.
"Miss Sherri" is host of a Phoenix-based edition of the popular children's show "Romper Room." Her husband is a high school teacher.
They have four children.
Pregnant again, Sherri reads a newspaper article describing severe birth defects connected with a sleeping medication, the same one she used after Bob brought some home from a trip to London.
Told by the family doctor that the new baby is likely to be deformed, a heartbroken Sherri and Bob decide to terminate the pregnancy.


2 New Financings From Fieldcrest
To redeem some high-interest debt and thereby reduce its debt service payments, Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., a home-furnishings and textile products company based in Greensboro, N.C., is raising money through two financings.
In one financing, the company is selling 1.5 million shares of common stock at $17.75 a share; in the other, it is selling $85 million principal amount of 11 1/4 percent senior subordinated debentures due in 2004 and priced at par.


Reviews/Film; If a Haircut's Erotic, Marry the Barber
Patrice Leconte gives "The Hairdresser's Husband" the same obsessive intensity he brought to "Monsieur Hire," but beyond that these two films have precious little in common.
Working with the Georges Simenon thriller that was the basis for his elegant 1989 tale of erotic longing, Mr.
Leconte constructed a tragic, symmetrical film graced with superb understatement and an eloquently plain visual style.
This time, he takes a similar tack with material so flimsy that it borders on sheer silliness.
Relentlessly contemplative, "The Hairdresser's Husband" is simply about one man's lifelong enjoyment of having women cut his hair.
The perfumes, the lotions, the trickling shampoo water, the close physical contact: these may be pleasant sensations, but there's a limit to how deeply they can be explored, at least by someone whose interests are as myopic as Mr.
Leconte's appear here.
Describing his film (which he co-wrote with Claude Klotz) as "this story that might have been about me," he imagines a hero named Antoine whose whole life has seemingly revolved around barbershop erotica.
Not even by incorporating customers who debate the existence of God during their haircuts can Mr.
Leconte give this idea any weight.


Handshakes in the Heartland


Review/Film: Batman Returns; A Sincere Bat, a Sexy Cat and a Bad Bird
Under these circumstances, the director Tim Burton has wisely switched gears, re-inventing the mood and manner of "Batman" so fearlessly that he steps out of his own film's murky shadow.
Mr.
Burton's new "Batman Returns" is as sprightly as its predecessor was sluggish, and it succeeds in banishing much of the dourness and tedium that made the first film such an ordeal.
Indeed, allowing for a ceiling on viewers' interest as to just what can transpire between cartoon characters like Batman and the Penguin, "Batman Returns" is often an unexpectedly droll creation.
It stands as evidence that movie properties, like this story's enchantingly mixed-up Catwoman, really can have multiple lives.


Mycogen Names Head Of Anti-Parasite Unit
The Mycogen Corporation has named Charles J. Dumbrell, a 52-year-old former executive at the American Cyanamid Corporation, to head a new subsidiary that will use genetically engineered bacteria to try to attack parasites in livestock.
The subsidiary, the Parasitix Corporation, may eventually develop similar products for human parasites, Mr.
Dumbrell said.


Seeking the Perfect Father's Day
THIS is that one weekend of the year when so many fathers get all foot-shuffling uncomfortable, their children, prompted by so many mothers, fussing over them.
The youngsters deliver cold drinks the dads didn't know they needed, hand them newspapers they've already read and hold up crayoned portraits labeled My Dad just as the big play happens in the game on television.
Thank you, instant replay.
This is that one weekend of the year when mothers escort those children to search for the perfect Father's Day gift -- aftershave, a Batman T-shirt for the office or, oh, look, how about a shiny shovel? (The mother, knowing her husband, has already vetoed the huge squirt-gun idea.) And guess what?
Whatever the gift, father inevitably likes it.
Even the package of plant fertilizer crumpled in Christmas paper turns out to be the absolutely perfect present, according to father.
Of course, the child knew all along.
And everybody beams.


U.N. Chief Asks for Armed Force To Serve as a Permanent Deterrent
The United Nations Secretary General tonight asked member countries to provide the Security Council with a permanent armed force to deter aggression and enforce peace.
The recommendation recalls the machinery that was intended by the San Francisco Conference at the end of World War II but is still untried.
At the time, the United Nations' founders wanted the Security Council to enforce peace throughout the world by using the armed might of its major members.
Cold-war tensions prevented that from happening, limiting the United Nations to deploying peacekeeping forces to monitor cease-fires.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; PRESIDENTIAL RACE NOW STABILIZING
After months of steady gains in polls by undeclared candidate Ross Perot, the race for President has leveled off and stabilized for the past month, according to the Gallup Poll.
Four polls taken by Gallup since May 18 have shown no significant fluctuations, measuring Mr.
Perot's support at 34 to 39 percent, President Bush's at 31 to 35 percent and Mr.
Clinton's at 24 to 25 percent.


Review/Ballet; Floating Or Plunging, But Always Glittering
Clark Tippet's "Bruch Violin Concerto No. 1" is a glittering showcase for dancers.
What makes it rewarding as well as demanding to perform is Mr.
Tippet's ability to make his choreography glitter in several different ways.
American Ballet Theater displayed all of the work's facets at the Metropolitan Opera House on Tuesday night, when a new cast took over most of the solo roles.
Julie Kent was once again the more serene of the two female soloists in the first movement.
The other was Christina Fagundes, who was making a debut in her role.
Ms.
Kent floated across space, Ms.
Fagundes plunged through it.
Robert Conn, who was dancing in this ballet for the first time this season, occasionally looked strained as Ms.
Kent's partner.
Ms.
Fagundes was reliably partnered by Roger Van Fleteren, who had appeared in the work on Monday night.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Broadcast television networks could buy local cable systems under a change approved by the F.C.C.
The new rule greatly relaxes a ban imposed in 1970 and could well overturn the traditional relationship between the networks and local affiliates.  [ Page A1. ]
A chain of in-vitro fertilization centers is providing hope for couples with problems conceiving.
But physicians often choose a treatment based on what insurance covers.  [ D1. ]


No Leads on G.I.'s
Russians are puzzling over assertions by President Yeltsin that some American prisoners were moved from Vietnam to the Soviet Union.
Archivists say the only Vietnam War-era servicemen who passed through Soviet territory were defectors, and they were released.
Article, page A8.


A TV News Program To Be Offered on Cable
Time Warner's all-news channel for New York City cable subscribers will begin a program in September to explore city news and issues in association with The New York Times.


U.S. Is Investigating Reports Of Corrupt New York Police
Federal law-enforcement officials are investigating allegations of drug-dealing by groups of police officers in one of New York City's most violent, drug-ridden precincts and suspect that there are pockets of corrupt officers in several other precincts, state and Federal investigators say.
The focus on corruption comes after accusations of a cocaine ring involving police officers in Brooklyn and underscores a pervasive problem that has long been acknowledged by the department -- that despite increased internal monitoring over the last two decades, police officers still exist in a society that discourages them from turning in their fellow officers.


New Definition of AIDS Postponed Again
Federal health officials said yesterday that they would not meet a July 1 deadline for changing the definition of AIDS, which they said had been indefinitely delayed.
The change in definition would affect eligibility for disability and other health and social benefits.
The definition is also a tool for tracking the epidemic of AIDS, which is caused by the human immunodeficiency virus.


Last Stand for the Adirondacks?
The 100th birthday celebration of the Adirondack Park may yet be turned into a wake.
Timberland owners with huge holdings, real estate speculators and their lawyers have converged on Albany, posing as "moderates" and friends of the "little man." They are, in reality, extremists who would weaken zoning rules, sell off shorefronts and brook no further interference with their "right" ultimately to devastate, for short-term gain, one of the great natural and scenic resources of the United States.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Financing; Lagging in the Polls, Clinton Also Faces a Cash Shortage
As Ross Perot has catapulted to the top of the polls and Gov.
Bill Clinton has fallen into third place, the Arkansas Governor's fund raising has also lagged, drawing his campaign so deep into debt that he has been unable to pay hundreds of campaign employees on time.
Campaign officials explain that Mr.
Perot's surging candidacy has made it harder for Mr.
Clinton to raise money.


Police Overlooked Bloodstain, Jury in Au Pair Trial Is Told
The police overlooked a bloodstain at the scene of a fire that killed a 3-month-old baby and prosecution investigators later discarded a sample from that stain, the jury was told today at the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair.
The au pair, Olivia Riner, was not bleeding when she was interrogated after the fire on Dec. 2 and the defense has said the stain could have been from an intruder who set the fire.


D'Amato Role Is Unfolding In Puerto Rico
Evidence introduced yesterday in the campaign-fraud trial of the chief Puerto Rican fund-raiser for Alfonse M. D'Amato details the central role played by the New York Senator in lobbying for Federal housing subsidies in Puerto Rico.
The Senator has repeatedly acknowledged intervening on behalf of Puerto Rico but has denied interceding to benefit any particular project or campaign contributor.
But the trial of the fund-raiser, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, a Puerto Rican advertising executive, shows how narrow a distinction this can be.


U.S. Backs Easier Terms for Russian Aid
The Bush Administration, in a shift of approach toward aid for Moscow, has called on the International Monetary Fund to ease some demands for harsh reform and not delay an aid agreement once Russia commits itself to broad economic changes.
Administration officials said today that they feared that a delay in signing an accord with the I.M.F. would block the flow of economic assistance and destabilize the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin at a time when Western governments want nothing more than to consolidate Moscow's fledgling democracy.


20 Ph.D.'s at Rockefeller U.
Rockefeller University awarded 20 Ph.D. degrees yesterday at the school's 34th commencement ceremonies , in the Caspary auditorium on the campus on York Avenue in Manhattan.
In keeping with university tradition, there were no commencement speakers, but a professor-mentor of each graduate spoke for five minutes discussing the significance of the degree recipient's research before presenting the degree.


Holyfield-Holmes: Match of 2 Bumps on a Log?
Just days before tonight's Evander Holyfield-Larry Holmes heavyweight championship fight on TVKO, pay-per-view orders were not storming cable TV systems as if they were coaxial Bastilles.
No, Evander and Larry are not big draws, and may not entice many more fans than the main boxing audience.
We're not talking about Tyson-like terror to scare up orders or Foremanesque folk-hero charisma to make nonboxing fans join the hard core and pay their $35 to $45.


In New Orleans, the Gumbo That Leads to the Games
For American track and field athletes, the road to Barcelona takes its final turn here.
The 10-day United States Olympic trials, a competition often more testing than the Games themselves, will begin Friday, and the survivors will qualify for the Olympics, which start July 25 in Barcelona.
Jackie Joyner-Kersee said today she would compete here in three women's events -- the heptathlon (seven events in all), the long jump and the 100-meter hurdles.
Her husband and coach, Bob Kersee, also wants her to enter the high jump and she will decide next week whether to do so.


Chicago Merc Plans Largest Trading Floor
Moving to adjust to its explosive growth over the last decade, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is expected to announce today that it plans to build the world's largest trading floor.
Exchange officials said yesterday that the expansion, which would cost $26.6 million and take a year to complete, would double the Merc's trading capacity to about 70,000 square feet.
The Merc has outgrown its trading space three times in this century.


Child Sex Abuse Cases Can Be Witch Hunts
To the Editor:
There is no question that the sexual abuse of children is an ancient and widespread phenomenon and has many similarities to the sexual abuse of women.
There is no question also that the majority of all accusations of child sex abuse are likely to be true.
However, there is still a significant number that are false, which, I believe, is the case in the charges against Kelly Michaels, discussed by Anna Quindlen in "Believing the Children" (column, April 29).
I believe we are witnessing a wave of hysteria in both categories of sex-abuse accusations.
The hysteria has resulted in overreaction and often Draconian punishment for those who have abused children, punishment that can be considered beyond Constitutional safeguards against cruel and unusual punishment.
And this hysteria has also resulted in lack of objectivity of assessment, resulting in "validation" of sex abuse when it has not taken place.
Accordingly, the careers and marriages of innocent people have been destroyed, and some people have even been incarcerated.


Albert Bader Jr., 59, Partner in Law Firm
Albert X. Bader Jr., a partner in the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, died on Monday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.
He died of complications from cancer, said Gabriel Belson, a spokeswoman for Simpson Thacher.


Michael Secures A New Attorney
One day after his meeting with the commissioner was called off because of a flap over lawyers, General Manager Gene Michael of the Yankees secured the New York-based William Robinson as his new lawyer today and will now meet with Commissioner Fay Vincent on Monday in New York City.
The meeting involves allegations that George Steinbrenner might have contacted Yankee employees over the last 22 months in violation of Steinbrenner's agreement with Vincent.


Why the Innocent Might Plead Guilty
To the Editor:
"Steve Howe, the Yankee relief pitcher who was arrested five months ago in Montana on drug charges," you report June 9 (sports pages), "was suspended indefinitely from baseball today after he entered a guilty plea" to a charge of attempting to possess cocaine.
You state that the pitcher pleaded guilty using a "legal precedent known as the Alford clause." You then explain that Alford means that the guilty plea will not be considered final until Steve Howe's sentencing.


Magazines Report Rise in Advertising
The tide in magazine advertising may be turning.
A report by the Publishers' Information Bureau shows that total magazine advertising revenue for May was up 9.37 percent over May 1991.
A 5.37 percent aggregate gain in revenue was posted for the first five months of the year as well.
James R. Guthrie, executive vice president of marketing and development at Magazine Publishers of America, said the five-month gain was the first for the comparable period since 1989.


Waiting For Lefty? Wait No Longer
When Phil Mickelson's 30-foot birdie putt clunked into the cup on the 12th green at Pebble Beach today in the opening round of the United States Open, a voice in the gallery yelled, "Go, Lefty."
Mickelson, who turned 22 years old on Tuesday, is playing in his first tournament as a professional.
Touted for the last few years as "the next Nicklaus," he was a curio followed by thousands who were rewarded with a four-under-par 68 in the world's most prestigious tournament on one of the world's most prestigious courses.


From the Annals of Long-Lasting Bulbs
To the Editor:
"In what appears to be a significant advance in the technology of efficient lighting," you report June 1, "a bulb wil be introduced today that uses a high-frequency radio signal instead of a filament to produce light" ("Bulb Lighted by Radio Waves May Last for Up to 14 Years," front page).
With regard to the new E-Lamp, for electronic lamp, I have a trivial -- yet truly apropos -- anecdote.


Bush Administration to Offer Legislation to Assist Banks
Offering an election year gift to the banking industry, the Bush Administration will introduce legislation to repeal provisions of last year's banking law that the banks have complained are too onerous.
Administration officials are packaging the legislation, which is expected to be sent to Capitol Hill next week, as a measure that will make credit more easily available to businesses and individuals.
Some banking groups have also maintained that it will result in more jobs.


Art in Review
Tim Rollins and K.O.S.
Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through June 27
In the 1980's, Tim Rollins and K.O.S., or Kids of Survival, developed from an innovative after-school art workshop to a blue-chip art-world phenomenon.
With Mr.
Rollins's guidance, the group became well known for giving works of literature a distinctive visual life, mostly by painting carefully developed images and symbols onto surfaces made of the books' pages.
In one series of paintings, idiosyncratic golden trumpets covered the pages of Kafka's "Amerika," each instrument having been designed by a different Kid; Hawthorne's "Scarlet Letter" resulted in fields of big red A's that ran the gamut from ornate to severe.
Just how long Mr.
Rollins and K.O.S. could continue their odd collaboration was always a question, one that loomed especially large last season, when it was rumored that the group was breaking up.


Blueprint for Justice in Massachusetts
Three hundred years after Massachusetts Bay colonists created the first appellate system in the Western Hemisphere here, a court-appointed commission has issued a blueprint for making the state's judicial system more accommodating to an increasingly diverse population.
The commission said the proposal represented the ideal justice system for the 21st century, without regard for cost or the likelihood of its being carried out.
That system, it said, would serve more women, blacks, Hispanic people and immigrants.


Alarm Goes Off as Mets Plunge Toward Cellar
The Mets' season is ominously close to becoming as empty as Shea Stadium has been of late.
The team is bankrupt of offense, depleted of pitching and devoid of energy or imagination.
Last night, the Mets succumbed without suspense to the Cardinals, 8-3.
Afterward, the players held a closed meeting for almost half an hour.
Manager Jeff Torborg, who had been approached by a player to approve the meeting, and his coaches were excluded, and other management officials were forced to wait outside the clubhouse.


CHRONICLE
It's not the kind of material that legislators are likely to use in re-election campaigns, but a number of Congressmen have acquired new titles, thanks to Washingtonian magazine's "Best and Worst" issue, which will be on newstands on Monday.
The magazine sent ballots to all 535 Capitol Hill offices, asking staff members to vote in various categories.
Responses came from 207 offices, said Jack Limpert, editor of the monthly magazine.


As Bishops Meet, Catholics Voice Differences With Church's Doctrine; Poll Finds Backing Of Female Priests
A Gallup poll released here today finds that two-thirds of Roman Catholics in the United States favor opening the priesthood to women, an increase of 20 percentage points over just seven years ago.
The poll, conducted in May by the Gallup Organization and commissioned by a coalition of groups seeking fundamental changes in the structure and policy of the church, was released as the nation's bishops gathered at the University of Notre Dame for their first open debate on a pastoral letter on the role of women in church and society.
The letter, crafted over a period of nine years, deplores "the sin of sexism" but affirms Vatican positions against female priests, artificial birth control and abortion.


For Children
Discovery Zone  Cross County Square Mall 752 Central Park Avenue Yonkers (914) 969-1666 Recommended ages: 1 to 10
The Discovery Zone is an indoor-playground franchise that began about three years ago in Kansas City, Mo., and plans to open at least four more centers this year in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
At the Zone, your children can claw their way up and slide down padded mazes while you sit and watch (and sip coffee and maybe peruse the paper), or they can spend a few tokens in carnival-style games or rides (like a flight simulator that jolts up, down and sideways and has an empowering joy stick) or attend an exuberant birthday party in one of three private rooms.
Or you can leave the children altogether for up to two hours, as part of the "break time" sitter service.
Whatever you or your children choose, visitors to the ubiquitously red, blue and yellow center have to leave their shoes (but not socks) in bins.
On one side of the Zone, which is in the middle of the mall and has picture windows, are the amusement park-style games.
They require one or two tokens ($1 for four) and are meant to develop hand-eye coordination, the management says.
With the Big Mouth game, users pull the trigger of a plastic gun to knock down Big Mouth's teeth. (The gun makes a whooshlike pneumatic sound when the ball flies out.)


39 IN SOUTH AFRICA DIE IN A MASSACRE
Mobs of armed attackers shot and hacked their way through this black township and an adjoining squatter camp on Wednesday night, leaving at least 39 people dead and delivering a jolt to negotiations on South Africa's political future.
Witnesses said today that the attackers were Zulu-speaking men who had been brought to the scene and assisted in the seemingly random massacre by the South African police.
The police heatedly denied involvement.


Excerpts From the Court's Decision on Rejecting Jurors on the Basis of Race
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Georgia v.
McCollum, holding that criminal defendants may not exercise their right to reject potential jurors in a manner that discriminates on the basis of race.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Byron R. White, John Paul Stevens, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter.


At the Bar; With judges hired and ready, arbitration services wait to see whether the lawyers will come.
Is scrappy, aggressive, argumentative New York, whose lawyers pride themselves on their bare-knuckled obstreperousness, finally ready to forsake traditional litigation for the more rational, orderly and private world of mediation and arbitration?
Two national companies hawking "A.D.R." -- lawyerese for alternative dispute resolution -- think so.
After a decade on the road, both are trying to crack the contentious but potentially vast New York market.
Both seek to offer local lawyers what Christopher Whittle and Benno Schmidt propose to give the nation's schoolchildren: a private, state-of-the-art alternative to increasingly inadequate public services.


On Stage, and Off
'Angels' and 'Atrides'
Don't look to Broadway for two of next season's biggest theatrical events.
This week, the New York Shakespeare Festival announced plans to present Tony Kushner's "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes," which comprises two full-length plays about AIDS, "Part One: Millenium Approaches" and "Part Two: Perestroika." "Millenium Approaches" has received rave reviews at the Royal National Theater in London this season.
"Perestroika" is to be seen for the first time in this co-production with the Mark Taper Forum in association with New York Theater Workshop.
After a run at the Taper in Los Angeles beginning on Oct. 18, "Angels in America" is to begin previews at the Joseph Papp Public Theater on Feb. 2, running through March 28.
Declan Donellan, who directed the London company, will not stage this production.
It will be directed instead by Oskar Eustis, the resident director at the Taper, who previously did "Millenium Approaches" there.
He will stage "Angels" with Anthony Taccone, the associate artistic director of Berkeley Repertory Theater, who directed the staged reading of "Perestroika" at the Taper this spring.
Information: (212) 598-7100.


Plan to Aid Olympia Is Reported
Looking to repay a favor to an old friend, the Wall Street trader Lewis S. Ranieri is putting together a posse of investors to rescue Paul Reichmann, vice chairman of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., Wall Street executives said yesterday.
The deal he is developing, which one executive said could be completed today or Monday, could provide the Canadian developer with the $20 million to $30 million it desperately needs to keep its American properties out of bankruptcy for at least six weeks.
Besides the $12 million the developer will owe New York City's tax authorities about July 1, Olympia &amp; York has a big interest payment coming due on Monday to Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce in connection with its ownership of 125 Broad Street in Manhattan.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on June 11 about proposals to rein in executive pay misstated current tax law.
Companies deduct salaries from taxable income, not from taxes.


Utah Utility Bonds
To take advantage of the lower interest rates in the debt market, the Intermountain Power Agency of Utah is offering $242.8 million in power-supply refunding revenue bonds to yield a maximum 6.45 percent for an issue due in 2021, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities are priced to yield from 3 percent in 1993 to 5.1 percent in 1997, 5.85 percent in 2002 and 6.25 percent in 2007.
For investors interested in other long-term issues, the financing includes a bond issue due in 2012 priced to yield about 6.393 percent.
Underwriters said the tax-exempt issue was rated double-A by both Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


The Art Market
George Segal Sculpture
After a 12-year battle, George Segal's sculpture "Gay Liberation" has been installed in Christopher Park, between West Fourth and Grove Streets in Greenwich Village.
It is to be unveiled on Tuesday.
The work was created specifically for the site, across the street from the former location of the Stonewall Bar, where riots in 1969 turned out to be the real start of the gay liberation movement in America.
The work consists of four life-size bronze figures painted white: two women seated on a 16-foot steel bench and two men standing together in front of it.
The models were two gay couples who are friends of the artist.


Yet Another Bid Emerges For U.P.I.
A British media company controlled by Saudi Arabian investors offered a no-strings-attached cash bid of $3.5 million today for United Press International, the failing news agency.
The new bidder is Middle East Broadcasting Center Ltd., a three-year-old company based in London that transmits television news and entertainment by satellite through Europe and the Middle East.


Juror Is Dismissed From N.F.L. Antitrust Suit
One of the nine jurors in the the National Football League antitrust trial here was dismissed today after it was reported that she had told the judge and the two attorneys in the case on Wednesday that she was concerned about being able to render a fair verdict.
Judge David S. Doty, addressing the United States District Court gallery this morning without the jury present, said that there had been misleading information about the juror in newspaper reports, but after talking with the attorneys this morning, Doty decided to dismiss the juror.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 11; Promises to Keep
My friend David Karestsky, whose hobby was physical challenge, would have loved this bicycle trip.
Karestsky was one of the best aerobic athletes I've ever known.
It was his dream to ride a bicycle from ocean to ocean.
But the mountains claimed him first.
David was 50 years old when he was killed by an avalanche in March 1991 while helicopter skiing in Canada.


Homestead Rebate Cuts Won't Include Elderly
The Republican Legislature did the expected and cut Gov.
Jim Florio's $685 million homestead rebate program by more than 60 percent, in the process cutting the rebates for most renters and homeowners to the bone and leaving only the elderly untouched.
The $385 million reduction in the Governor's proposal, to $300 million from $685 million, means that only the elderly and disabled will continue to be eligible for the maximum $500 rebate.
Renters will be able to collect $30 and homeowners with incomes under $40,000 a year will get $90.


Laettner Has Job Interview in Minnesota
The Minnesota Timberwolves have interviewed CHRISTIAN LAETTNER in anticipation of picking him third in the college draft.
Timberwolves Coach JIMMY RODGERS predicted that the 6-foot-11-inch Laettner, who was a center at Duke, would be a star at power forward. (AP)


After the Cold War: Views From Vietnam; Vietnam, Now Master of Its Own House, Tries to Mend Neighborhood Fences
For the first time since French gunboats laid waste to the port of Da Nang in 1858 and began the colonization of what became French Indochina, Vietnam is free of domination by distant powers.
But the post-cold-war task of emerging from the umbrella of the old Soviet Union and finding a new place in the rapidly developing region of Southeast Asia is daunting.
"The collapse of the Soviet Union was a devastating blow for us," said Maj.
Gen.
Tran Cong Man, a Vietnamese Government spokesman.
"The Soviet Union was our support, ideologically and psychologically, also militarily and economically. It was our unique model. Now we find it was a false model."


Tyson Is Out of an Isolation Cell
MIKE TYSON was released from an isolation cell yesterday, hours before the broadcast of a television interview in which he criticized guards and fellow inmates at the Indiana Youth Center in Plainfield, Ind.
KEVIN MOORE, a prison spokesman in Indianapolis, said Tyson's request to be isolated was not directly linked to the interview, scheduled to be aired on CBS's "Street Stories."
"Tyson's request was very simple: 'There's some things I need to sort out, and I need to get away from the offender population to do that,' " Moore said, quoting a written request the boxer submitted to prison officials on Wednesday morning.
Tyson is serving a six-year sentence following his conviction on Feb. 10 on rape and other charges in Indianapolis last July.
Moore said the former heavyweight champion, who complains of harassment in prison to the interviewer, ED BRADLEY, had met with prison staff yesterday morning.
"And he feels that in his opinion, things are better," Moore said.
"He feels more in control or able to deal with the population."
Moore said Tyson and the inmates were allowed to watch the television show in common areas of the prison. (AP)


Surprise! Escaping From Fenway Is Possible After All
How many lives did Melido Perez have tonight against the Red Sox?
How many pitches did his right arm have?
How many Yankees were finally smiling after another one-run game was completed at Fenway Park?
The answers are several lives for the shifty Perez, 140 pitches for the durable Perez and 25 Yankee players beaming because the stopper named Perez helped them erase a 4-0 deficit, snatch a 5-4 victory from Boston and avoid a sweep in the four-game series.
All six games between the teams this year have been decided by one run.


Parks Threaten to Uproot Cottages by Long Island Sound
Since 1974, Dick and Peggy Confoy and their six children have spent every summer at their cottage here on West Meadow Beach, overlooking Long Island Sound.
Each spring, Mr.
Confoy removes the boards from the windows, cleans the winter's accumulation of sea thatch and sets up the barbecue grill on the deck.
This is where the family stays until the fall.
"It's been a good life," he said. "I wouldn't trade it for anything."


Confusion Reigns as Athletes Open U.S. Olympic Track Trials
It seems like ages ago: FloJo and her body suits, the remarkable reigns of Edwin Moses and Carl Lewis; the ascending stars of Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Randy Barnes and a trio of 400-meter runners.
Over nine days four summers ago in the heat and humidity of Indianapolis, the 1988 United States Olympic trials in track and field produced an array of impressions and records.
It was not until some months later, during and after the Olympics a half-world away in Seoul, South Korea, that another side to those trials would emerge.
They became track and field's last dance of innocence.


Public Broadcasting Lobbied for an Increase
To the Editor:
"Conservative critics," you report (front page, June 4), "were decisively defeated today when the Senate rejected their efforts to reduce proposed Federal spending on public broadcasting by nearly $400 million over three years."
You continue: "By a 75-to-22 vote, senators rejected a Republican measure to freeze Government financing of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which had become enmeshed in a dispute over ideology and sexual expression."


Market Place; Ex-Growth Stars Alluring to Some
VALUE is in.
Growth is out.
So why are some of the people who traditionally invest in value putting growth stocks in their portfolios?
Investors fell out of love with the go-go growth theme when the New Year dawned, opting instead for stodgier "value" stocks of companies selling on the cheap like G. M. or Caterpillar.
Growth stocks like Bristol-Myers Squibb had been fashionable throughout the recession, as investors flocked to shares of companies that were known for making money in good times and bad.


Vasiliki Johnides, 92; Ran L.I. Restaurant
Vasiliki Johnides, who founded a Long Island restaurant popular with food critics and celebrities, died on Tuesday at Southampton Hospital in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Johnides, known as Mama Bessie, celebrated her 92d birthday the day before.
She lived in Sagaponack and died of a stroke and heart attack, her family said.


Dropping Heavy Weights
THE POLLS close tonight on the race for the toughest job in the world.
And none too soon.
It has been a noisy, lumpy, mud-slinging campaign.
The incumbent has been struggling for respect against charges that he isn't really a heavyweight.
The challenger, knocked as a rich guy who shouldn't even be here, has tried to circumvent the media and go straight to the people.
It's enough to make one wish pay-per-view were carrying the Presidential election instead of Evander Holyfield and Larry Holmes.


Schmidt's Degree
To the Editor:
"Ivy League Builders" (editorial, June 9) erroneously states that Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the retiring president of Yale, is a graduate of Columbia University's law school.
Mr.
Schmidt is a graduate of the Yale Law School, from which he received a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1966.


Sports of The Times; Gambling on Athletes Is Not Allowed Here
THE horse does not understand why the people are shouting.
The jockey, on the other hand, knows exactly why the people are yelling such unceremonious things in many different languages and dialects.
The jockey has been judged responsible by these people for the money they lose, and they are not amused.
If there were no parimutuel betting, I somehow doubt there would be over 100,000 people singing "My Old Kentucky Home" on the first Saturday in May.
I'm also guessing that if people did not have a few dollars going for them, they would not be out at the greyhound track cheering on good old Fluffy.


A &amp; S in Hempstead Closing After 40 Years
When Abraham &amp; Straus opened its doors here 40 years ago, this village was the center of business and politics on Long Island.
But now that A &amp; S, once described as the largest suburban department store in the nation, is closing those doors, the village is preparing for the loss of one of its biggest employers and largest taxpayers.


Child Sex Abuse Cases Can Be Witch Hunts; Grounds for Appeal
To the Editor:
In "Believing the Children" (column, April 29), Anna Quindlen based her views on communication with a former colleague whose child was in a nursery school in Maplewood, N.J.
Ms.
Quindlen accepted as fact that Kelly Michaels was a child sex abuser, having been convicted of that crime by a New Jersey trial court.
She did not mention that the case is the subject of a vigorous appeal.
Nor did Ms.
Quindlen mention the issues on appeal that deal with whether or not a jury was given a fair opportunity to determine guilt or innocence.
The prosecution used 13 so-called experts who gave psychological testimony about the children.
Each of these experts had examined the children.
When Ms.
Michaels sought to have the children examined by her psychologists so that the testimony of the prosecutor's psychologists could be contested, she was turned down, though the trial judge conceded that the defense "comes with totally constructive motives with doctors who are beyond criticism."


Litton Wins Court Round In Itek Case
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan reinstated a suit by Litton Industries against Shearson Lehman Hutton yesterday based on the insider-trading scandals of the 1980's.
In a 2-to-1 ruling that overturned a District Court decision last June, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that Litton was entitled to a jury verdict on whether insider-trading violations by Lehman officials in 1982 caused an increase of the stock of the Itek Corporation, a company Litton was acquiring, thus forcing Litton to pay more to close the deal.


Review/Television; Melting Pot? Simmering Nicely
Right-wing critics of public broadcasting should be cheered tonight by an essay, in prime time, that is upbeat about America from a man who has been known to consort with neo-conservatives.
"The First Universal Nation," at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, is an installment of "Ben J. Wattenberg: Trends in the 90's." It is Mr.
Wattenberg's description of the American melting pot, which he finds to be poppling vigorously and productively.
In this energetic hour, the author and television commentator looks at immigration, intermarriage and the worldwide taste for American pop culture.


Eagleburger Anguishes Over Yugoslav Upheaval
Oldtimers call Larry Eagleburger "Lawrence of Macedonia," an allusion to his exploits 29 years ago as a diplomatic troubleshooter handling American relief efforts after a major earthquake in the southernmost republic of Yugoslavia.
The current Yugoslav crisis, which has torn the country asunder over the last 11 months first in Slovenia, then in Croatia, now in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is an inter-ethnic war that has resisted all diplomatic interventions, making this an agonizing time for Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger.


39 Blacks Massacred in a South African Township


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Jackson Sees a 'Character Flaw' In Clinton's Remarks on Racism
Escalating his conflict with Gov.
Bill Clinton, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson charged today that in a clumsy bid for the backing of alienated white voters the presumptive Democratic nominee had "again exposed a character flaw."
In a bitter rejoinder to Mr.
Clinton, Mr.
Jackson said in an interview that the Arkansas Governor had come to the Rainbow Coalition conference in Washington last weekend to "stage a very well-planned sneak attack, without the courage to confront but with a calculation to embarrass" him.


Bush Plans to Lower Fees Charged To Foreigners for Military Goods
In a move to support military contractors at a time of shrinking budgets in the post-cold war era, the Bush Administration has decided to lower fees the Pentagon charges foreigners for some products.
A White House official said President Bush would announce the elimination of the tax-like fee in an address Friday before the Industrial League of Orange County, Calif., an area with many aerospace concerns in a state where the President's political fortunes have been sagging.


Ol' Khrushchev Trail Leads Yeltsin to Kansas
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia was beaming today when he met Dmitri Antoniadi, a fellow Russian and a student at a university in this city on the Kansas plains.
But his smile grew when he was told that Mr.
Antoniadi's father is the manager of a Pizza Hut restaurant in Moscow, part of the capitalist beachhead that the former Communist is so eager to see develop into an all-out assault on the Soviet past.


INSIDE
Maxwell's Sons and Adviser Arrested on Theft Charges
Kevin and Ian Maxwell, sons of the late Robert Maxwell, and Larry S. Trachtenberg, an American investment manager to Mr.
Maxwell, were arrested in London on charges of stealing from pension funds.
Page D1.
Accord on Georgia Judges
Georgia and a group of plaintiffs reached an agreement that would bring a vast increase in the number of black state judges.
Page A18.
Women and the Priesthood
Gallup found two-thirds of American Catholics favoring the ordination of women, an increase of 20 percentage points since 1985.
Page A16.
Envoy's Bond to Yugoslavia
The Yugoslav crisis is agonizing for an American diplomat whose relief efforts there won him the nickname "Lawrence of Macedonia." Page A6.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
A FEDERAL INQUIRY INTO CITY POLICE
Federal law enforcement officials are investigating allegations of drug-dealing by groups of police officers in one of New York City's most violent, drug-ridden precincts and suspect that there are pockets of corrupt officers in several other precincts, state and Federal investigators say.
The focus on corruption comes after revelations of a cocaine ring involving Brooklyn police officers.
A1.
Police internal affairs division under scrutiny.
B3.
USING MUSIC AS A CULTURAL BRIDGE


Clinton Camp Badly in Debt
Hurt by Ross Perot's popularity, the Clinton campaign is so financially weakened that hundreds of workers have not been paid on time.
Page A24.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Signed Wesley Weger, shortstop; Gennaro Salzano, infielder; and Bill Hardwick and Daniel Ortiz, pitchers.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Signed Curt Young, pitcher, to a contract with Columbus of the International League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Juan Agosto, pitcher.
Sent Bert Heffernan, catcher, to Jacksonville of the Southern League.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Activated Alejandro Pena, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Pete Smith, pitcher, to Richmond of the International League.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Signed Phil Nevin, third baseman, to a minor-league contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Recalled Kyle Abbott, pitcher, and Wes Chamberlain, outfielder, from Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Optioned Kim Batiste, shortstop and Cliff Brantley, pitcher, to Scranton-Wilkes-Barre.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Signed Danny Cox, pitcher, to a contract with Buffalo of the American Association.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Signed Jim Rosenbohm, Jeff Myers, Jorge Vazquez, and Mark Saugstad, pitchers; Benji Simonton and Kumundae Miller, outfielders, and Armond Anderson and Keith Stafford, infielders, to minor-league contracts.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Named Eddie Jordan assistant coach.
Continental Basketball Association
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Signed Kevin McKenna, coach and director of basketball operations, for the 1992-93 season.
Football  National Football League
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Ron Hallstrom, offensive lineman. Arena Football League
ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Signed Darin Mrachek, offensive-defensive lineman.
SACRAMENTO ATTACK -- Signed Eric Hickerson, wide receiver-defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Signed Ken Sabourin, defenseman. International Hockey League
IHL -- Elected Russel A. Parker, owner and president of the Kansas City Blades, chairman of the board of governors.


People
*
Jamie Rhind has been named senior vice president and associate media director at Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York.
Mr.
Rhind had been a media supervisor at Young &amp; Rubicam, New York.


Magic's Scott Undergoes Arthroscopy
Orlando Magic forward DENNIS SCOTT underwent an arthroscopic procedure on his right knee yesterday after injuring the joint during rehabilitation of a tendon in the leg.
Scott underwent outpatient surgery on April 2 for inflammation of the tendon in his right leg.
Scott averaged 19.9 points in just 18 games for the Magic last season, missing most of the year because of the leg injury. (AP)


Justices Affirm Law in California Restricting Property Tax Increases
The Supreme Court today upheld the constitutionality of California's Proposition 13, a property tax system based on the date of purchase that has pitted new neighbor against old and created startling differences in tax bills for nearly identical houses.
The 8-to-1 decision, with a majority opinion by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, was scarcely an endorsement of the system, the product of a taxpayer revolt against soaring tax assessments in California in the mid-1970's.


More Arrests in Milwaukee
The police today arrested at least 73 anti-abortion protesters, 47 of them children, outside a women's clinic where hundreds of abortion rights supporters locked arms to protect it.
Many of those arrested were adults and children who kneeled or lay in the street outside the clinic and refused to move.
Today's arrests followed dozens of others on Tuesday outside abortion clinics in Milwaukee, where protesters plan a weeks-long campaign.


Valvano Is Ill With Cancer
Jim Valvano, the former basketball coach at North Carolina State and Iona who is now a television commentator, is ill with cancer, according to ESPN and his agent.
The network, which employs Valvano on its college basketball telecasts, made a brief announcement of the illness at the end of its 7 P.M.
SportsCenter telecast last night.
It did not elaborate on the type of cancer, nor did it give any details of the extent of the illness.


Howe Case Nears Solution
Steve Howe could learn just what definite sanctions baseball has in store for him as early as next week, after management and union officials yesterday agreed upon an interim solution to a grievance that was pending on behalf of the suspended Yankee pitcher.
"What we have is an agreement that the commissioner will rule on a definite sanction within the next 14 days," Steve Greenberg, the deputy commissioner, said.
The agreement, which has been dated back to Tuesday, eliminates the need for the players association to pursue the grievance.
Union officials protested the suspension handed the pitcher on June 8 by Fay Vincent, the commissioner, because of its indefinite nature.


Jordan Says Bulls Won't Visit Bush
MICHAEL JORDAN says he doesn't think there will be any trip to the White House for the Chicago Bulls, who recently won their second consecutive National Basketball Association title.
Jordan was criticized last year for not accompanying the Bulls to meet PRESIDENT BUSH after the team won its first title.
Jordan said at the time that a previously scheduled vacation with his family took precedence.
But a Bulls official said yesterday that Jordan might have spoken out of turn about any White House trips.
"First of all, we haven't been invited," said JOYCE SZYMANSKI, a team spokeswoman.
"And if and when we are invited, we'll decide then what will happen."
In any case, Jordan said both he and SCOTTIE PIPPEN, his All-Star teammate, would be likely to be busy with the United States Olympic basketball team. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Braces for a Political 'Hurricane'
President Bush today described the voter discontent that has swept both the nation and his campaign as "a hurricane blowing out there," but vowed to ride it out and to take on Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot forcefully.
In a question-and-answer session at an oil recycling company in this Northern California city, workers and area residents politely but firmly put Mr.
Bush on the defensive, questioning his record on issues, including the environment, education and the economy.
One asked him to explain why Mr.
Perot was drawing away his supporters, and another suggested that he had been goaded by Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Perot into holding the forum because of their appearances on call-in programs.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a statement by President Boris N. Yeltsin referred incorrectly to the home state of Bob Smith, the deputy chairman of a Senate committee investigating missing American servicemen.
He is a Republican of New Hampshire, not Oregon.





THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Makes Plea for Racial Harmony
At an outdoor rally before an overwhelmingly white crowd in conservative Orange County, Ross Perot today made his most explicit plea for racial harmony since he first began flirting with the idea of running for President.
"We're a nation of many races and many creeds," Mr.
Perot said.
"We are a melting pot. That is a strength, not a weakness."


St.-Tropez Journal; On the Riviera, Naughty Town Feels a Firm Hand
Tired of hibernating under North European skies, the tourists are back in town to celebrate the summer, squeezing their yachts into port, camping among the vineyards, and, come nightfall, swirling their bronzed torsos on motorbikes through the scent of pizza and french fries.
St.-Tropez was not always so.
Few people had heard of the little fishing port until it introduced Europe to the topless bikini and freedom in the sun some 30 years ago.
But its fame as an unspoiled hideaway for movie stars and designers soon rippled through the Mediterranean; villas and hotels followed and St.-Tropez came to mean the naughtiest place in France.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Saturday misstated the change in consumer prices for the New York City region in May.
The change was a decrease of 0.2 percent, not an increase.


Family Suing F.B.I. in Death Of 'Informer'
HOUSTON, June 18 -- The family of a wealthy businessman who was mysteriously murdered here has filed an unusual lawsuit against the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Justice Department.
The suit says that he was an informer for the Government and that the Government failed to protect him.
The lawsuit, filed on May 26 in Federal District Court by the widow and the son of the businessman, Mark Osborne, asserts that he was cooperating with the bureau and other agencies in criminal investigations.
The suit maintains that "both an inducement to enter that engagement and a provision of it" had been a promise by the F.B.I.
"to assist and protect Mr. Osborne both during and after the investigations."


Review/Architecture; A Master of Masses, Last in a Long Line
LOUIS I. KAHN believed that architecture "shouldn't just exist for itself; it should throw out sparks to others." Wear something flameproof to the Museum of Modern Art this summer.
Better yet, just let the mind catch fire.
The museum's new Kahn retrospective sends out more sparks than any architecture show in recent years.
First shown at the Philadelphia Museum of Art last fall, "Louis I. Kahn: In the Realm of Architecture" is immeasurably enriched by its current setting.
For one thing, the show's installation, a tour de force of exhibition design by Arata Isozaki, is much improved.
The lighting is clearer, the viewing spaces more compact.
These refinements make it easier to focus on the detailed scale of Kahn's drawings and models and to see how his individual projects add up to a body of work.


Review/Art; Humble Jars and Bowls Valued More Than Gold
Korean ceramic work was described by an astonished 12th-century Chinese visitor as having "the radiance of jade and the clarity of water," and from early times Chinese and Japanese collectors are said to have valued it above gold.
They still do, as the 114 pieces of Korean ceramics from the famed Ataka Collection, now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, attest.
The collection was amassed by a Japanese businessman, Eiichi Ataka, now 93 years old, and is widely considered the premier private gathering of this work.
Threatened with dispersal in 1975, the collection was purchased by the Sumitomo Corporation and donated to the city of Osaka, Japan.


California Eccentrics And the Big One
Their best friends won't tell them, but Andrew Yates, the director, and Mark Edens, the writer, must be told anyway: their first feature film, a comedy titled "Life on the Edge," is inept and unfunny to the point of being terrible.
It's about some eccentric Los Angeles types caught in a hillside house after an earthquake, the long-promised "big one." There are gags about adultery, plastic surgery, "channeling," homosexuality, cocaine, bungee jumping (called skywalking in the film), hidden gold and childbirth.
The performances suit the material and Mr.
Yates's direction of it.


Lubavitch Leader Undergoes Surgery


Padres Pound Giants In a Literal Slugfest
Padres 9, Giants 4
SAN FRANCISCO, June 18 (AP) -- Gary Sheffield hit two homers, including a grand slam, and Trevor Wilson took it out on Fred McGriff by hitting him with a pitch that caused a bench-clearing brawl during the San Diego Padres' 9-4 victory over the San Francisco Giants tonight.
Frank Seminara (1-2) picked up his first major league victory in his fourth big league start, going six innings before being ejected for throwing a pitch that hit Robby Thompson opening the seventh inning.
The benches emptied for a second time, but only words were exchanged and the game proceeded after Mike Maddux replaced Seminara, who allowed five hits and four runs in helping send the Giants to their sixth straight loss.
McGriff had stepped in against Wilson after Sheffield hit his first career slam in the fourth to give the Padres an 8-0 lead.
Wilson's first pitch hit McGriff in his right leg, and McGriff dropped his bat and charged the mound.
Wilson threw his glove at McGriff, and the two tumbled to the ground.
In an instant, the benches cleared and players and coaches from the two sides mixed it up in an all-out fight.
It took about 15 minutes for the umpires to restore order and resume play.
At one point, the fight seemed to be dying down.
But as Wilson walked away from the mound toward the dugout, McGriff went over to him and the two exchanged punches again.
Other players and coaches rejoined the melee before calm was restored.
Both Wilson and McGriff were ejected.
Wilson (5-6), whose face appeared red and puffy as he left the game, was pounded for eight hits in three and two-third innings.
Sheffield, who had a career-high six runs batted in and boosted his homer total to 12, apparently was injured during the fighting and left with a strained left shoulder.
McGriff suffered a strained muscle in his left rib cage.
Both players were listed as day to day.
Four others were also ejected: the San Francisco batting coach, Dusty Baker; the Padres' third base coach, Bruce Kimm; the Padres' bullpen catcher, Ron Ogelsby, and Padre pitcher Jose Melendez.
Reds 7, Braves 5
ATLANTA (AP) -- Pinch-hitter Glenn Braggs hit a two-run homer in the 10th inning, lifting surging Cincinnati over Atlanta before 47,896, the largest regular-season crowd at Fulton County Stadium since 1983.
Braggs hit the first pitch from reliever Mike Stanton (1-4) over the left-field fence after Hal Morris walked with one out.
It was Braggs's first home run of the year.
Scott Bankhead (8-1) picked up the victory with two and one-third innings of relief in the opener of the four-game series between two of baseball's hottest teams.
Norm Charlton picked up his 16th save.
It was Cincinnati's seventh victory in a row and 19th in 23 games.
The loss snapped Atlanta's winning streak at seven and was only the Braves' third loss in 19 games.
Deion Sanders had three hits off Reds starter Tim Belcher and is 7 for 7 against him this season.
Expos 4, Pirates 0
PITTSBURGH (AP) -- Moises Alou, Larry Walker and Tim Wallach had run-scoring doubles in the first inning, and Chris Nabholz and Jeff Fassero shut out Pittsburgh on three hits.
Nabholz (5-5) was working on a two-hitter when he walked the bases full with one out in the sixth, prompting Manager Felipe Alou to bring on Fassero.
Fassero promptly got Don Slaught, who was 3 for 4 and has 10 hits in his last 15 at-bats, to ground into an inning-ending double play.
Fassero pitched three and two-third innings of one-hit relief for his first save.
The Pirates had won 7 of 8 and 12 of 15 and are now 2-2 since Barry Bonds strained a rib cage muscle Sunday in New York.
Bonds is expected to be out at least another week.
Phillies 4, Cubs 3
PHILADELPHIA (AP) -- Lenny Dykstra's two-run double in the eighth inning rallied Philadelphia over Chicago, snapping the Cubs' six-game winning streak.
Cubs reliever Bob Scanlan (2-4) retired the first two batters in the eighth before Mickey Morandini and pinch-hitter Wally Backman singled.
Chuck McElroy relieved and gave up the two-out, game-winning double to Dykstra on a 3-2 pitch.
Tigers 14, Blue Jays 10
TORONTO (AP) -- Travis Fryman drove in a career-high five runs with a double and a triple, and Cecil Fielder broke a 10-10 tie in the eighth inning with a sacrifice fly as Detroit beat Toronto in a game that lasted 4 hours 1 minute.
Detroit chased Blue Jays starter Dave Stieb with six runs in the second.
Stieb lasted only one and two-third innings, his shortest start of the season, and allowed six runs on four hits while walking three and striking out one.
Twins 3, Royals 1
MINNEAPOLIS (AP) -- Scott Erickson, struggling for almost a year, pitched his best game of the season and got home-run support from Minnesota teammates Kent Hrbek, Shane Mack and Pedro Munoz to beat Kansas City.
Erickson (4-5) was 12-2 with a 1.39 earned run average on June 24, 1991.
From then until Thursday, he was 11-11 with a 5.37 e.r.a.
The Twins' Kirby Puckett had a bunt single in the sixth, extending his hitting streak to 15 games.
He added an eighth-inning triple and is batting .396 in his last 36 games, raising his league-leading average to .349.
Mariners 5, White Sox 4
SEATTLE (AP) -- Harold Reynolds singled with the bases loaded in the 11th inning, giving Seattle its first four-game series sweep over Chicago.
The Mariners won their fourth in a row, while the White Sox lost their fifth straight and 17th in 23 games.
The White Sox are 2-5 in extra-inning games.
The Mariners were the only major league team that had not played an extra-inning game this season.
Brewers 4, Indians 1
MILWAUKEE (AP) -- Bill Wegman pitched the first three-hitter of his career as Milwaukee defeated Cleveland.
Wegman (7-5), whose previous best effort was a four-hitter in 1986, was perfect through four innings before Albert Belle hit his 15th homer on Wegman's first pitch of the fifth.
Cleveland's only other hits were an infield single by Sandy Alomar Jr. in the sixth and a single by Belle in the seventh.
The Brewers improved their record to 34-29 with their fifth victory in six games.
It's Milwaukee's first time at five games over .500 since May 25, 1990.


Clinton Becomes Yeltsin Fan After Early Morning Chat
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas met President Boris N. Yeltsin today, and to hear the likely Democratic Presidential nominee tell it, the half-hour chat with the Russian leader was a meeting of the minds.
"We have some things in common," Mr.
Clinton told reporters as he returned to Arkansas after what he called a "lively and energetic" early morning meeting across the street from the White House with President Yeltsin.
"You know, he had an interesting childhood, a pretty tough childhood and his political obituary's been written several times. The same thing's happened for me. So I admire him a lot."


Art in Review
Edwin Ruda  June Kelly Gallery 591 Broadway, at Houston Street SoHo Through June 23
Edwin Ruda had his first New York solo show 30 years ago, and his recent paintings have the kind of weight -- neither too heavy nor too light -- that seems to come from long practice with his medium.
Stylistically, this is modest-scale geometric abstraction, with rectangles intersecting and smaller barlike forms entering from the side, or suspended tentatively in space.
The work is, however, at least as much about paint as it is about geometry, and one's attention is constantly drawn to the complex brushwork.
It is through texture that the paintings achieve the planar ambiguity that is their most engaging feature.
In "Backtrack," a white field underlies a central form in burnt umber at the same time that it eats away at its edges, so that spatial advance and retreat seem to be in the process of exchanging places.


G.O.P. Cuts Florio's Plan in Its Budget
The leaders of the Republican legislative majority announced today a $14.6 billion budget for 1993 that cuts Gov.
Jim Florio's spending plan by $1.1 billion.
Reducing the Democratic administration's request for all but three departments and agencies -- the Personnel and Agriculture Departments and the Governor's office -- the Republicans made their cuts largely in programs intended to help the poor and the middle class.


Peter Allen, Concert Entertainer And Songwriter, Is Dead at 48
Peter Allen, the popular concert entertainer and Grammy- and Academy Award-winning songwriter, died yesterday at a hospital in San Diego.
He was 48 years old, and lived in Manhattan and had homes near San Diego and in Australia.
He died of an AIDS-related illness, said his personal assistant, Bruce Cudd.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.56
3.71
5.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.64
3.60
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.75
3.69
5.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.83
6.76
8.16
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.79
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.72
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.54
6.54
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Securities Sales Don't Need Punitive Damages
To the Editor:
"Brokers Tilt Field More Against Buyers" (letter, May 30) by James E. Beckley, public member of the Securities Industry Conference on Arbitration, is misleading on securities industry arbitration.
The General Accounting Office, comparing industry arbitrations to those sponsored by nonindustry forums, concuded that "an investor was no more likely to prevail in an independent forum than in an industry-sponsored forum."
Mr.
Beckley's position that arbitration would be fairer if arbitrators were chosen from the "noninvesting public" instead of "business people, lawyers and professors," is absurd.
Would anyone suggest admiralty cases be heard exclusively by people who had never been on a ship, or patent infringement cases by people with no technical knowledge?
Arriving at his main agenda, Mr.
Beckley states that punitive damages are necessary as a "significant deterrent to fradulent conduct." This ignores the severe sanctions (like revocation of a broker's license and substantial fines) available to the Securities and Exchange Commission, the stock exchanges, the National Association of Securities Dealers and all state securities commissioners.
The real beneficiaries of punitive damages would be lawyers for plaintiffs.
They desire a windfall far beyond the real losses of their client and the leverage for exorbitant settlement demands.
Such a result could only increase commissions to cover the costs.
A.
George Saks Exec.
V.P., Smith Barney New York, June 1, 1992.


Tripucka Is a Net, Sort Of
KELLY TRIPUCKA, a 10-year National Basketball Association veteran who played in Europe last season, will play with the Nets on their free agent-rookie summer team.
The 6-foot-6-inch Tripucka, who is 33 years old, has an N.B.A. career scoring average of 17.2 points per game.
Playing for the Nets would be a double homecoming of sorts for Tripucka, who grew up in Bloomfield, N.J., and played four seasons under the new Nets coach, CHUCK DALY, when both were with the Detroit Pistons.


Commuter Lines Bracing for an Amtrak Strike
Transit officials in the New York metropolitan region are planning for service disruptions affecting tens of thousands of commuters next week if railway employees strike Amtrak and Conrail.
The walkout, which is threatened for 12:01 A.M. on Wednesday, would close Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan to commuters who use the Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit, halt Amtrak passenger service throughout the region and elsewhere in the nation and shut down the Shore Line East commuter line in Connecticut.
The Metro-North Commuter Railroad would not be affected directly, officials said.
Nationwide Effects
"Based on what we're hearing from the unions, we anticipate a walkout," said Cliff Black, a spokesman for Amtrak, which carries 60,000 riders a day.
He said that negotiations were continuing with six unions representing 7,900 workers, mostly in the Northeast.


Microlog Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Ruling Clarifies a Curb On State Corporate Tax
The Supreme Court today clarified the meaning of a 33-year-old Federal law intended to shield companies from state income taxes in states where they conduct no business except the "solicitation of orders."
The Court for the first time defined this phrase, the source of many disputed rulings in the lower courts.
The states -- Wisconsin in today's case -- have tried to give the tax immunity as narrow a basis as possible, while companies -- the Wm.
Wrigley Jr.
Company in this case -- have argued that "solicitation" should be broadly defined to include a sales force's other activities like restocking retailers' supplies and servicing products.


Communications World International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


In Nigeria, Democracy Stays on Track
To the Editor:
"Clashes in Nigeria Show the Shakiness of its Balancing Act" (The Week in Review, May 31) gives a wrong impression of Nigeria's political scene.
Recent disturbances have been nipped in the bud.
The Government is in full control of the situation.
With Nigeria at peace with itself, there is no threat to its democratization and economic reforms.
Local and state governments have been democratized.
Elections for the National Assembly will take place July 4, and a civilian president will be elected before the end of this year.
The military is not stage managing the democratization begun in the 1980's, when President Ibraham B. Babangida set up a political bureau of disgruntled nongovernment functionaries, who made concrete recommendations on transition to civil rule.
The program has, with minor modifications in timing, been followed faithfully.
People were later allowed to form political parties and participate in elections to the three tiers of government conducted by the National Electoral Commission, also made up of nongovernment personnel.
As many as 30 political associations were subsequently formed, none of them truly national in character.
Not to repeat the political fragmentation that previously led to civil war, the Government recognized only two political parties, the right-wing National Republic Convention and the left-wing Social Democratic Party.
Interested individuals registered voluntarily and democratically elected their leaders from the ward level.
Hitherto, individuals used money and influence to found political parties and requested people to join, thereby undemocratically imposing themselves as leaders.
The geographical spread of the two parties, as demonstrated by their election performance, reflects their national character.
Their platforms, reflecting a consensus of those of more than 30 unregistered political parties, was drafted by the National Electoral Commission.
Nigeria haas not been spared by the worldwide economic malaise.
But our Government has had success in restructuring the economy to lessen dependence on petroluem.
The Ajaokata iron and steel plant and the aluminum smelting plant are designed to help develop the steel sector and facilitate industrial development.
The projects are therefore cost-effective, and the money invested in them will ultimately be recovered.
Zubair Mahmud Kazaure Ambassador of Nigeria Washington, June 5, 1992


Where's Faldo? Check the Trees
Hoping to find his ball, Nick Faldo climbed 20 feet up a tree today at the United States Open but never recovered it.
"When I was up there," he said later with a laugh, "I thought, Where is Jane?' And then I thought, 'How am I going to get down?"'


Becoming a True Father: A Rocky Road for Glenn
TOO many fathers are not there for their sons, either physically or spiritually.
The sons fall into what the poet Robert Bly calls "a secret despair."
Glenn Barnes knows the feeling, though only recently has the 41-year-old man confronted it.
Monday will mark the completion of his fifth month at the Project Return Foundation, a private drug-treatment program that helps participants get to the bottom of things and turn their lives around, usually over the course of 18 months.


McRae Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Irish Vote Backs European Treaty, Giving New Life to Plan for Unity
Ireland has voted for a treaty on European political and monetary union by a resounding margin, according to referendum results announced today.
The vote appeared to revive the treaty's chances of surviving and gaining wider approval in the rest of the European Community.
"Today here in Ireland," said Prime Minister Albert Reynolds, "after much hard pounding and what many feared would be a damn close-run thing, we have succeeded in putting European union back on the rails."


NEWS SUMMARY
The vote appears to revive the treaty's chances of drawing more support in the 12-nation community.  1  CZECHOSLOVAKS CLOSER TO SPLIT  Leaders of the Czech and Slovak regions agreed to begin preparations to split Czechoslovakia into two nations.
Their regional parliaments are to make the final decisions.  3  HOPE OF AID RECEDES IN SARAJEVO  Fierce fighting continued all around Sarajevo airport, dimming hopes that the United Nations will succeed in carrying out a plan to reopen the airport for a relief airlift.  5  U.N.
SEEKING VIRTUAL ARMY  The United Nations Secretary General says he wants as many countries as possible to make up to 1,000 troops each available on a day's notice for peace operations.  5  PALESTINIANS ARE FOREWARNED  After Palestinian delegates to the Middle East peace talks embraced Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, Israel warned they would be arrested when they returned home.  2  HAITI SWEARS IN REPLACEMENT  A former World Bank official was installed as President by Haiti's military-backed regime.
The meeting was shunned by diplomats and supporters of the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.  3  UBZEKS COAX THEIR RAVAGED LAND  Freed from the yoke of Soviet planners, independent Uzbekistan is reducing the sway of Czar Cotton and feeling its way toward a more rational use of its resources.  4  RUSSIAN RESISTS I.M.F.
The decision was a victory for New York State, which has been unable to find a politically acceptable site for disposing of contaminated medical and industrial waste.  1  Cuomo said the ruling would put pressure on utilities.  10  CLINTON REBUTS JACKSON  Governor Clinton said that he would not retract his criticism of the rap performer Sister Souljah and that if the Rev.
Jesse Jackson wanted to align himself with her, "then that's his business." 1  Perot's offices in Dallas are a shrine to his life.  8  Perot seems headed for confrontation with a Senate panel.  8  Bush told executives he could best bring recovery.  9  APPROVAL OF DEPO-PROVERA URGED  A panel of advisers to the F.D.A. recommended that the agency reverse itself and allow the marketing of the injectable contraceptive Depo-Provera.
Approved for use in about 90 countries, Depo-Provera has been barred from the American market because of concerns that it may cause breast cancer in a small percentage of women.  6  The F.D.A. received worrisome reports on nicotine patches.  6  UNEMPLOYMENT BILL GAINS  The Senate voted to automatically prolong unemployment benefits to the longtime jobless during periods of recession.
A more expensive version of the bill has already passed in the House.
The arrests came after officials spent two days following a convoluted trail of ransom notes.
But law-enforcement officials said they had no information about the whereabouts of the 57-year-old president of Exxon International.  1  NEW WAYS TO TREAT ADDICTS  Packing psychological exercises into hours usually reserved for leisure, drug seminars at places like Odyssey House in Manhattan are among a range of new approaches that experts are trying in the hope of making drug treatment cheaper and more effective.
Many experts believe the ranks of drug users in the country could be thinned considerably if treatment were available for all.  1  Business Digest 35  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  New Guido for the police.
Shrine on Seventh Avenue.
Smoke and veterans' health.
N.J.'s G.O.P. wrecking crew.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: The perfumed workout.  23  Summer poetry: Mary Jo Salter: June -- the gianicolo.  23  Rosanna Warren: Noon.  23  W. S. Merwin: Threshold.  23  Thylias Moss: When I was 'bout ten we didn't play baseball.  23  Charlie Smith: Homage to persistence.  23  Sports 30-34  Obituaries 12  Arts/Entertainment 15-18  Consumer's World 13


Review/Cabaret; Showing Off in Pop-Jazz, With Self-Deflating Wit
"The next wad of music we'll be doing is our moisture medley," said Jim Caruso, a singer who is one-third of the musical-comedy trio Wiseguys, on Tuesday evening at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street.) The group immediately went into a swinging, smoothly harmonized medley of three weather-related Harold Arlen songs: "Right as the Rain," "Come Rain or Come Shine" and "When the Sun Comes Out."
That mixture of mild, self-deflating wit and musical polish defines the style of the trio, whose two other members include Campbell Martin and John Boswell.
The trio, which is appearing at the Oak Room through July 4, alternately pokes fun at itself and shows off its skill at close-harmony singing in a pop-jazz idiom that echoes the soaring chromaticism of the Hi-Lo's.


Another Suspicious Fire Erupts, This One at the Waldorf-Astoria
A small fire broke out in a linen room at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel yesterday evening, the 13th in a string of suspicious fires at midtown Manhattan hotels in the last two weeks, the fire department said.
The fire was started on the same day that a homeless teen-ager pleaded not guilty to charges of arson in five of the other hotel fires and to a charge of attempted arson in a fire at Pennsylvania Station.
With the teen-ager, 17-year-old Raymond C. Dunford, held without bail yesterday, the Waldorf fire compounded worries that either a second arsonist or a copycat was at work.


J. Edward Crabiel, 75, Who Held Posts in New Jersey Government
J.
Edward Crabiel, a New Jersey Democrat who was the state's Secretary of State and the minority leader of the State Senate, died yesterday at St.
Peter's Medical Center in New Brunswick, where he was admitted two weeks earlier.
He was 75 years old and a lifelong resident of Milltown.
He had been suffering for a few weeks from a muscle disease, and his death was caused by acute respiratory failure, said his brother, David B. Crabiel.


Reading Machines for the Blind at a Lower Cost
Reading machines for blind people are now reaching more individuals who need them as both prices and sizes continue to shrink.
These devices, which make use of voice synthesizers, personal computers and other equipment, help the visually impaired develop greater independence by converting text to speech.
Upon request, some manufacturers of the machines send sales representatives to the homes of prospective customers.
They also display their equipment at exhibitions or meetings of organizations that work with blind people (see box).


Fleming Stymies Twins And Racks Up No. 10
Mariners 1, Twins 0
MINNEAPOLIS, June 19 (AP) -- Rookie Dave Fleming rebounded from his worst start of the season with his best, pitching a four-hitter tonight to become the American League's first 10-game winner as the Seattle Mariners beat the Minnesota Twins, 1-0.
Greg Briley began the game with a home run, one of only four hits off Kevin Tapani (6-5).
That was enough for Fleming (10-2), who pitched the Mariners to their fifth straight victory.
Fleming scattered four singles, struck out six and walked two in joining Atlanta's Tom Glavine as the top winners in baseball.
Fleming's nine-game winning streak was ended in his last start, a 14-4 loss to Milwaukee.


Shrine on Seventh Avenue
When the man, now 40, thought of his father, he summoned up the fistfight they'd had on his 16th birthday.
For weeks the air between them had crackled with anger.
Cross words led to shouting.
The old man barked, "So you think you're a man now?" And suddenly the boy of 16 and the father of 40 were circling, showing game faces behind their fists.
The boy was frightened at first.
But confidence grew within him with every flurry of blows that he fended off.
Yes, he was a man now.
He'd turned 16 that day, at last old enough to drive.
And what better evidence of manhood could there be than that he was holding his own in a fight, against the first man he'd ever known?


The Sparrow's Pedigree
To the Editor:
You put words in my mouth in "Watch birds and Your Heart Will Soar" (letter, June 12) when you added the sparrow to my list of familiar birds the average reader could identify.
There is no such bird as the sparrow.
Sparrow refers to a broad group of birds, with 26 species in the Eastern United States: 8 regularly occur in Central Park alone.
The sparrow of city streets is not one of them.
Properly known as the house sparrow, this bird is actually a member of the weaver finch family and hails from Africa.
Released in Brooklyn in 1850, it has been enormously successful.
I had qualms about including the pigeon on my list; pigeon is a taxonomic family with 289 species worldwide, of which 7 occur in the Eastern United States.
The species familiar to city dwellers is known as the rock dove.
REBEKAH CRESHKOFF New York, June 12, 1992


Senate Votes to Extend Jobless Aid, Creating Another Bush Veto Threat
Setting up another showdown with President Bush on a touchy election year issue, the Senate voted today to prolong benefits automatically to the long-term unemployed in times of recession.
The Senate measure, which was passed by a voice vote, would not raise taxes to pay for the benefits, as would a more expensive version passed on June 9 by the House.
But a senior White House official said Mr.
Bush would veto either form of the legislation, not only because he considers both too expensive but because he opposes making a permanent change in the unemployment insurance system now.


Too Few Benefit from Monopolies in the Skies
To the Editor:
I take exception to several conclusions that you and many of the experts you quote reach in your May 22 Economic Watch article on the airline industry battle for dominance of the skies.
In 1978, Congress deregulated the airlines to allow a natural formation of highly competitive industry, encourage new entrants, create jobs, increase airline efficiency, hold down costs and make it cheaper to fly.
What you call consolidation, and I term creeping monopolization, has halted entry by new carriers and sabotaged established carriers in deregulation and entrants (of the 14 relatively alarge new airlines estabished since 1978 only America West survives).
The industry is losing jobs -- 150,000 in the last four years.
Productivity and profits among the three major carriers are low and sinking lower; revenues are not keeping up with costs.
I think readers will recognize that we need more competition, not less.
I would also take issue with the following areas in your assessment:
*To hold up Southwest Airlines as the little engine that could paints an incomplete picture.
Southwest has indeed achieved one of the lowest cost structures in the industry, a record America West has matched.
But neither America West nor any other airline has the leegislatively mandated advantage Congress gave Southwest in 1978, with the Wright amendment.
Southwest profits significantly from the monopoly it has created at Dallas Love Field.
Its fares in the Texas market are considerably higher, compared with those elsewhere in its system (particularly on routes also served by America West.) With artificially high profits from Texas passengers, this "special advantage" as you call it, contributes roughly $75 million to the bottom line annually and allows Southwest to subsidize its operation in markets where it competes with other carriers or loses money.
Without this legislative monopoly, Southwest would be losing money like everyone else.
Southwest has driven ticket prices on competitive routes way below cost.
The carrier will continue to subsidize predatory pricing conditions in other markets as long as it holds onto its monoppoly at Love Field.
*
Rapid growth has been cited by many as a major contributor to the downfall or financial problems of a number of airlines, including America West.
But America West, like Southwest and others, found that the only way for the smaller lines to survive was to grow beyond our original market niches.
The more sucessful we were with new routes and new markets, the fiercer the competition was to grow or be swallowed up.
*
The competitive advantages conferred on the Big Three -- American, United and Delta -- by frequent-flier programs, computerized reservations systems and landing slots are hardly water over the dam.
The proprietary Sabre and Apollo computerized reservations systems contribute $400 million annually to the bottom line for American and United, and offset losses from ticket sales.
America West alone contributes more then $3 million a month to revenue transfers.
Add to that the booking advantages and incentives built into the system, and you have an overwhelming cost advantage, a formidable barrier to entry and a dangerous concentration of air traffic in the hands of a few carriers.
*
The argument that competition among relatively few airlines will keep prices in line with costs is folly.
It hasn't happened yet -- performance and profitability are down, and prices in no way reflect costs -- nor is there any indication from the United States oil and gas, automobile and steel industries that it will.
Industrial consolidation has meant a market closed to innovation, job creation, productivity and fair pricing.
*
Optimism about new entrants is misplaced.
Of the 14 large airlines formed after deregulation in 1978 only America West survives, and it operates in Chapter 11.
Sure, the industry makes room for new entrants, but it penalizes those that become too big, too successful or too aggressive.
By restricting access to airports, the large airlines quash those entrants who attempt to compete on the more popular routes.
Monopolies represent and protect inefficient industries.
Unless the Government uses its antitrust powers to preserve the airline industry's competitive integrity, the result will be even less efficiency, higher fares, fewer passengers, and, ultimately, re-regulation.
And that's something no one wants.
EDWARD R. BEAUVAIS Chairman, America West Airlines Phoenix, June 1, 1992


U.N. Chief Asks for 1,000-Troop Units
The Secretary General of the United Nations said today that he wanted as many countries as possible to make available up to 1,000 troops each on 24 hours' notice for peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security Council.
That and a number of other proposals, including the creation of United Nations stockpiles of military stores and vehicles around the world, would enable him to begin new peacekeeping operations within a few days instead of needing two to three months as at present, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said.


In Surprise, Digital Picks Finance Chief From Inside
In a move that surprised the investment community, the Digital Equipment Corporation today named William M. Steul, a 20-year Digital executive, as chief financial officer.
The post, which had been vacant for nearly a year since James Osterhoff departed, was expected to be filled by someone outside the corporation.
Analysts and insiders had speculated that Digital's directors, worried about the company's continuing financial woes, would insist that Kenneth H. Olsen, Digital's founder and president, bring in a financial professional from the outside.
Neither Mr.
Olsen nor members of the board were available for comment.


Review/Cabaret; Trumpeter, 80, Adds Flavor To the Taste of New Orleans
In recent months, Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street) has been looking toward New Orleans for both its musical and gastronomic inspirations.
There was a Jelly Roll Morton program featuring the pianist Terry Waldo, and in April the kitchen was taken over by a chef from New Orleans, Jean Michael Mayeaux.
For the room's current New Orleans Jazz and Food Festival, the food has become more specifically New Orleans in style (gumbo, jambalaya, fried catfish) and the music is a more generalized reflection of the city.
Mr.
Waldo is still drawing from his Jelly Roll Morton bag with such rarely heard Morton tunes as "Big Lip Blues" and the catchy piano specialty "Freakish," and the clarinetist Orange Kellin is playing the classic version of "High Society." But this band has more polish and individuality than one usually finds in such groups.


Yeltsin's Bandwagon Rolls Into Canada to Cheers and Applause
Stopping in Canada after his visit to the United States, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia was welcomed here today as a man of "courage and purpose" and won commitments similar to those obtained in Washington for more trade and investment.
The Russian leader, who arrived here on Thursday evening from his whirlwind tour of the American grain belt, spent a heady day visiting politicians, businessmen and just ordinary people and winning applause almost everywhere he went.


Howe Won't Meet Vincent
Steve Howe informed Commissioner Fay Vincent today that he does not want to meet with him regarding his guilty plea to a charge of attempting to possess cocaine.
That means Vincent will now impose definite sanctions on the suspended Yankee relief pitcher on Wednesday.
Management and union officials agreed on an interim solution Thursday in which the commissioner would rule in 14 days on definite penalties against Howe for violating baseball's drug policy.
Previously, Vincent had suspended Howe indefinitely, but the union objected to the unspecific nature of the punishment.


The Smoke Around Veterans' Health
Considering how much America knows now about the connection between smoking and health, it's no surprise that 172 veterans' hospitals want to help their patients break the habit.
Unfortunately, the job is going to be a lot harder if the House of Representatives passes the Staggers amendment to the Veterans Health Bill.
Representative Harley Staggers, a Democrat from West Virginia, wants to insure that patients who smoke -- and one in four do -- will have easy access to cigarettes and to smoking lounges.
The Department of Veterans Affairs, on the other hand, has been moving for months to bring its hospitals up to the level of most private institutions.
It wants to ban the sale of cigarettes in hospital shops and allow smoking lounges only outside the building.
The department proposes to be sensible, not censorious.
It would allow exemptions for those patients for whom quitting would be too severe a physcological strain.
And for those who want to quit but find it hard, the hospitals will provide smoking cessation programs.
The Veterans Heatlh bill will be coming up for House action soon.
The surest way to vote for veteran's health is to vote down the Staggers amendment.


Curtis Sliwa Is Shot by Man In Stolen Taxi
Curtis Sliwa, the leader of the Guardian Angels street patrol, was kidnapped in a stolen taxi, shot several times and left bleeding in a lower Manhattan street before dawn yesterday, the police said.
As he settled into a cab shortly after 5 A.M. on his way to his morning talk show on WABC-AM, the police said, a man hiding beside the driver suddenly sat up and opened fire.
At East Seventh Street and Avenue B, the taxi lurched around the corner and Mr.
Sliwa tumbled out, seriously wounded.


COMPANY NEWS: It's a Dad; Paternity Is Established For the Babes in Toyland
Charlie doesn't come bearing cigars.
He doesn't come with a pocketful of quarters to call relatives.
And he doesn't say "Breathe!" when you pull a string.
Other than his dazed grin, it is not quite clear why Charlie is being sold as a father-to-be doll for $20 at F.A.O.
Schwarz.
But in a move that will no doubt delight the Vice President, Charlie yesterday joined Judy, the mommy-to-be doll, on the shelves of the New York toy store.


Patent; 2 Dentists Join the War On Snoring
NOISY, annoying and sometimes even unhealthy, snoring is one of life's most common problems.
Yet while the causes of snoring are usually easy to identify, solutions that do not make a person miserable have always been elusive.
Consider the range of anti-snoring devices that have been used over the years.
One of the oldest and simplest is the tennis ball trick, the practice of sewing a tennis ball into the back of pajamas to keep sleepers from rolling on their backs.
It works for many people but can be uncomfortable and will not help those who snore on their sides or stomachs.


Deal Made on Bugged U.S. Moscow Embassy
The Bush Administration said today that it had closed a deal with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia to resolve the fate of the American Embassy in Moscow that was never occupied because it was bugged by the Soviets.
Work on the embassy was stopped in 1985, after it was determined that the building was so riddled with listening devices implanted by Soviet workers that the structure was in effect a multistory microphone.
Washington and Moscow, as well as the Administration and Congress, have been haggling over what to do with the building ever since.


Classical Music in Review
'Il Barbiere di Siviglia' Metropolitan Opera in the Parks
New Yorkers from the outer boroughs and suburbanites who feel that Manhattan gets all the breaks may take perverse pleasure in the Met's schedule of parks concerts this summer.
Budget cuts forced the company to reduce its season from three weeks to two, and for the first time since the mid-1970's, one of the operas is bypassing Central Park.
It is a considerable loss.
"Il Barbiere di Siviglia," a happy choice for a large audience at any time, makes especially good sense in this Rossini bicentennial year.
And to a number of small pleasures the Met's performance adds one major asset: the splendid Rosina of Ruth Ann Swenson.


Handleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


In Surprise, Digital Picks Finance Chief From Inside
In a move that surprised the investment community, the Digital Equipment Corporation today named William M. Steul, a 20-year Digital executive, as chief financial officer.
The post, which had been vacant for nearly a year since James Osterhoff departed, was expected to be filled by someone outside the corporation.
Analysts and insiders had speculated that Digital's directors, worried about the company's continuing financial woes, would insist that Kenneth H. Olsen, Digital's founder and president, bring in a financial professional from the outside.
Neither Mr.
Olsen nor members of the board were available for comment.


Final Push for the Really Big Democratic Show; New York City Smooths Streets, Soothes Unions and Hopes for a Psychological Lift
From repaving city streets to assigning a deputy mayor to work at Democratic headquarters, New York City has embarked on the final phase of preparations for the Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden.
Officials are trying to put the best face on a city with a nationwide reputation for dashboard-pounding traffic jams, spur-of-the-moment walkouts and menacing muggers.
From City Hall to the 66 hotels where the 5,000 Democratic delegates will be staying, the goal is almost a New York impossibility: four hassle-free days, starting July 13.


New Jersey's G.O.P. Wrecking Crew
The Republicans who control New Jersey's legislature have proposed the biggest spending cuts in history -- less than two weeks before the budget deadline.
Their cuts would profoundly reshape government operations, effectively repudiating the activist role pursued by Gov.
Jim Florio, a Democrat, and Thomas Kean, his Repubican predecessor.
And by keeping their proposal secret until the last minute, they have regrettably foreclosed any serious public debate.
Under the State Constitution, a balanced budget must be passed and signed by July 1.
The prospective deficit in the $15.7 billion budget for the new year is $1.4 billion -- more than half of it because the Republicans have already cut a penny off the sales tax.
With veto-proof majorities in both houses, they have the muscle to enact a spending plan, as they did the tax cut, over a veto.
The Republicans took control of the legislature last November when voters rebelled against big tax increases Mr.
Florio put through the year before.
It's no secret that the Republican aim to dismantle much of what Mr.
Florio has achieved; in addition to budget and tax cuts, for instance, they want to repeal his gun control legislation and dilute state aid to needy schools.
Their budget proposals are a mixed bag.
They deserve credit for tackling the sensitive issue of property tax rebates, in which the state mails yearly checks -- just before Election Day -- to homeowners and renters as a partial offset to local property taxes.
Without admitting it, the Republicans would raise property taxes by reducing rebates.
For the average resident, the increase would exceed any benefits from the sales tax cut.
There is also room for some of the proposed cutbacks in middle management -- although officials say the cuts would be much more severe than the Republicans advertise.
More ominous, the cuts wouild threaten services for the poor.
The Department of Human Services would take a $190 million hit and the Office of Public Advocate, which represents consumer interests, would be virtually eliminated.
The Republican's failure to cut extra state aid to the populous northern counties is blatantly self-serving.
They criticized this aid when those counties were represented largely by Democrats.
With Republicans in more of those seats now, the program escapes their ax.
The Republicans worsened this year's problems by trimming the sales tax, and then cheated the public by delay in disclosing their Draconian spending cuts.
Voting strength does not give license to irresponsibility.


Deltona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Kitty Godfree, Tennis Titlist, Is Dead at 96
Kathleen (Kitty) Godfree, a two-time Wimbledon singles champion, died today.
She was 96 years old.
Her death was announced by officals of Wimbledon, the prestigious grass-court tennis tournament whose 1992 edition will start on Monday.
Mrs.
Godfree had been living in a nursing home in her native London for many years and died of the effects of old age, tournament officials said.


Panatech Research &amp; Development Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Time Out. It's Almost Summer.; June: The Gianicolo
Driven to this, the pairs of lovers roll into the parking lot like shaken dice, and though they've come expressly for a vista much larger than themselves, begin to fuse into each other's eyes.
Oh, that fond conviction of a match made in Heaven!
Below them, from the crest of an ancient hill, the million lamps of Rome light up in rosy approbation, each signaling to one chosen counterpart among the stars the nightly-freshened wish to lie uniquely in its dazzled gaze.


Decision Is Expected to Ease the Pressure on States
The Supreme Court's decision today on nuclear waste will put more pressure on utilities to help states develop disposal sites or face the possibility that low-level radioactive wastes could be stored at their nuclear plants indefinitely, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York said today.
Executives of the nuclear utility industry, which generates 70 percent of the roughly 1 million cubic feet of low-level radioactive waste produced each year in the United States, said the court's decision would have no noticeable affect on their operations.
Pipe, Flanges and Clothing
The reaction in New York and across the country came after the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional a central provision in a 12-year-old Federal law that directed states to begin planning new sites for disposing of low-level waste, mostly items contaminated by contact with radioactive substances like the resins, pipes, flanges, reactor parts and some clothing used by workers at nuclear power plants.
About 30 percent of low-level wastes are the contaminated containers, plastics and radioactive sources used by medical researchers and manufacturers.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; Perot and Senators Seem Headed for a Fight on P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s
Ross Perot appears to be headed for a confrontation with the Senate over his refusal to testify this month at a hearing on American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.
After a private meeting Thursday of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s, a committee spokeswoman said today, "The committee is unanimous in feeling that we do have to have his testimony."


Panel Urges Contraceptive's Approval
A panel of experts on obstetrics and gynecology recommended today that the Food and Drug Administration reverse itself and approve the injectable contraceptive Depo-Provera for use in the United States.
The contraceptive is approved for use in about 90 countries but has been blocked from the United States market because of concerns that it may cause breast cancer in a small percentage of women.
It was not immediately clear whether the F.D.A. would accept the panel's recommendation.
In the 1970's, panels of experts twice recommended that the drug be approved as a contraceptive; though the agency usually accepts such advice, each time it overruled the panels.


The Bad News? Play Edberg
STEVE BRYAN of the United States has been named the new opponent for second-seeded STEFAN EDBERG in the opening round of Wimbledon on Monday.
Bryan was chosen after Edberg's original opponent, ANDRES GOMEZ of Ecuador, withdrew with a knee injury.
GORAN PRPIC of Croatia also withdrew, with an ankle injury. (AP)


American Resource Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CONNECTICUT NATIONAL BANK PLANS TO CHANGE NAME
The Connecticut National Bank, the largest in the state, with 143 branches, will change its name to Shawmut Bank Connecticut on Jan. 11.
Since 1988, the bank has been owned by the Shawmut National Corporation, a Hartford banking company whose other subsidiary banks in Massachusetts and Rhode Island also use the Shawmut name.


The Bad News? Play Edberg
STEVE BRYAN of the United States has been named the new opponent for second-seeded STEFAN EDBERG in the opening round of Wimbledon on Monday.
Bryan was chosen after Edberg's original opponent, ANDRES GOMEZ of Ecuador, withdrew with a knee injury.
GORAN PRPIC of Croatia also withdrew, with an ankle injury. (AP)


Prof. Alta Jablow, 72; Wrote About Folklore
Alta Jablow, professor emeritus of anthropology at Brooklyn College, died on Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was was 72 years old.
Professor Jablow died of natural causes, said her daughter, Lisa Jablow.


'La Boheme' Is Rescheduled
The Metropolitan Opera's production of "La Boheme," scheduled for last night in Cunningham Park in Queens but canceled because of rain, has been rescheduled for tomorrow night at 8.
Cunningham Park is at Grand Central Parkway and 193d Street in Hollis.


Payless Cashways Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Neighbors Say Suspects Lived Quiet Rural Life
The rustic sign about 4 feet square is positioned toward approaching cars at the end of the driveway, just as Musconetcong River Road bends slightly to the right.
In white letters on brown wood it says: "The Seales of Possum Hollow." A fanciful drawing of a smiling seal completes the welcoming effect.
But the Seales who lived here in this rural Hunterdon County hamlet were gone today, in Federal custody and charged with kidnapping Sidney J. Reso, an Exxon official who disappeared from his Morris Township home on April 29.
In their place were at least a dozen taciturn F.B.I. agents whose cars lined the long drive down to the wood-frame bungalow and garage that are shielded from the road by dense foliage.


Uncovered Short Sales Jump 8.7% on Big Board
The number of shares sold short and not yet covered between mid-May and mid-June on the New York Stock Exchange rose sharply for the third straight month, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The short covering, which reflects growing pessimism among investors about the market's direction, ended the period at 820.3 million shares.
That was up 8.7 percent over the 754.6 million reported the month before.
It means short interest on the Big Board has shot up 18.7 percent since mid-March, when it first reversed course.


Lower Fares, Faster Flight, Harder Sell
The fares are a bit lower, the time is shorter and the planes are the same.
So why is T. A. Hwang, the senior vice president of American operations for Singapore Airlines, fretting about finding enough travelers willing to fly to Singapore from New York over the Atlantic rather than by way of the Pacific, long the traditional route?
"It's a hard sell," he conceded.
Although such service has been available, with stops in Europe, from European carriers, only a trickle of travelers have chosen the alternative route.
"The perception is that it is shorter to go to the Far East over the Pacific -- to fly to Japan and then connect to Singapore," he said.


Review/Dance; Ferri in 'Fall River Legend' Debut
American Ballet Theater upheld its best artistic traditions on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Its varied program featured both serious choreography and lighthearted entertainment.
The dancing was fine.
And the notable performers included the ballerina Alessandra Ferri and the jazz vocalist Bobby McFerrin.
Miss Ferri, an Italian dancer from Milan who was formerly a star of the Royal Ballet in London, made her debut as the Accused in this season's first performance of "Fall River Legend," Agnes de Mille's dance-drama inspired by the trial of Lizzie Borden, a shy New England woman accused of murdering her father and stepmother.
Mr.
McFerrin is one of several musical and theatrical personalities who have been invited to recite Larry Gelbart's comic text for Michael Smuin's new version of "Peter and the Wolf."


British Intend to Sell Off Maxwell Empire in U.S.
The British court-appointed administrators running the bankrupt Maxwell Communication Corporation intend to split up and sell the company's vast United States publishing and information businesses, one of the administrators said today.
The administrator, Mark Homan, said individual transactions would have to be approved by a United States bankruptcy judge.
The businesses include Macmillan, the publisher; the Official Airline Guides, and P. F. Collier, which produces encyclopedias.


Independent Expert Named to Draw District Lines
In a ruling that sent shivers through the majority parties in the Legislature, a panel of three Federal judges sitting in Utica appointed an independent expert today to begin drawing a new legislative redistricting plan.
The order stunned both the Democrats who dominate the Assembly and the Republicans who dominate the Senate because the judges have yet to rule that the redistricting plan passed by the Legislature last month is flawed.
A trial on that matter is to begin in Utica on Wednesday.


Not So Young, but Lewis Is Still Fast
For Carl Lewis, perhaps the greatest athlete ever in track and field, it was another night at the office, and not a difficult night except for calf cramps.
For Andre Cason, a leading pretender to Lewis's sprinting throne, it was a disaster, his Olympic dreams ended by a torn left Achilles' tendon.
This was the first night of the United States Olympic trials, eight days of competition over a 10-day span.
In draining weather -- the temperature was 92 degrees and the humidity 51 percent -- Lewis ran easily in winning his men's 100-meter heat in 10.33 seconds.
Then he finished second to his teammate, Mike Marsh, in the quarterfinals, 10.09 (the fastest of the night) to 10.17. 16 Advance to Semifinals
The semifinals and final will be run Saturday afternoon.
Sixteen men advanced to the semifinals, among them Lewis, Marsh and a former world record-holder, Leroy Burrell.


The Sparrow's Pedigree
To the Editor:
You put words in my mouth in "Watch birds and Your Heart Will Soar" (letter, June 12) when you added the sparrow to my list of familiar birds the average reader could identify.
There is no such bird as the sparrow.
Sparrow refers to a broad group of birds, with 26 species in the Eastern United States: 8 regularly occur in Central Park alone.
The sparrow of city streets is not one of them.
Properly known as the house sparrow, this bird is actually a member of the weaver finch family and hails from Africa.
Released in Brooklyn in 1850, it has been enormously successful.
I had qualms about including the pigeon on my list; pigeon is a taxonomic family with 289 species worldwide, of which 7 occur in the Eastern United States.
The species familiar to city dwellers is known as the rock dove.
REBEKAH CRESHKOFF New York, June 12, 1992


Mets Take a Meeting and a Rare Victory
The ninth inning couldn't have been any more charged emotionally, more loaded with implications.
There had been an encouraging comeback for the Mets.
There had been a mortifying failure at the plate in the eighth.
In the interest of the season, there couldn't be another defeat.
And then there was the pitch to Vince Coleman, whose home run had got the Mets even in the fifth.
This time he sent the Mets into their clubhouse with a triumph when he curled a single into right field to score Dick Schofield from second for a 4-3 decision over the St.
Louis Cardinals.


Shrine on Seventh Avenue
When the man, now 40, thought of his father, he summoned up the fistfight they'd had on his 16th birthday.
For weeks the air between them had crackled with anger.
Cross words led to shouting.
The old man barked, "So you think you're a man now?" And suddenly the boy of 16 and the father of 40 were circling, showing game faces behind their fists.
The boy was frightened at first.
But confidence grew within him with every flurry of blows that he fended off.
Yes, he was a man now.
He'd turned 16 that day, at last old enough to drive.
And what better evidence of manhood could there be than that he was holding his own in a fight, against the first man he'd ever known?


Johnson Wins, But Not Really
The twisting comeback trail of Ben Johnson took another turn tonight.
Thirty minutes after the former Olympian appeared to have won his qualifying race in the 100 meters at the Canadian Olympic trials, meet officials, citing a malfunction in the electronic starting mechanism, scratched all three 100 meters heats held today and rescheduled them for Saturday afternoon.
Running in a driving rain, Johnson easily won the third heat of the 100 in what appeared to be the fastest time of the day.


Rival of Haiti's Ousted President Is Installed as the Prime Minister
Marc L. Bazin was installed today as Haiti's Prime Minister in a ceremony that was attended by many of this country's leading politicians and businessmen but shunned by foreign diplomats and supporters of the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Mr.
Bazin, a 60-year-old lawyer and former World Bank official, was appointed to the post over Father Aristide's objections by Haiti's army-backed Provisional President, Joseph Nerette.


AAR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


In Surprise, Digital Picks Finance Chief From Inside
In a move that surprised the investment community, the Digital Equipment Corporation today named William M. Steul, a 20-year Digital executive, as chief financial officer.
The post, which had been vacant for nearly a year since James Osterhoff departed, was expected to be filled by someone outside the corporation.
Analysts and insiders had speculated that Digital's directors, worried about the company's continuing financial woes, would insist that Kenneth H. Olsen, Digital's founder and president, bring in a financial professional from the outside.
Neither Mr.
Olsen nor members of the board were available for comment.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Won't Back Down in Tiff With Jackson Over a Rap Singer
Aggressively rebutting the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, Gov.
Bill Clinton said today that he would not "back down on what I said" at the conference of the Rainbow Coalition last weekend about remarks attributed to a rap performer.
"I bragged on the Rainbow Coalition and its programs," Mr.
Clinton told reporters as he entered a radio station, defending his speech at the conference.
"I criticized divisive language by Sister Souljah. If Jesse Jackson wants to align himself with that now and claim that's the way he felt, then that's his business."


MDS Health reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


'Day of Absence' Marks Juneteenth Observance


Langer Biomechanics reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Whispers, Anger and Doubt As Britons Rally to Princess
There was a polite ripple of applause as the carriage carrying Queen Elizabeth II and the Prince of Wales curled beside the grandstand at the Royal Ascot on Tuesday.
It was the opening day of the summer season, and the men in top hats and morning coats and the women in pastel dresses were there as much to watch the members of the royal family as the race horses.
But it was the second carriage, the one carrying the Princess of Wales, that caused the commotion.
As it approached, the applause began to swell, growing louder and louder.
Behind the ropes, some people were shouting, and waving hats in the air.
"Di!" one man hollered, above the din.
"We're with you!" No Public Comment
Two weeks after newspapers in London began printing excerpts from a new book depicting the 30-year-old Princess as abjectly depressed and even suicidal over her marriage to the Prince of Wales, Britons remain alternately enthralled and horrified.


The Perfumed Workout
This is not to knock New York, which is great, with its opera and theater and bridges and tunnels and subways and everything, but it would be even better with some honeysuckle vines in bloom.
In June the perfect world has to have the smell of honeysuckle on the morning air, and plenty of it.
For exercise, too, nothing beats walking out there into that honeysuckle with a scythe and pruning shears and a saw and some good heavy gloves and flinging yourself at it.
It's like being in low-risk combat.
As a sport, it beats pounding that New York asphalt in jogging sneakers.


Churchill Downs Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


In Nigeria, Democracy Stays on Track
To the Editor:
"Clashes in Nigeria Show the Shakiness of its Balancing Act" (The Week in Review, May 31) gives a wrong impression of Nigeria's political scene.
Recent disturbances have been nipped in the bud.
The Government is in full control of the situation.
With Nigeria at peace with itself, there is no threat to its democratization and economic reforms.
Local and state governments have been democratized.
Elections for the National Assembly will take place July 4, and a civilian president will be elected before the end of this year.
The military is not stage managing the democratization begun in the 1980's, when President Ibraham B. Babangida set up a political bureau of disgruntled nongovernment functionaries, who made concrete recommendations on transition to civil rule.
The program has, with minor modifications in timing, been followed faithfully.
People were later allowed to form political parties and participate in elections to the three tiers of government conducted by the National Electoral Commission, also made up of nongovernment personnel.
As many as 30 political associations were subsequently formed, none of them truly national in character.
Not to repeat the political fragmentation that previously led to civil war, the Government recognized only two political parties, the right-wing National Republic Convention and the left-wing Social Democratic Party.
Interested individuals registered voluntarily and democratically elected their leaders from the ward level.
Hitherto, individuals used money and influence to found political parties and requested people to join, thereby undemocratically imposing themselves as leaders.
The geographical spread of the two parties, as demonstrated by their election performance, reflects their national character.
Their platforms, reflecting a consensus of those of more than 30 unregistered political parties, was drafted by the National Electoral Commission.
Nigeria haas not been spared by the worldwide economic malaise.
But our Government has had success in restructuring the economy to lessen dependence on petroluem.
The Ajaokata iron and steel plant and the aluminum smelting plant are designed to help develop the steel sector and facilitate industrial development.
The projects are therefore cost-effective, and the money invested in them will ultimately be recovered.
Zubair Mahmud Kazaure Ambassador of Nigeria Washington, June 5, 1992


No Introduction Necessary
There was a rumble in Phoenix yesterday.
CHARLES BARKLEY, who was traded to the Suns this week, was passing through on his way to work out with the United States Olympic basketball team.
At a news conference, the All-Star N.B.A. forward made a few points in typically direct fashion.
He will play three more years; he couldn't have returned to Philadelphia; he expects to help the Suns win a championship, and he has no problem with Arizona's lack of a holiday honoring Martin Luther King Jr.


Brick Brewing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Securities Sales Don't Need Punitive Damages
To the Editor:
"Brokers Tilt Field More Against Buyers" (letter, May 30) by James E. Beckley, public member of the Securities Industry Conference on Arbitration, is misleading on securities industry arbitration.
The General Accounting Office, comparing industry arbitrations to those sponsored by nonindustry forums, concuded that "an investor was no more likely to prevail in an independent forum than in an industry-sponsored forum."
Mr.
Beckley's position that arbitration would be fairer if arbitrators were chosen from the "noninvesting public" instead of "business people, lawyers and professors," is absurd.
Would anyone suggest admiralty cases be heard exclusively by people who had never been on a ship, or patent infringement cases by people with no technical knowledge?
Arriving at his main agenda, Mr.
Beckley states that punitive damages are necessary as a "significant deterrent to fradulent conduct." This ignores the severe sanctions (like revocation of a broker's license and substantial fines) available to the Securities and Exchange Commission, the stock exchanges, the National Association of Securities Dealers and all state securities commissioners.
The real beneficiaries of punitive damages would be lawyers for plaintiffs.
They desire a windfall far beyond the real losses of their client and the leverage for exorbitant settlement demands.
Such a result could only increase commissions to cover the costs.
A.
George Saks Exec.
V.P., Smith Barney New York, June 1, 1992.


No Introduction Necessary
There was a rumble in Phoenix yesterday.
CHARLES BARKLEY, who was traded to the Suns this week, was passing through on his way to work out with the United States Olympic basketball team.
At a news conference, the All-Star N.B.A. forward made a few points in typically direct fashion.
He will play three more years; he couldn't have returned to Philadelphia; he expects to help the Suns win a championship, and he has no problem with Arizona's lack of a holiday honoring Martin Luther King Jr.


Storm System Brings More Twisters to Midwest


Micron Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 4


Beat 'Em, and Then Join 'Em
GORD ROBERTS, a defenseman on the Pittsburgh team that knocked Boston out of the Stanley Cup semifinals the last two seasons, has signed with the Bruins, the club said yesterday.


Altai reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


NORTHERN TELECOM NOTES FIBER-OPTICS ADVANCE
Northern Telecom, the Canadian maker of telecommunications equipment, announced yesterday an advance in fiber-optic cable transmission, which conveys data with pulses of light.
The advance involves the aiming of the light source into the cable.
Current fiber-optic design requires the precise alignment of a tiny laser into a fiber-optic filament.
The alignment must be within one-tenth of a micron, a unit of measurement. (For example, a human hair equals 70 microns.) Northern Telecom's light source needs to be aligned within 10 to 20 microns.
The Northern Telecom part is far cheaper to manufacture and could reduce the cost of fiber-optic systems significantly.


Review/Pop; Tripping Back to the 60's (but a Kilt?)
Any band with a drummer in a kilt who comes out from behind his drums, lies down on the stage and keeps time with his sticks while the guitarist, also lying on his back, plays a quiet psychedelic interlude, his legs swaying gently in the air above his head, deserves a hearty round of applause.
The Dentists, from Kent, England, are such a band, and at CBGB on Wednesday night they got the crowd response they had earned.
Except for the drummer, the Dentists all look as if they could be dentists on holiday: short haircuts sprinkled with gray, striped polo shirts, goofy striped boxer shorts.
They played with admirable passion and abandon, as if they never wanted to go back to their day jobs.
The music was a punky, fuzzy takeoff of 1960's guitar-pop, with trippy, good-natured songs like "Strawberries Are Growing in My Garden (and It's Wintertime)." A Dentists compilation, "Dressed," is available on the Long Island-based independent label Homestead Records, which sponsored the CBGB showcase as part of the New Music Seminar.
Also on the bill were Love Child, a post-Nirvana grunge band with a completely incompetent rhythm section and two singers, one male and one female, neither of whom could sing; and the Cake Kitchen, a politely droning neo-psychedelic band from New Zealand.


Man Tied to Mafia Guilty on 10 Counts
A man identified as the boss of a Greek organized-crime group based in Queens has been convicted of racketeering, gambling, loan sharking and tax-fraud charges.
The 57-year-old defendant, Spyredon (Spiros) Velentzas, was found guilty on Thursday night of 10 charges in his trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
The jury failed to reach a verdict on two other charges against him involving the murder of a gambling rival.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about Kidz Mouse, a computer pointing device for children, misidentified the manufacturer.
It is Logitech Inc.


Cubs Send Walton to Minors
The Chicago Cubs sent outfielder JEROME WALTON, the 1989 National League rookie of the year, to their Class AAA farm team in Iowa yesterday and recalled catcher RICK WILKINS.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
West End Avenue between 72d and 79th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the West Side Basketball League street fair.
TOMORROW
Second Avenue between 96th and 68th streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Second Avenue street fair.
Fifty-Second Street between Seventh Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Association for the Handicapped street fair.


VIDEO-CONFERENCING SYSTEM SET FOR DEMOCRATS
The Nynex Corporation's New York Telephone Company unit will provide delegates and party officials at next month's Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden with an advanced video-conferencing system.
Video conferencing uses television and telephone linkups to allow people meeting at different locations to see and talk to one another.
The convention system will connect several conference rooms and a special suite for party officials.
New York Telephone said its convention system would allow participants to view live television coverage of convention activities and view videotapes of previous days' events.


MTC Electronic Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Beliefs
Father's Day is here, and a lot of fathers aren't.
The flight of fathers from the home is one of the great social changes of recent years -- a vast ozone hole in the family ecology.
There is a debate among those who find the causes and the cures of this change in economic forces, those who emphasize government policies and those who point to basic American beliefs and moral standards as well as everyday culture.
It is simply inconceivable that a shift of this magnitude, or a sensible discussion of that shift, could occur without involving all these things.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress; Perot and Senators Seem Headed for a Fight on P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s
Ross Perot appears to be headed for a confrontation with the Senate over his refusal to testify this month at a hearing on American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.
After a private meeting Thursday of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s, a committee spokeswoman said today, "The committee is unanimous in feeling that we do have to have his testimony."


Kitty Godfree, Tennis Titlist, Is Dead at 96
Kathleen (Kitty) Godfree, a two-time Wimbledon singles champion, died today.
She was 96 years old.
Her death was announced by officals of Wimbledon, the prestigious grass-court tennis tournament whose 1992 edition will start on Monday.
Mrs.
Godfree had been living in a nursing home in her native London for many years and died of the effects of old age, tournament officials said.


On the Border Cafes Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to March 23


New Jersey's G.O.P. Wrecking Crew
The Republicans who control New Jersey's legislature have proposed the biggest spending cuts in history -- less than two weeks before the budget deadline.
Their cuts would profoundly reshape government operations, effectively repudiating the activist role pursued by Gov.
Jim Florio, a Democrat, and Thomas Kean, his Repubican predecessor.
And by keeping their proposal secret until the last minute, they have regrettably foreclosed any serious public debate.
Under the State Constitution, a balanced budget must be passed and signed by July 1.
The prospective deficit in the $15.7 billion budget for the new year is $1.4 billion -- more than half of it because the Republicans have already cut a penny off the sales tax.
With veto-proof majorities in both houses, they have the muscle to enact a spending plan, as they did the tax cut, over a veto.
The Republicans took control of the legislature last November when voters rebelled against big tax increases Mr.
Florio put through the year before.
It's no secret that the Republican aim to dismantle much of what Mr.
Florio has achieved; in addition to budget and tax cuts, for instance, they want to repeal his gun control legislation and dilute state aid to needy schools.
Their budget proposals are a mixed bag.
They deserve credit for tackling the sensitive issue of property tax rebates, in which the state mails yearly checks -- just before Election Day -- to homeowners and renters as a partial offset to local property taxes.
Without admitting it, the Republicans would raise property taxes by reducing rebates.
For the average resident, the increase would exceed any benefits from the sales tax cut.
There is also room for some of the proposed cutbacks in middle management -- although officials say the cuts would be much more severe than the Republicans advertise.
More ominous, the cuts wouild threaten services for the poor.
The Department of Human Services would take a $190 million hit and the Office of Public Advocate, which represents consumer interests, would be virtually eliminated.
The Republican's failure to cut extra state aid to the populous northern counties is blatantly self-serving.
They criticized this aid when those counties were represented largely by Democrats.
With Republicans in more of those seats now, the program escapes their ax.
The Republicans worsened this year's problems by trimming the sales tax, and then cheated the public by delay in disclosing their Draconian spending cuts.
Voting strength does not give license to irresponsibility.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ennis Business Forms reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Classical Music in Review
Beverly Hill Soprano Merkin Concert Hall
Beverly Hill, a young American soprano who studies in New York and the Netherlands and who has made recent appearances in what used to be the Soviet Union, sang a collection of what were mainly Italian, French, German and Russian songs on Sunday afternoon.
Together, they showed both her pleasing and unfinished sides.
There is just enough constriction in Ms.
Hill's technique to rob her voice of all the color and heft of which it seems ultimately capable.
This results in a tendency toward overbrightness and a little bit too much vibrato for comfort.
Pitch is an occasional problem, but it seems to right itself once the singer is properly warmed up.
Ms.
Hill made her best effect when she allowed her clear sound to float lightly over such songs as Reynaldo Hahn's "D'une prison" and "Die Mainacht" by Brahms.
Her poorest choice of repertory was perhaps the Rachmaninoff "Vocalise," which offered an unintended catalogue of all that is not quite right with her voice to date.


Final Push for the Really Big Democratic Show; New York City Smooths Streets, Soothes Unions and Hopes for a Psychological Lift
From repaving city streets to assigning a deputy mayor to work at Democratic headquarters, New York City has embarked on the final phase of preparations for the Democratic National Convention at Madison Square Garden.
Officials are trying to put the best face on a city with a nationwide reputation for dashboard-pounding traffic jams, spur-of-the-moment walkouts and menacing muggers.
From City Hall to the 66 hotels where the 5,000 Democratic delegates will be staying, the goal is almost a New York impossibility: four hassle-free days, starting July 13.


THE 1992 CAMPIAGN: Undeclared Candidate; Where Perot Exhibits A Lifetime of Memories
When talking to reporters he suspects of not properly understanding him, Ross Perot will sometimes offer an invitation: Come on up and see my office; then you'll see what I'm all about.
And he is right.
What Ross Perot is about -- what he has done in his life, what he thinks, what he believes in, what he treasures -- is on permanent display in what amounts to a Museum of Perot here in a suite of offices on the 17th floor of a high-rise in North Dallas.


U.S. Advisers Will Aid Russians In Modernizing Banking System
Officials of the Russian Government and the Federal Reserve announced yesterday that they were creating an advisory group to help Russia develop a banking system that can cope with modern business practices and help speed the transition to a market economy.
The group, the Russian-American Bankers Forum, was assembled by E. Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Its role is strictly advisory, but it has the endorsement of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Electronics Instead of Paper
Although there are more than 1,000 banks in Russia, they lack many of the services taken for granted in countries whose economies did not mature under Communism.
Because business enterprises were financed by the state for decades, Russian banks have not developed the skills needed to collect money, or deposits, from areas with surpluses, and make loans in areas with shortages.
They also lack systems to transfer money quickly among banks and businesses and keep records of the transfers.


Classical Music in Review
Klezfest '92 Symphony Space
On Thursday night, Klezfest '92 offered two klezmer ensembles and two messages.
The first half of this evening honored tradition; the second attempted to build on it.
Before intermission, Kapelye, a quintet of clarinet, violin, tuba, banjo and piano, rendered faithful copies of the festive dance music and Yiddish theater songs that have enjoyed revival in the last few years.
Bound together by the pleasant patter of Henry Sapoznik and featuring the fluid singing and dancing of Michael Alpert and the splendid clarinet playing of Ken Maltz, Kapelye functions as a kind of preservation society, bent on keeping old values fresh for new ears.


Quick Returns: Kelly to Yanks, Barfield to D.L.
Two days ago, Pat Kelly was demoted to Class AAA as the Yankees made a roster spot for Jesse Barfield, who was coming off the disabled list.
Tonight, Kelly rejoined the Yankees because Barfield was back on the list.
Kelly was activated after Barfield incurred a recurrent sprain of his left wrist and was placed on the 15-day disabled list.
Barfield reinjured his wrist swinging and missing at Frank Viola's changeup Wednesday night in Boston.


The Smoke Around Veterans' Health
Considering how much America knows now about the connection between smoking and health, it's no surprise that 172 veterans' hospitals want to help their patients break the habit.
Unfortunately, the job is going to be a lot harder if the House of Representatives passes the Staggers amendment to the Veterans Health Bill.
Representative Harley Staggers, a Democrat from West Virginia, wants to insure that patients who smoke -- and one in four do -- will have easy access to cigarettes and to smoking lounges.
The Department of Veterans Affairs, on the other hand, has been moving for months to bring its hospitals up to the level of most private institutions.
It wants to ban the sale of cigarettes in hospital shops and allow smoking lounges only outside the building.
The department proposes to be sensible, not censorious.
It would allow exemptions for those patients for whom quitting would be too severe a physcological strain.
And for those who want to quit but find it hard, the hospitals will provide smoking cessation programs.
The Veterans Heatlh bill will be coming up for House action soon.
The surest way to vote for veteran's health is to vote down the Staggers amendment.


THE 1992 CAMPIAGN: Undeclared Candidate; Where Perot Exhibits A Lifetime of Memories
When talking to reporters he suspects of not properly understanding him, Ross Perot will sometimes offer an invitation: Come on up and see my office; then you'll see what I'm all about.
And he is right.
What Ross Perot is about -- what he has done in his life, what he thinks, what he believes in, what he treasures -- is on permanent display in what amounts to a Museum of Perot here in a suite of offices on the 17th floor of a high-rise in North Dallas.


Lord Iveagh, Guinness Chairman In a Troubled Time, Is Dead at 55
The third Earl of Iveagh, who served as chairman of Guinness P.L.C. during a period of change and turmoil for the British brewing and spirits giant, died here on Thursday.
He was 55 years old.
Company officials said he had died of a throat ailment but declined to provide further details.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about a Navy investigation of a 1991 aviators' convention referred incorrectly in some copies to the year the Navy Secretary visited several hotel suites used by conventiongoers.
A Navy spokesman, Comdr.
Bill Harlow, said the Secretary, H. Lawrence Garrett 3d, visited the suites during the convention in 1990.


Cubs Send Walton to Minors
The Chicago Cubs sent outfielder JEROME WALTON, the 1989 National League rookie of the year, to their Class AAA farm team in Iowa yesterday and recalled catcher RICK WILKINS.


Pebble Beach Is Morgan's Private Playground
Playing at an elevated level that nearly achieved the national championship's most elusive number -- 10 under par -- Gil Morgan skipped through the veritable minefield that is Pebble Beach to a three-stroke lead after two rounds of the United States Open.
On a cool overcast morning stirred only by light breezes, Morgan fired a three-under-par 69 for a 36-hole total of nine-under-par 135.
His closest pursuer was Andy Dillard at 138, followed by 49-year-old Raymond Floyd and Wayne Grady at 140.


Bridge
One of the most useful maneuvers in modern bidding has a misleading name.
Nearly all tournament players employ "fourth-suit forcing," which should be described as "fourth-suit artificial." Practically nobody believes that a fourth-suit bid, such as two diamonds in the diagramed auction, can be passed.
The great majority nowadays believes that it is a vague forcing move, and may or may not show length or strength in the fourth suit.
Often the bidder will be hoping that his partner will be able to bid no-trump with a fourth-suit stopper.
In the diagramed example from a money game North followed up his fourth-suit bid with some overbidding.
A jump to four spades after two no-trump would have been a slam invitation and would have been sufficient.


Vice President Calls Corporation Wrong For Selling Rap Song
Vice President Dan Quayle today accused Time-Warner Inc. of shirking its responsibility by selling an "obscene record" called "Cop Killer" by the rap performer Ice-T.
Continuing his role as the White House's warrior against lax morals, Mr.
Quayle said the Government cannot act against Ice-T or any other performer because of First Amendment protections of free speech.
But he said Time-Warner, parent company of the record company that released Ice-T's album "Body Count," should re-examine its sponsorship of the recording.


Beat 'Em, and Then Join 'Em
GORD ROBERTS, a defenseman on the Pittsburgh team that knocked Boston out of the Stanley Cup semifinals the last two seasons, has signed with the Bruins, the club said yesterday.


An Outdoor Celebration Of the Hudson River
The Clearwater's Great Hudson River Revival, an annual outdoor gathering featuring entertainment and environmental information, will run through tomorrow at the Westchester Community College, off Route 100 in Valhalla, N.Y.


Battle on AIDS Lessons Deadlocks School Board
A public meeting of the New York City Board of Education meant to resolve the rancorous debate over teaching about AIDS in elementary schools collapsed in shouting, finger-pointing and chaos yesterday, leaving the deeply divided board stalemated on an issue that has become almost its singular obsession.
The board's failure to reach a compromise on how to teach about topics such as condom use and anal intercourse to children in kindergarten through sixth grade illustrated the depths of the members' disagreement with each other and with the Schools Chancellor.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's criticism of Gov.
Bill Clinton rendered the name of Mr.
Clinton's communications director incorrectly in some editions, as did several earlier articles about the Governor's Presidential campaign.
The communications director is George Stephanopoulos.


Islanders Sign Two Players
Yes, the New York Islanders have signed a pair of forwards.
No, neither one of them is named ERIC LINDROS.
Instead, the Islanders announced they have agreed to multiyear pacts with DANIEL MAROIS, who was acquired by the team in a trade with Toronto in March, and MARTIN LACROIX, who recently completed his senior season for St.
Lawrence University.


No Evidence in Attack on Moon Church
To the Editor:
"Moon Church a Stranger to Academic Freedom" (letter, June 13) by Phillip Abramowitz is replete with unfounded accusations and sweeping mischaracterizations of a minority religious group.
It has the classic hallmarks of hate speech.
It is not surprising that Mr.
Abramowitz would be "outraged" by your effort to report on this issue with a modicum of partiality.
Mr.
Abramowitz's unbridled hostility causes him to be incriminated by his own fallacious charges.
On the one hand, he alleges, without corroborating evidence, that Rev.
Sun Myung Moon would not permit academic freedom at the University of Bridgeport.
At the same time he seeks to reserve for himself and his fellow vigilantes the prerogative of determining what young malleable minds should or should not be exposed to.
His excessive paternalism is an affront to academic freedom.
Like the emperor's clothes, bigotry is bold and bare.
Nor is bigotry easily disguised, for as we say in Ireland, you cannot make a silk purse out of a sow's ear!
One comment on your second letter on the same subject, "A Temporary Bailout?" by Richard Quebedeaux.
Mr.
Quebedeaux's comments on academic freedom are appropriate while he speaks as an academician and a participant in conferences sponsored by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
But when he diverges from his expertise and personal experience, and strays into the murky area of gossip and hearsay regarding the finances of the Unification Church, his comments are disingenuous and less than credible.
Peter D. Ross Director, Public Affairs The Unification Church New York, June 15, 1992


CHRONICLE
When VICTOR BORGE steps onto the stage at a performance of "Peter and the Wolf" by American Ballet Theater at Lincoln Center tonight, it will be a milestone for the comedian and pianist.
"I have played in so many opera houses, concert halls, stadiums, on everything that can be called a stage, but never have I been at the Metropolitan Opera House," he said yesterday.
"I am not a ballet dancer or opera singer, though many people think I am."


Northwest Drug reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Napier International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


American Science &amp; Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Where Perot Exhibits A Lifetime of Memories
When talking to reporters he suspects of not properly understanding him, Ross Perot will sometimes offer an invitation: Come on up and see my office; then you'll see what I'm all about.
And he is right.
What Ross Perot is about -- what he has done in his life, what he thinks, what he believes in, what he treasures -- is on permanent display in what amounts to a Museum of Perot here in a suite of offices on the 17th floor of a high-rise in North Dallas.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; President Portrays Himself As Best Choice for Economy
One day after Ross Perot drew a rousing crowd in this bastion of conservatism, President Bush sought today to persuade skeptical Orange County business executives that he could best lead the nation to economic recovery.
Mustering the power of his office to press that point, Mr.
Bush announced that he would rescind a Federal rule that officials said would mean millions of dollars in savings each year for contractors converting technology to nonmilitary use.
In a further attempt to make the case that he offered more than words, he waved a copy of a plan that he said was a roadmap for controlling Federal spending.


A New John Guido for the Police
Why can't New York City's police department police itself?
The arrest of city officers by Suffolk County police, now followed by news that Federal and local prosecutors are investigating other cases, raises that alarming question.
Mayor David Dinkins has authorized a special counsel to examine the issue.
But where is Commissioner Lee Brown?
He should need no outside help to make clear his concern, or to address an obvious issue: the need to beef up the department's internal affairs unit.


Danielson Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assoc reports earnings for Year to March 31


Appeals Court Keeps Reynolds Out of the Trials
Butch Reynolds's long and arduous campaign to run in the Barcelona Olympics ended tonight when a Federal appeals court in Cincinnati overturned a lower court decision that would have allowed him to compete in the United States Olympics track and field trials, which opened today.
Judge Eugene E. Siler Jr. dissolved a preliminary injunction issued this morning in a Columbus, Ohio, District Court that would have cleared the way for Reynolds to compete in the 400 meters despite his two-year suspension for drug use that expires on Aug. 11.


Weinberger Pleads Not Guilty in Iran-Contra Case
Caspar W. Weinberger, the Republican senior statesman who served in the Cabinets of Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan, pleaded not guilty today to five felony charges of lying to Congress and concealing from investigators a private diary that recorded his role in the Iran-contra affair.
Judge Thomas F. Hogan of Federal District Court tentatively set the trial for Nov. 2, one day before the Presidential election.
The timing raised at least the possibility that President Bush might face embarrassment, since as Vice President he attended some of the meetings cited in the charges against the former Defense Secretary in the Reagan Administration.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Rain Scrambles Leader Board
Rain left the first day of the L.P.G.A.'s $400,000 Lady Keystone Open in Hershey, Pa., inconclusive, with Nanci Bowen finishing the round yesterday with a five-under-par 67 and Laurel Kean at six under through 15 holes.
The opening round of the 54-hole tournament was halted twice by thunderstorms for a total delay of almost four hours.
The players who failed to finish their first rounds will start early today before the second round begins.
Kean, who hasn't won in five years on the tour, had two eagles for a 30 on the back side of the 6,348-yard West Course of the Hershey Country Club.
Bowen, who has missed the cut in 11 of her 12 L.P.G.A. appearances, had played just three holes when thunderstorms hit the course and forced a delay of nearly three hours. (AP) TENNIS  Washington Advances to Final
MaliVai Washington of the United States moved into the final of the Manchester grass-court tournament in England with a comeback victory yesterday over Luis Herrera of Mexico, 6-7 (5-7), 6-1, 6-1.
Washington's opponent in the title match will be Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands, who beat Wally Masur of Australia, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3).
Herrera used his speed and crisp volleying to take the first set in 53 minutes.
But Washington, who is seeded fifth and who turns 23 years old today, had winning streaks of six and five games to wrap up the match 58 minutes later. (AP) Medvedev Staves Off Oncins: Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine fought off eight match points in the final set to defeat Jaime Oncins of Brazil, 1-6, 6-2, 7-6 (8-2), and advance to the semifinals of the Genoa International in Italy.
Medvedev's next opponent will be Marcelo Filippini of Uruguay, who defeated Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden, 6-1, 6-4, in the quarterfinals.
The other semifinal will match Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina against the winner of the match today between Horst Skoff and Paolo Cane.
Perez-Roldan advanced with a 7-5, 6-1 victory over Marcos Gorriz of Spain. (AP) McNeil Upsets Fernandez: Lori McNeil of the United States upset another American, Mary Joe Fernandez, 7-6 (7-4), 6-0, to reach the final of the Eastbourne grass-court tournament in England.
McNeil will face the winner of the other semifinal between Linda Harvey-Wild and Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer.
Rain halted their match with Harvey-Wild leading, 2-1, in the first set with a break of serve.
Officials rescheduled the match for this morning with the winner facing McNeil this afternoon.
The McNeil-Fernandez match was interrupted by light rain three times. (AP) CYCLING  Two Qualify for Olympics
Tim Peddie and Jeanne Golay earned automatic Olympic team positions yesterday on the rainy and overcast final qualifying day at the United States Cycling Olympic trials and national championships in Altoona, Pa.
Peddie, 22 years old, of Boulder, Colo., who has been racing in Spain since February, surprisingly emerged from a lead group of eight to win the 123-mile men's Olympic Trials race in 5 hours 12 minutes and 53 seconds.
While Inga Thompson of Reno made a strong bid for her third Olympic team with a three-minute solo victory in the earlier 65-mile women's race, Golay outsprinted Sally Zack of Boulder, Colo., to finish second by one foot to earn her Olympic team position. (AP)


Coverage of Au Pair's Trial Is Attacked by Prosecutor
The prosecutor in the arson murder trial of a Swiss au pair interrupted the proceedings today to attack media coverage of the trial and stopped just short of accusing the defense of manipulating the press by distributing "distortions and falsehoods."
With the jury out of the courtroom, the prosecutor, George L. Bolen, singled out the television reporter Geraldo Rivera who, he said, reported an "outright lie" favorable to the defense that has been widely repeated in coverage of the case.


Israel Vows to Arrest Palestinians Who Embraced Arafat in Jordan
After Palestinian negotiators in the Middle East peace talks publicly embraced Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Israel said today that they would be arrested as soon as they returned to this country.
A staged kiss-and-hug session between the negotiators and Mr.
Arafat, held Thursday in the Jordanian capital, Amman, both infuriated the governing Likud Party and stuck it with an embarrassing dilemma as Israelis prepare for a national election on Tuesday.


Humana reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Creditors Cool to Olympia &amp; York Debt Plan
A debt-restructuring plan that Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. outlined to an Ontario court on Thursday was received poorly yesterday by the company's Canadian lenders.
The plan, which would let the Canadian developer continue as a going concern, would essentially give lenders up to 80 percent of the equity in the parent company in exchange for waiting an extra five years to collect on their loans.
That equity stake would give the lenders a share of future profits, but no voting control.


Yangi Journal; Uzbeks, Free of Soviets, Dethrone Czar Cotton
For years, under orders from Moscow, the Uzbek republic of the Soviet Union produced as much cotton as the entire United States, doing enormous damage to its land, waters and people.
Now, freed from the yoke of Soviet central planners, independent Uzbekistan is reducing the sway of Czar Cotton and feeling its way toward a more rational use of its resources.


Classical Music in Review
Bach Aria Festival and Institute  Cathedral of St. John the Divine
Judging from Wednesday's concert, one of nine over a two-week period, the Bach Aria Festival and Institute has had more than correct ornamentation and historically informed performance practice to teach its 39 young fellows.
Now in the midst of its 12th spring session, this easy mixing of professionals with students created, at least on this occasion, a love feast of music-making that went beyond academic concerns.
Bach's use of dance forms, as it applies directly to the cantatas and as it sublimates itself within purely instrumental forms, was the guiding principle on Wednesday; the four singers, the young chorus and the instrumentalists went out of their way to emphasize pointed rhythm and accent in a wide variety of music.
All the performances were happy, but the spine of this event was created by Daniel Philips, violinist, and Samuel Baron, flutist.


METRO DIGEST
WEIGHING NEW WAYS TO TREAT ADDICTS
Packing psychological exercises into hours usually reserved for leisure, seminars at places like Odyssey House in Manhattan are among a range of approaches that experts are trying in the hope of making drug treatment cheaper and more effective.
Many experts believe the ranks of drug users in the country could be thinned if treatment were available for all.
But many Washington officials have been unwilling to allocate money for programs that now treat fewer than a third of the nation's addicts.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
MEETING OF SCHOOL BOARD COLLAPSES OVER AIDS LESSONS
A public meeting of the New York City Board of Education meant to resolve the rancorous debate over teaching about AIDS in elementary schools collapsed in shouting and finger-pointing yesterday, leaving the deeply divided board stalemated on an issue that has become almost its singular obsession.
Page 27.
CITY GOES DARK FOR LESS THAN A SECOND
Yesterday, once again, the city that has endured some of its worst moments of the last 30 years when the power failed was plunged into darkness -- for about three one-thousandths of a second.
It was one of the briefest such power failures in New York's history, according to the Consolidated Edison Company, which caused it, but the flash lasted long enough to disrupt subway service on the West Side of Manhattan for two hours.
Page 27.
Consolidated Edison and its workers continue to negotiate. Page 27.
A small, suspicious fire breaks out in a Manhattan hotel. Page 27.
REGION
TWO ARRESTED IN KIDNAPPING OF EXXON OFFICIAL
A married couple from rural northern New Jersey were arrested yesterday and charged with the kidnapping of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive who disappeared April 29 after he left his home in Morris Township, N.J., for the short drive to his office in nearby Morris Plains.
But law-enforcement officials said they had no information about the whereabouts of Mr.
Reso.
Page 1.
The arrested couple lived quietly and privately in the small town of Changewater, N.J.
Page 29.
$25,000 IN SHAM CONTRIBUTIONS
An advertising executive told a Federal court in San Juan, P.R., yesterday that she corralled her family and friends to make $25,000 in sham contributions to Republican causes and to pack Republican events to help Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's chief Puerto Rican fund-raiser get the Senator's attention and "look good." Page 28.
PROPOSED BUDGET COULD TRIGGER LAYOFFS
In New Jersey, the Republicans' plan to cut $1.1 billion from Gov.
Jim Florio's proposed budget had an immediate impact as the Commissioner of Personnel announced yesterday that he had asked nearly every part of state government to prepare for as many as 6,500 layoffs.
Page 28.
Media coverage attacked at arson trial of Swiss au pair. Page 28.
A setback for efforts in Albany to create a new kind of business entity.
Business Day, Page 36.
About New York by Douglas Martin Page 27


Not So Young, but Lewis Is Still Fast
For Carl Lewis, perhaps the greatest athlete ever in track and field, it was another night at the office, and not a difficult night except for calf cramps.
For Andre Cason, a leading pretender to Lewis's sprinting throne, it was a disaster, his Olympic dreams ended by a torn left Achilles' tendon.
This was the first night of the United States Olympic trials, eight days of competition over a 10-day span.
In draining weather -- the temperature was 92 degrees and the humidity 51 percent -- Lewis ran easily in winning his men's 100-meter heat in 10.33 seconds.
Then he finished second to his teammate, Mike Marsh, in the quarterfinals, 10.09 (the fastest of the night) to 10.17. 16 Advance to Semifinals
The semifinals and final will be run Saturday afternoon.
Sixteen men advanced to the semifinals, among them Lewis, Marsh and a former world record-holder, Leroy Burrell.


The Rise and Fall of the Floral Tie
Father's Day fashion quiz: The bright floral-print tie you receive tomorrow will make you look:
(a) Out-of-date
(b) Floriferous
(c) Garnished
(d) Visible at night
(For answer, read on.)
Unlike most fathers, Bert Pulitzer will awaken tomorrow knowing that his gift won't be a tie.
Mr.
Pulitzer does not even need to buy a tie; he makes them.


Trenton Democrats Brace for G.O.P.'s Budget Cuts
The Republicans' plan to cut $1.1 billion from Gov.
Jim Florio's proposed budget had an immediate impact today, as the Commissioner of Personnel announced that he had asked nearly every part of state government to begin mobilizing for as many as 6,500 layoffs.
The Commissioner, Anthony J. Cimino, said the anticipated layoffs would represent the biggest employment upheaval in the state's history except for those in World War II and the Depression.


Rookie's Homers Give Cubs All They Need
Cubs 5, Phillies 2  PHILADELPHIA, June 19 (AP) -- Derrick May hit two homers and drove in five runs and Danny Jackson pitched six and one-third strong innings for his third straight victory as the Chicago Cubs beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 5-2, tonight.
The Cubs have won seven of their last eight games.
In his last nine games, May, a rookie, is 11 for 32 with a double, three homers and 11 runs batted in.
He started the season with two home runs during brief call-ups the last two seasons.
Jackson (3-7) gave up two runs and four hits before leaving in the seventh inning with one out and runners on first and third.
Jeff Robinson relieved and retired the side.
Paul Assenmacher pitched one and one-third innings, and Jim Bullinger, a rookie, got the last out for his sixth save.


Testimony by Milken Wins U.S. Approval
Despite Michael R. Milken's contradictory evidence, the United States Attorney in Manhattan said last night that Mr.
Milken's "cooperation and testimony substantially aided the Government in the prosecution of Alan E. Rosenthal."
The assessment of Mr.
Milken's testimony in the trial of his former protege was included in a law memorandum by Roger S. Hayes, the Acting United States Attorney, to Federal Judge Kimba M. Wood, who is scheduled to rule on Mr.
Milken's plea for a reduction of the 10-year prison term she gave him in 1990 for his guilty plea to securities fraud.


Rangers Push To Front of Line in Bid For Lindros
The Rangers sent a jolt through the National Hockey League today when they let it be known that they have entered into serious negotiations with the Quebec Nordiques to acquire Eric Lindros.
Neil Smith, the Rangers general manager who was named team president today, revealed the Lindros scenario late this morning in a meeting with reporters in a downtown hotel.


Sham Gifts Encouraged to Try to Impress D'Amato, Witness Says
An advertising executive told a Federal court here today that she corralled her family and friends to make $25,000 in sham contributions to Republican causes and to pack Republican events as a way of helping Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's chief Puerto Rican fund-raiser get the Senator's attention and "look good."
"He wanted to have successful fund-raisers, he wanted to look good," the executive, Carmen Maria Ferre, testified.


RUSSIA AND I.M.F. FAIL AT AN ACCORD
Negotiators for the International Monetary Fund ended a round of talks with the Russian Government today after failing to win Moscow's compliance with several harsh demands for changes in its economy in return for billions in foreign loans.
Officials involved in the talks said that several major issues remain unresolved and that the next round of talks could occur early in July, before President Bush and the leaders of the other major industrial nations hold their annual economic summit.
This year, the meeting will be held in Munich, Germany, and is to be attended by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.


Military's Anti-Gay Rule Is Costly, a Report Says
The ban on homosexuals in the armed forces costs the Pentagon at least $27 million a year and perpetuates a policy unsupported by science and sociology, a new congressional study says.
In a review of the Pentagon's policy, the General Accounting Office said that several other countries allow gay men and lesbians to serve.
Moreover, investigators said, the American Psychiatric Association and the American Psychological Association disagree with the Defense Department's claim that a ban is necessary to insure "good order, discipline and morale."


International Testing Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Newest Postal Clerks Won't Smile or Frown
The United States Postal Service plans to test a kind of do-it-yourself post office this summer in five markets: Miami, Detroit, Oklahoma City, southern Maryland and Santa Ana, Calif.
The machines, to be placed in post office lobbies, will combine an advanced scale to weigh letters and packages and calculate postage, with a machine that will print stamps in the exact denomination needed after deposit of the proper amount (it even gives change).


Editors' Note
An obituary on Tuesday reported the death of Martin McKneally at the age of 77.
He was a former New York state and national commander of the American Legion, and served one term in Congress.
The first sentence of the article also said that Mr.
McKneally had "pleaded guilty to income tax evasion."
In 1971, Mr.
McKneally pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge that he had filed no income tax return on income of $24,000 for 1965.
The judge, who placed him on probation for a year, called the offense a "crime of omission rather than commission."


Maax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New Programs for Addicts: Time is Precious
They were young men and women with eyes showing lots of hard mileage, and they were dumping their most shameful secrets.
One woman told of stealing her mother's rent money.
Another had slammed a cranky child into a wall.
A man in a light windbreaker and expensive sneakers told of trading his girl friend to another man for a few vials of crack.
The confessions, drawn out during a weekend seminar in Manhattan operated by Odyssey House, were part of an effort to break down the streetwise addict's resistance to treatment.


Cryenco Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Guidepost; To Help Hear the Phone
New devices to help people with hearing problems use telephones are available from hearing-aid retailers and at some department stores and telephone-company retail outlets.
Here is a sampling.
ATTENTION-GETTERS An alternative to devices that make the phone ring louder is a tiny plug-in box that attaches to the phone and flashes a brilliant, pulsating light when it rings.
Cost: around $30.
Some new audio attchments, costing around $24, can convert the ring to a special frequency for people with high-frequency hearing loss.
AMPLIFIERS New powerful volume amplifiers can make special telephones unnecessay for many people.
They come in handsets that cost around $20 and plug into any phone with a standard modular receptacle.
Battery-operated portable amplifiers, barely larger than a matchbox, clip or strap onto anyphone.
They are about $15.
THE WRITTEN WORD Fax machines that plug into phone outlets are ideal for people who can't type on normal message transmitters.
The messages can be handwritten and sent to and received from any fax machine.
The machines start at around $400.
The phone company also offers a service called TDD, or text relay, but this requires some typing skill.
TDD equipment costs $250 to $550.
WHERE TO SHOP New York Telephone has a Communications Center for Disabled Customers at 204 Second Avenue (13 Street) in Manhattan; for information call (800) 482-9020 from anywhere in New York State.
Information about manufacturers, distributors and special outlets elsewhere is available from (800) 332-1123, the tele-Consumer Hotline, an information service sponsored by various telephone companies and audio-aid suppliers.
Local phone company business offices can also be consulted.


Panel Didn't Rule Out Power-Line Health Risk
To the Editor:
An Associated Press article from New Haven June 6 gave a misleading impression of a report by a Connecticut Academy of Science and Engineering panel investigating links between health and the magnetic waves sent out by highpower electrical lines.
The panel's three-page summary states and restates that the findings were inconclusive: "Absolute proof of the occurence of adverse effects of E.L.F." - extremely low frequency - "fields at pervading magnitudes cannot be found in the available evidence, and the same evidence does not permit a judgment that adverse effects could not occur."
Electromagnetic radiation has an undisputed physical effect on people.
It may be true that no one study has yet proved that electromagnetic fields are carcinogens.
However, thousands of studies have shown strong links, and more conclusive evidence is emerging.
More is known today of the adverse effects of electromagnetic fields than was known 20 years ago about asbestos.
Electromagnetic fields are a huge and pervasive issue.
When their danger is admitted,there will be financial ramifications of a magnitude that will make the savings and loan institutions bailout seem small potatoes.
Note that utility companies have financed much of the research on the subject.
Alan Herman New York, June 7, 1992.


Calderon Faces Knife Again
Montreal Expos outfielder IVAN CALDERON is facing surgery on his left shoulder for the third time in the last four years.
Calderon was placed on the disabled list yesterday with a shoulder problem that required operations in 1988 and 1991.


INSIDE
A Contraceptive Advances


Little Park in Brooklyn
To the Editor:
I was glad to learn from your June 9 article on the New York City waterfront that the Parks Council created the little park at the foot of Grand Street in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn where I go to watch sugar boats unload.
I'd rather that the council and the Pfizer Company, instead of building a costly new walkway along the river, maintained the park that's there.
The benches are rotting, the garbage cans overflowing, and the whole lot is littered with trash and broken glass.
Robert Neuwirth Brooklyn, June 10, 1992.


Brendle's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Hello, Davis; Goodbye, Daniels
The Los Angeles Dodgers activated ERIC DAVIS from the disabled list yesterday and made room for the outfielder on the roster by reassigning KAL DANIELS.
Before being disabled, Davis was hitting .257 with 4 home runs and 16 runs batted in in 32 games.
In all, he missed 24 games with a shoulder injury, and his return may signal the end of Daniels's stay with the Dodgers.


Air Raid Near the White House


The Perfumed Workout
This is not to knock New York, which is great, with its opera and theater and bridges and tunnels and subways and everything, but it would be even better with some honeysuckle vines in bloom.
In June the perfect world has to have the smell of honeysuckle on the morning air, and plenty of it.
For exercise, too, nothing beats walking out there into that honeysuckle with a scythe and pruning shears and a saw and some good heavy gloves and flinging yourself at it.
It's like being in low-risk combat.
As a sport, it beats pounding that New York asphalt in jogging sneakers.


Quotation of the Day
"People have become so engaged in this story, because people want to project their own values and expectations onto the royals. Thanks to the tabloid press and books like Morton's, the royal family has been reduced to nearly fictional characters, where the readers fill in the blanks." -- HAROLD BROOKS-BAKER, publishing director of Burke's Peerage.  [ 5:4. ]


Review/Theater; Superman as Dimwit in 1966 Parable
An amusing Freudian joke animates "It's a Bird, It's a Plane, It's Superman," the 1966 pop-art musical about a diabolical scheme to unman the Man of Steel.
The show's arch-villain, a mad scientist named Dr.
Abner Sedgwick (Gabriel Barre), arranges for the city of Metropolis to be nearly destroyed while Superman attends the unveiling of a statue in his honor.
Overnight, the public hero becomes a public whipping boy, reviled in the newspapers as an egotist who would rather accept awards than do good deeds.
Mortified, Superman drops out of sight.
When next seen, he is a whimpering, impotent shell of his former self who believes all of his bad publicity.


Corby Distilleries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


In Surprise, Digital Picks Finance Chief From Inside
In a move that surprised the investment community, the Digital Equipment Corporation today named William M. Steul, a 20-year Digital executive, as chief financial officer.
The post, which had been vacant for nearly a year since James Osterhoff departed, was expected to be filled by someone outside the corporation.
Analysts and insiders had speculated that Digital's directors, worried about the company's continuing financial woes, would insist that Kenneth H. Olsen, Digital's founder and president, bring in a financial professional from the outside.
Neither Mr.
Olsen nor members of the board were available for comment.


New-Found Offense Isn't Enough
What better time than Friday night to unveil a wild and crazy display of baseball?
With the work week completed, it is the perfect opportunity to walk a few, surrender a bunch of hits, botch some grounders and toss the game around.
All in good fun, right?
The Yankees and Orioles obliged the fans tonight by playing a game that was fraught with action, some of it frightful.
They combined for 14 runs, 14 hits, two home runs and three errors -- and those totals were in the first four innings alone.
The clubs finished with 17 runs, 24 hits and four homers over all.


Executive Changes
COLLAGEN CORP., Palo Alto, Calif., appointed David Foster vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
Collagen manufactures biomedical devices.
CONSOLIDATED RAIL CORP., Philadelphia, named David M. Levan senior vice president, operations, succeeding Donald A. Swanson, who retired.


Grace T. Hamilton, 85, a Pioneer In the Cause of Blacks in the South
Grace T. Hamilton, a pioneer in racial integration who worked to give blacks a political voice in Atlanta, died on Wednesday at the Briarcliff Haven Nursing Home in Atlanta.
She was 85 years old and lived in Atlanta.
Mrs.
Hamilton was in the forefront of efforts to improve the lives of blacks and the poor through jobs, education, housing, health care and child care.


Classical Music in Review
A Virtuoso Trio Weill Recital Hall
Three musicians from the Central Philharmonic Society of China, in Beijing, gave a joint recital on Monday evening under the name A Virtuoso Trio.
Actually, only the opening work, a Telemann Concerto, was a full collaboration.
Otherwise, the players performed as soloists and duos, and if their playing did not always have either the refinement or the abandon that the word virtuoso suggests, it would be harsh to accuse them of false advertising.
The most consistent of the three was Zhang Dihe, an oboist, who gave a shapely account of a Cimaroso concerto and a group of short, lively character works.
Mr.
Zhang's tone was small, but he was a thoughtful colorist, and he had a thorough grasp of the music's driving spirit.


Sports of The Times; Canada's Persistent Nightmare
CECIL SMITH sat in Claude Robillard Center on Thursday afternoon, discussing Canada's Olympic hopefuls as he watched athletes compete on the first day of trials for the Canadian Olympic track team.
When Ben Johnson's name came up, Smith, the president of the Ontario Track and Field Federation, smiled, then grunted.
"It will soon be over," Smith said, referring to Johnson's career.
"Soon."


Curtis Sliwa Is Shot by Man In Stolen Taxi
Curtis Sliwa, the leader of the Guardian Angels street patrol, was kidnapped in a stolen taxi, shot several times and left bleeding in a lower Manhattan street before dawn yesterday, the police said.
As he settled into a cab shortly after 5 A.M. on his way to his morning talk show on WABC-AM, the police said, a man hiding beside the driver suddenly sat up and opened fire.
At East Seventh Street and Avenue B, the taxi lurched around the corner and Mr.
Sliwa tumbled out, seriously wounded.


A Blackout So Brief, Those Not on Trains May Have Missed It
Every great city has its own elemental fear: San Francisco has earthquakes, Chicago has fire.
In Miami the threat comes from hurricanes.
New York, of course, has blackouts.
Yesterday, once again, the city that has endured some of its worst moments of the last 30 years when the power failed was plunged into darkness -- for about three one-thousandths of a second.


A New John Guido for the Police
Why can't New York City's police department police itself?
The arrest of city officers by Suffolk County police, now followed by news that Federal and local prosecutors are investigating other cases, raises that alarming question.
Mayor David Dinkins has authorized a special counsel to examine the issue.
But where is Commissioner Lee Brown?
He should need no outside help to make clear his concern, or to address an obvious issue: the need to beef up the department's internal affairs unit.


Chief-to-Be at Chrysler Sees No Need to Merge
Robert J. Eaton, the former General Motors executive who will become Chrysler's chief executive next year, says he is certain the No. 3 auto maker can survive without a merger or an alliance with another auto maker.
In an interview today, Mr.
Eaton, who is currently the vice chairman and chief operating officer of the Chrysler Corporation, said the company's new products, leaner manufacturing operation and a recovering economy "mean we can strengthen ourselves so we don't have to look to anyone" for help.


New Type of Company Stirs Tax Worry in Albany
State lawmakers said this week that efforts to create a new kind of business entity in New York had been seriously wounded by new projections showing that the businesses could mean the state would lose up to $65 million a year in tax revenue.
The businesses, known as limited liability companies, are hybrid entities with the legal insulation of a corporation and the preferred tax treatment of a limited partnership.


Zuckerman Proposes Color Printing Plant
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, a real-estate developer and owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, told newspaper union leaders yesterday that he would immediately build a modern color printing plant for The Daily News if he was successful in buying it.
Mr.
Zuckerman did not provide details of concessions he would ask in exchange for such a plant or how much he expected the printing plant to cost.
Formal negotiating sessions are scheduled for next week.


It Wasn't Pretty, but Holyfield Still Retains Title
Call it winning ugly, but call it a victory for Evander Holyfield.
Holyfield outworked a cunning former champion, Larry Holmes, tonight and scored a unanimous 12-round decision to retain his undisputed heavyweight title at the outdoor ring at Caesars Palace.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; President Portrays Himself As Best Choice for Economy
One day after Ross Perot drew a rousing crowd in this bastion of conservatism, President Bush sought today to persuade skeptical Orange County business executives that he could best lead the nation to economic recovery.
Mustering the power of his office to press that point, Mr.
Bush announced that he would rescind a Federal rule that officials said would mean millions of dollars in savings each year for contractors converting technology to nonmilitary use.
In a further attempt to make the case that he offered more than words, he waved a copy of a plan that he said was a roadmap for controlling Federal spending.


National Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Armbro Enterprises reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Where Perot Exhibits A Lifetime of Memories
When talking to reporters he suspects of not properly understanding him, Ross Perot will sometimes offer an invitation: Come on up and see my office; then you'll see what I'm all about.
And he is right.
What Ross Perot is about -- what he has done in his life, what he thinks, what he believes in, what he treasures -- is on permanent display in what amounts to a Museum of Perot here in a suite of offices on the 17th floor of a high-rise in North Dallas.


Testimony by Milken Wins U.S. Approval
Despite Michael R. Milken's contradictory evidence, the United States Attorney in Manhattan said last night that Mr.
Milken's "cooperation and testimony substantially aided the Government in the prosecution of Alan E. Rosenthal."
The assessment of Mr.
Milken's testimony in the trial of his former protege was included in a law memorandum by Roger S. Hayes, the Acting United States Attorney, to Federal Judge Kimba M. Wood, who is scheduled to rule on Mr.
Milken's plea for a reduction of the 10-year prison term she gave him in 1990 for his guilty plea to securities fraud.


Review/Music; A Deluge Of Sounds From Africa
A lot of strange noises came off the stage at S.O.B.'s on Thursday night.
Geoffrey Oryema, a Ugandan singer, and Zap Mama, a five-member Zairian a cappella group based in Belgium, whistled, clucked, moaned and groaned, at times sounding like birds in a forest, a train, horses, wind and a lot of other things.
The show, part of the New Music Seminar, opened with Mr.
Oryema.
Playing guitar, he sang some deep blues phrases, strumming away.
He changed to thumb piano, and sang to that, then to an African stringed instrument.
He shifted into English occasionally, singing phrases like "I feel like a nomad"; most of his show was underpowered, as if he were in a trance.
The audience, standing around, was mildly pleased.


CHRONICLE
When VICTOR BORGE steps onto the stage at a performance of "Peter and the Wolf" by American Ballet Theater at Lincoln Center tonight, it will be a milestone for the comedian and pianist.
"I have played in so many opera houses, concert halls, stadiums, on everything that can be called a stage, but never have I been at the Metropolitan Opera House," he said yesterday.
"I am not a ballet dancer or opera singer, though many people think I am."


Bonn Flowers Culturally, Belatedly
June 19 was a turning point in the cultural history of this charming town by the Rhine, with the public opening of two new art museums.
After four decades as the capital of West Germany, Bonn can at last claim to have become a significant cultural center.
But the great day may have come too late.
How long can Bonn continue to make a real cultural mark now that Berlin, a true metropolis with three opera companies and eight symphony orchestras and a host of world-class museums, has been renamed the capital of a united Germany?


Islanders Sign Two Players
Yes, the New York Islanders have signed a pair of forwards.
No, neither one of them is named ERIC LINDROS.
Instead, the Islanders announced they have agreed to multiyear pacts with DANIEL MAROIS, who was acquired by the team in a trade with Toronto in March, and MARTIN LACROIX, who recently completed his senior season for St.
Lawrence University.


Review/Pop; Basement Verite and One-Worldism
Wednesday night's show at the Marquis Theater, part of the New Music Seminar and featuring Basehead, Jah Wobble and the Spent Poets, was two-thirds of a good idea.
The Spent Poets, who closed the show, were the odd men out; playing rock and pop with elements of funk, they seemed absolutely conventional.
Which can't be said about either Basehead or Jah Wobble.
Michael Ivey, the Basehead of Basehead, released "Play With Toys" (Imago) last year, one of the most distinctive albums of 1991.
Low tech, it sounds as if it was recorded in a basement.
Mr.
Ivey has elevated the vernacular to an art form, replacing the language of song, always highly stylized, with the language of everyday use.
Part of Mr.
Ivey's routine is that he draws heavily from rap, but more important, since rap has its own formalities, Mr.
Ivey isn't interested in either tricky rhymes or velocity of delivery.
He's slow and strange.


Dr. Maria Roque Cohen Physician, 61
Dr.
Maria Victoria Roque Cohen, who practiced internal medicine in the Bronx for 30 years, died on Monday at her home in Harrison, N.Y.
She was 61 years old. Her family said she died of breast cancer.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a guest list on Wednesday for the White House dinner in honor of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia included an incorrect entry.
Patricia Burch was a guest; her husband, Dean Burch, a former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, died last year.


Corrections
An article on May 8 about a study in the journal Epidemiology suggesting that consuming ample amounts of vitamin C may lower death rates from heart disease and other ailments misidentified the author of a related editorial.
A recent letter from an author of the report points out that the editorial was by Dr.
Gladys Block of the University of California at Berkeley, not by Dr.
Kenneth J. Rothman.


Calderon Faces Knife Again
Montreal Expos outfielder IVAN CALDERON is facing surgery on his left shoulder for the third time in the last four years.
Calderon was placed on the disabled list yesterday with a shoulder problem that required operations in 1988 and 1991.


COMPANY NEWS
FIRST CITIZENS BANCORP OF CHEROKEE COUNTY INC.  signed a definitive agreement to merge with First National Bancorp, Gainesville, Ga.
GEORG FISCHER A.G.  and D.R.
Hall EngineeringCo., Detroit, agreed to establish a joint venture under the name of Buss Process Technologies Corp.


Ricoh Develops a 'No Software' Computer
A Japanese company has developed a computer that requires no software to operate.
The computer, developed by the Ricoh Company and introduced on Thursday, learns what to do by example.
The Ricoh computer is a neural network machine, a type of computer with a design based on how the brain is believed to function.


Vice President Calls Corporation Wrong For Selling Rap Song
Vice President Dan Quayle today accused Time-Warner Inc. of shirking its responsibility by selling an "obscene record" called "Cop Killer" by the rap performer Ice-T.
Continuing his role as the White House's warrior against lax morals, Mr.
Quayle said the Government cannot act against Ice-T or any other performer because of First Amendment protections of free speech.
But he said Time-Warner, parent company of the record company that released Ice-T's album "Body Count," should re-examine its sponsorship of the recording.


Scientists Assail Move To Cancel Supercollider
Canceling the proposed supercollider atom smasher being built in Texas would be a devastating loss for science and an abdication of American leadership in physics, scientists said today.
Reacting to the surprise vote by the House of Representatives on Wednesday to end financing for the $8.3 billion Superconducting Supercollider particle accelerator, scientists expressed hope that the Senate would work to restore the funds.


HIGH COURT EASES STATES' OBLIGATION OVER TOXIC WASTE
Declaring that the Federal Government "may not conscript state governments as its agents," the Supreme Court today held unconstitutional a central portion of a law aimed at making states take responsibility for the low-level radioactive waste generated within their borders.
The 6-to-3 decision was a victory for New York State, which has been unable to find a politically acceptable site in the state for disposing of contaminated medical and industrial waste.
Such wastes have been the focus of a nationwide policy dispute.


No Evidence in Attack on Moon Church
To the Editor:
"Moon Church a Stranger to Academic Freedom" (letter, June 13) by Phillip Abramowitz is replete with unfounded accusations and sweeping mischaracterizations of a minority religious group.
It has the classic hallmarks of hate speech.
It is not surprising that Mr.
Abramowitz would be "outraged" by your effort to report on this issue with a modicum of partiality.
Mr.
Abramowitz's unbridled hostility causes him to be incriminated by his own fallacious charges.
On the one hand, he alleges, without corroborating evidence, that Rev.
Sun Myung Moon would not permit academic freedom at the University of Bridgeport.
At the same time he seeks to reserve for himself and his fellow vigilantes the prerogative of determining what young malleable minds should or should not be exposed to.
His excessive paternalism is an affront to academic freedom.
Like the emperor's clothes, bigotry is bold and bare.
Nor is bigotry easily disguised, for as we say in Ireland, you cannot make a silk purse out of a sow's ear!
One comment on your second letter on the same subject, "A Temporary Bailout?" by Richard Quebedeaux.
Mr.
Quebedeaux's comments on academic freedom are appropriate while he speaks as an academician and a participant in conferences sponsored by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
But when he diverges from his expertise and personal experience, and strays into the murky area of gossip and hearsay regarding the finances of the Unification Church, his comments are disingenuous and less than credible.
Peter D. Ross Director, Public Affairs The Unification Church New York, June 15, 1992


Continental Homes Holding Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Where's Faldo? Check the Trees
Hoping to find his ball, Nick Faldo climbed 20 feet up a tree today at the United States Open but never recovered it.
"When I was up there," he said later with a laugh, "I thought, Where is Jane?' And then I thought, 'How am I going to get down?"'


Little Park in Brooklyn
To the Editor:
I was glad to learn from your June 9 article on the New York City waterfront that the Parks Council created the little park at the foot of Grand Street in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn where I go to watch sugar boats unload.
I'd rather that the council and the Pfizer Company, instead of building a costly new walkway along the river, maintained the park that's there.
The benches are rotting, the garbage cans overflowing, and the whole lot is littered with trash and broken glass.
Robert Neuwirth Brooklyn, June 10, 1992.


Your Money; Family Businesses Need Special Plan
THE toughest part of a family business is often succession -- passing the baton from one generation to the next.
In fact, it's so tough that 70 percent of family businesses do not make the transition.
The business often dies with the founder, the strong entrepreneur who created it and imbued it with his or her personality.
But to preserve family wealth and esteem, it is worth trying to beat these odds, which may take considerable effort and outside help.


Tripucka Is a Net, Sort Of
KELLY TRIPUCKA, a 10-year National Basketball Association veteran who played in Europe last season, will play with the Nets on their free agent-rookie summer team.
The 6-foot-6-inch Tripucka, who is 33 years old, has an N.B.A. career scoring average of 17.2 points per game.
Playing for the Nets would be a double homecoming of sorts for Tripucka, who grew up in Bloomfield, N.J., and played four seasons under the new Nets coach, CHUCK DALY, when both were with the Detroit Pistons.


Boston's Mayor Cites Crowd Size In Concert Melee
Mayor Raymond L. Flynn said today that an unexpectedly large crowd was responsible for a disturbance Thursday night when the police halted an open-air concert in City Hall Plaza after fighting erupted in the audience.
After the police stopped the concert, made up mostly of pop, reggae and rap acts, groups of young people rampaged through several downtown streets.
Eighteen people were arrested and 25 were injured, one seriously, at the concert and in the melee in the streets after it was canceled, the police said.


Sylvia Syms Memorial
A memorial service for the pop-jazz singer Sylvia Syms is to be held on Monday at 6:30 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 53d Street, Manhattan.
Among those who will speak and perform at the service, which will be open to the public, will be Marilyn and Alan Bergman, Cy Coleman, Bobby Short, Margaret Whiting, Julie Wilson, Barbara Carroll, Terry Clarke and Rex Reed.
Miss Syms died on May 10 at age 74.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Despite contradictory evidence by Michael Milken, who is seeking to have his sentence reduced, his "cooperation and testimony substantially aided the Government in the prosecution of Alan E. Rosenthal," the U.S.
Attorney in Manhattan said.  [ Page 35. ]
Robert J. Eaton is certain Chrysler can survive without a merger or an alliance with another auto maker.
The former G.M. executive, who will become Chrysler's chief executive next year, said the company's new products, its leaner manufacturing operation and a recovering economy "mean we can strengthen ourselves so we don't have to look to anyone" for help.  [ 35. ]


Material Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hopes Dim for U.N. Efforts, To Open Sarajevo's Airport
Fierce fighting continued all around the Sarajevo airport today, further dimming hopes that the United Nations will succeed in carrying out a Security Council plan to reopen the airport for a relief airlift.
For the third day, Serbian fighters using the airport as a base attacked the nearby high-rise suburb of Dobrinja with artillery, tanks and infantry.
But they apparently failed to seize Dobrinja, which is 500 yards northeast of the airport terminal.


Chief-to-Be at Chrysler Sees No Need to Merge
Robert J. Eaton, the former General Motors executive who will become Chrysler's chief executive next year, says he is certain the No. 3 auto maker can survive without a merger or an alliance with another auto maker.
In an interview today, Mr.
Eaton, who is currently the vice chairman and chief operating officer of the Chrysler Corporation, said the company's new products, leaner manufacturing operation and a recovering economy "mean we can strengthen ourselves so we don't have to look to anyone" for help.


Couple Arrested in Kidnapping of Exxon Official
A former Exxon employee and his wife were arrested today and charged with kidnapping Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive who disappeared nearly two months ago.
There was no word on the whereabouts of Mr.
Reso, the 57-year-old president of Exxon International.
"This should be a cause for celebrating," said W. Michael Murphy, the Morris County Prosecutor, "but it isn't, because we still haven't achieved our goal, the safe return of Mr. Reso."


Marquette Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Hy &amp; Zel's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


6 Men Shot at Card Game
Six men were wounded, two seriously, when two gunmen opened fire last night on a card game on a Brooklyn street corner, the police said.
The victims, who range from 20 to 36 years old, were involved in a game at the corner of Utica Avenue and Carroll Street in Crown Heights when shots rang out just after 8 P.M.
The police said they had not identified any suspects or determined a motive.


Top Officer Says Police Corruption Is Hard to Stop
The ranking New York City police officer charged with stopping corruption conceded, even as Mayor David N. Dinkins prepared yesterday to appoint a special investigator to look into charges of police wrongdoing, that his task has never been more difficult.
Law enforcement officials and experts say that is because an explosive growth of drugs; the changing nature of crime; the desire of senior officers to insulate themselves from scandal, and an influx of younger, and some say, naive police officers have eroded the New York City Police Department's ability to police itself effectively.


Panel Didn't Rule Out Power-Line Health Risk
To the Editor:
An Associated Press article from New Haven June 6 gave a misleading impression of a report by a Connecticut Academy of Science and Engineering panel investigating links between health and the magnetic waves sent out by highpower electrical lines.
The panel's three-page summary states and restates that the findings were inconclusive: "Absolute proof of the occurence of adverse effects of E.L.F." - extremely low frequency - "fields at pervading magnitudes cannot be found in the available evidence, and the same evidence does not permit a judgment that adverse effects could not occur."
Electromagnetic radiation has an undisputed physical effect on people.
It may be true that no one study has yet proved that electromagnetic fields are carcinogens.
However, thousands of studies have shown strong links, and more conclusive evidence is emerging.
More is known today of the adverse effects of electromagnetic fields than was known 20 years ago about asbestos.
Electromagnetic fields are a huge and pervasive issue.
When their danger is admitted,there will be financial ramifications of a magnitude that will make the savings and loan institutions bailout seem small potatoes.
Note that utility companies have financed much of the research on the subject.
Alan Herman New York, June 7, 1992.


Hello, Davis; Goodbye, Daniels
The Los Angeles Dodgers activated ERIC DAVIS from the disabled list yesterday and made room for the outfielder on the roster by reassigning KAL DANIELS.
Before being disabled, Davis was hitting .257 with 4 home runs and 16 runs batted in in 32 games.
In all, he missed 24 games with a shoulder injury, and his return may signal the end of Daniels's stay with the Dodgers.


South African Massacre: Fingers Point at the Police
The Kwamadala Hostel hulks here on the edge of the vast Iscor steelworks, part Zulu laborers' dormitory, part refugee camp, part political ward and, by many accounts, part staging area for some of South Africa's most savage political killings.
Today the hostel and its murky relationship with the South African police were at the center of the country's stunned attention after the seemingly random massacre of 39 black men, women and children on Wednesday night in Boipatong township, less than a mile away.


With Labor Pact to End at Midnight, Con Edison Talks Continue
Even as management repeatedly threatened a lockout, negotiators for the Consolidated Edison Company and a union representing 13,000 utility workers continued to struggle over pension and medical insurance issues yesterday with the contract due to expire at midnight tonight.
"It's moving a little too slowly for my liking, but I'm guardedly optimistic," Joe Flaherty, president of Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers Union of America, said yesterday after stepping away from the negotiating table at the Rye Town Hilton Hotel in Westchester.


CHRONICLE
ELIE WIESEL, the Nobel Peace Prize winner and writer on the Holocaust, and PAT ROBERTSON, the television evangelist and former Presidential aspirant, are to be among the speakers at a rally tomorrow morning to urge President Bush to commute the life sentence of JONATHAN JAY POLLARD.
Mr.
Pollard, a former civilian intelligence analyst for the Navy, pleaded guilty in 1986 to transmitting intelligence information to Israel.
He is in solitary confinement in the federal penitentiary in Marion, Ill.


Appeals Court Keeps Reynolds Out of the Trials
Butch Reynolds's long and arduous campaign to run in the Barcelona Olympics ended tonight when a Federal appeals court in Cincinnati overturned a lower court decision that would have allowed him to compete in the United States Olympics track and field trials, which opened today.
Judge Eugene E. Siler Jr. dissolved a preliminary injunction issued this morning in a Columbus, Ohio, District Court that would have cleared the way for Reynolds to compete in the 400 meters despite his two-year suspension for drug use that expires on Aug. 11.


A Racquet With Precision in Mind
PRO KENNEX INC. of San Diego has designed an asymmetrical tennis racquet whose lopsided shape is designed to make it easier to hit a ball precisely.
The opposite sides of the racquet's head frame vary in thickness.
Although the differences are small -- measured in millimeters -- Pro Kennex said that the racquet, the Asymmetric, makes a big difference in play.


Too Few Benefit from Monopolies in the Skies
To the Editor:
I take exception to several conclusions that you and many of the experts you quote reach in your May 22 Economic Watch article on the airline industry battle for dominance of the skies.
In 1978, Congress deregulated the airlines to allow a natural formation of highly competitive industry, encourage new entrants, create jobs, increase airline efficiency, hold down costs and make it cheaper to fly.
What you call consolidation, and I term creeping monopolization, has halted entry by new carriers and sabotaged established carriers in deregulation and entrants (of the 14 relatively alarge new airlines estabished since 1978 only America West survives).
The industry is losing jobs -- 150,000 in the last four years.
Productivity and profits among the three major carriers are low and sinking lower; revenues are not keeping up with costs.
I think readers will recognize that we need more competition, not less.
I would also take issue with the following areas in your assessment:
*To hold up Southwest Airlines as the little engine that could paints an incomplete picture.
Southwest has indeed achieved one of the lowest cost structures in the industry, a record America West has matched.
But neither America West nor any other airline has the leegislatively mandated advantage Congress gave Southwest in 1978, with the Wright amendment.
Southwest profits significantly from the monopoly it has created at Dallas Love Field.
Its fares in the Texas market are considerably higher, compared with those elsewhere in its system (particularly on routes also served by America West.) With artificially high profits from Texas passengers, this "special advantage" as you call it, contributes roughly $75 million to the bottom line annually and allows Southwest to subsidize its operation in markets where it competes with other carriers or loses money.
Without this legislative monopoly, Southwest would be losing money like everyone else.
Southwest has driven ticket prices on competitive routes way below cost.
The carrier will continue to subsidize predatory pricing conditions in other markets as long as it holds onto its monoppoly at Love Field.
*
Rapid growth has been cited by many as a major contributor to the downfall or financial problems of a number of airlines, including America West.
But America West, like Southwest and others, found that the only way for the smaller lines to survive was to grow beyond our original market niches.
The more sucessful we were with new routes and new markets, the fiercer the competition was to grow or be swallowed up.
*
The competitive advantages conferred on the Big Three -- American, United and Delta -- by frequent-flier programs, computerized reservations systems and landing slots are hardly water over the dam.
The proprietary Sabre and Apollo computerized reservations systems contribute $400 million annually to the bottom line for American and United, and offset losses from ticket sales.
America West alone contributes more then $3 million a month to revenue transfers.
Add to that the booking advantages and incentives built into the system, and you have an overwhelming cost advantage, a formidable barrier to entry and a dangerous concentration of air traffic in the hands of a few carriers.
*
The argument that competition among relatively few airlines will keep prices in line with costs is folly.
It hasn't happened yet -- performance and profitability are down, and prices in no way reflect costs -- nor is there any indication from the United States oil and gas, automobile and steel industries that it will.
Industrial consolidation has meant a market closed to innovation, job creation, productivity and fair pricing.
*
Optimism about new entrants is misplaced.
Of the 14 large airlines formed after deregulation in 1978 only America West survives, and it operates in Chapter 11.
Sure, the industry makes room for new entrants, but it penalizes those that become too big, too successful or too aggressive.
By restricting access to airports, the large airlines quash those entrants who attempt to compete on the more popular routes.
Monopolies represent and protect inefficient industries.
Unless the Government uses its antitrust powers to preserve the airline industry's competitive integrity, the result will be even less efficiency, higher fares, fewer passengers, and, ultimately, re-regulation.
And that's something no one wants.
EDWARD R. BEAUVAIS Chairman, America West Airlines Phoenix, June 1, 1992


Miss Campbell, Count von Arnim
Camille Rogers Campbell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel R. Campbell of Southampton, L.I., was married there last evening to Count Joachim von Arnim, a son of Count Adolf-Heinrich von Arnim-Boitzenburg of Schlossborn, Germany, and Countess Maria von Arnim of Munich, Germany.
The Rev.
Peter M. Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church.
Countess Camille von Arnim was until recently a public affairs coordinator for the New York Zoological Society in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Personal Economics Group, a New York financial-services company.


All of Metal, but There Similarities Stop
JEWELRY, wall hangings, lamps, bells, a vegetable chopper, tea strainers and two iron apples: only the craft artists' use of metal can explain how this heterogeneous collection came together in one show.
In spite of the diverse styles and techniques, these works by 42 New Jersey metalsmiths reflect a quiet harmony.
"Forged and Fired," the title of the current exhibition at the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen Gallery, evokes images of red-hot metal and artisans silhouetted against the glow of a forge or a kiln.
But viewers can relax and enjoy; these fiery origins are in the past.
And the gallery is well air-conditioned.


'GRAY'S ANATOMY'
In his article, Spalding Gray spoke of his attempts to treat his eye problem, first with traditional medicine, then with a sweat-lodge healing.
As a physician and, in recent years, a student of the sweat lodge, I feel compelled to write.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Great Kills
GREAT KILLS, with its calm harbor and clean beaches on the south shore of Staten Island, has been adding housing since the opening of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge in 1964 made it easily accessible to Brooklyn and Manhattan.
The recession has slowed construction and sales, but brokers and local officials expect sharp increases in both when the economy picks up.
"Housing prices will take off again because the Lord isn't making any more waterfront property," said Dorothy Fitzpatrick, district manager of Community Board 3, based in Great Kills.
She said the next surge could start at one of the newest developments in the community, Port Regalle.
This is a 50-unit, pink-stucco condominium town- house complex off Wiman Avenue, overlooking Great Kills Harbor.
A three-bedroom unit with a waterfront view is currently listed for resale at $369,000, a two bedroom unit at $320,000.
Local real estate agents say the owners may be unable to get those prices.


Chance of a Rail Strike Grows as Talks Bog Down
Railway officials and union leaders made little progress in negotiations yesterday, increasing the possibility of a Wednesday strike at Amtrak, Conrail and other rail lines around the nation.
Union officials argue that a strike at Conrail, which carries most of the freight in the Northeast and links up with most major railroads, would cause only limited disruptions.
But Conrail officials and railway analysts say its impact would be felt within days at power utilities and factories throughout the United States.


Crime
Key West is known to be a tolerant little town.
But when Joey Goldman packs his girlfriend, Sandra, into his 1973 Eldorado convertible and drives down from New York to make his dishonest fortune, in Laurence Shames' antic crime caper, FLORIDA STRAITS (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20), the local racketeers literally spit on the brash young entrepreneur's shiny loafers.
Humbled, Joey takes the advice of a retired wise guy named Bert the Shirt to come up with "a scam that fits the climate" and finds himself a legitimate hustle.
"I stand onna corner and con people into going to look at these condos," he explains on the phone to his friend Sal back in Queens.
"Time-snare, they call it."
Things are going swell for Joey and Sandra until Joey's older half brother, Gino, pulls up in a rented Thunderbird, chased by a gang of Miami mobsters who have a few questions for him about some missing emeralds.
The land-and-sea hunt for this loot makes a
mensch
of Joey, who masterminds the operation, confounds the crooks, makes a monkey out of Gino and wins his father's respect -- all without selling out his newfound values.


World Markets; Trembling in Japan and Mexico
It was rough for stock markets around the world last week.
But it was especially bad in Japan and Mexico.
One market, Mexico, has been a high-flyer.
Japan was just trying to lift its chin off the floor.
But both, like markets around the world now, are vulnerable because of economic uncertainty and coming elections.


Leave Mets Sluggers Alone
To the Sports Editor:
The highly paid sluggers, Bobby Bonilla and Howard Johnson, are not hitting, and a "throng of reporters" is asking them why ("2 Met Sluggers Deal With Hard Times Differently," The Times, May 10).


Jenny Yoon, David Lee
Jenny Jae Yoon, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Hong C. Yoon of Manlius, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Lee, a son of Drs.
Bong S. Lee and Mi Wha Lee of Haddonfield, N.J.
The Rev.
J.
Robert Yeazel officiated at the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Church in Fayetteville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Lee, 25 years old, is studying for a master's degree in organization and management at Yale University.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College.
Her father is an anesthesiologist in Syracuse.


Party Flavors
THE SUMMER APPETITE IS like an indecisive lover.
Subdued or perhaps subordinated by heat and the mixed blessing of long, slow days, warm-weather hunger is laconic and lackadaisical.
It is loath to commit to a full meal, looking to be convinced.
As if teaching the cook to nurse a fussy patient, antique cookbooks use words like "cooling" and "soothing" when describing dishes to tempt the summer palate.
Such dishes are still typically gussied up to an extreme.
Cucumber butterflies, carved carrot florets and radish roses abound, all begging to beguile.
In the end, the same thing that subdues appetite can inflame it: the nature of the season.


Heather L. McCutchen, Thomas Paul Kannam
Heather Lynn McCutchen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh L. McCutchen of Florence, Ala., was married yesterday in Hanover, N.H., to Thomas Paul Kannam, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Kannam of Andover, Mass.
The Rev.
Peter E. Camp officiated at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church.


A la Carte: A Gourmet Beachhead Is Established on the East End
THERE was a time when the East End was a culinary wasteland.
The short, summer season simply did not generate enough business to attract and hold talented chefs or permanent professional serving staffs.
But in the last decade, a new breed of enterprising owners and chefs started coming to the Island.
These entrepreneurial types provided year-round employment: summers in the Hamptons and winters in restaurants they owned in Manhattan or the Caribbean.


A Trip And a Half; Yeltsin's Visit Seals a Bond; The Details Will Test It
Every summit meeting has its photo, and surely the one that will endure from last week's will be that cozy family snapshot of Russia's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, standing on the White House lawn with one arm around Barbara Bush and the other around President Bush, with the Bush family dog Millie at their feet.
The picture could be in a scrapbook labeled: "Uncle Boris Comes to Visit." And the caption would have Mr.
Yeltsin saying to the Bushes: "So! Great to be here! What's for dinner?"
In that picture are hints of the many contradictory impulses behind this summit.
There was an innocent warmth in the smiles of these two former adversaries, but it masked the frustrating, messy domestic realities in their respective countries that will continue to complicate the relationship.
There was the big-hearted charisma of Mr.
Yeltsin, who came to Washington tossing off tantalizing tidbits about American prisoners of war and his undying commitment to economic reform.
He was the Russian Ross Perot, a blunt breath of fresh air without the details.


Worries on Budget Cuts Anger Trenton Workers
The budget cut that the Republican legislative majority has proposed for Tom Kearns's Solid Waste Management division at the state environmental protection department comes to less than 10 percent of the total.
What makes Mr.
Kearns nervous, and angry, is that part of the cut is to come from eliminating jobs like his.
Mr.
Kearns, a 15-year veteran of the Department of Environmental Protection, is one of the 9,000 state employees who make more than $50,000, the management-level workers who would be the first to go under the Republican budget-cutting plan.
Mr.
Kearns earns $61,000 a year.


Still Dating After All These Years
THE EVENING STAR
By Larry McMurtry. 637 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON TO RETURN MONEY RAISED IN TV FORUM
Acknowledging that it made a "technical error," Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign organization says that it will return all donations it received in response to a half-hour television program last week.
Mr.
Clinton staged a televised question-and-answer session on June 12 that was financed by $395,000 from the Democratic National Committee.
The Republican Party on Friday accused the Democrats of a legal infraction and asked the Federal Election Commission to cut off money for the Clinton campaign.


To Mexico, High Court Sounds Like A Bully
By nearly all accounts but his own, Humberto Alvarez Machain is an unfortunate choice as a cause celebre.
Even to Mexican officials, the heavyset, 44-year-old gynecologist suggests the drug-related corruption that has stamped Guadalajara, Mexico's second-largest city.
In Los Angeles, where he now occupies a prison cell, prosecutors know Dr.
Alvarez as the man who in 1985 injected stimulants into a dying American drug enforcement agent, Enrique Camarena Salazar, to keep him conscious while Guadalajara drug traffickers tortured him with a red-hot pipe.
Yet to many Mexicans, Dr.
Alvarez has also become a symbol of the arrogant and unbridled exercise of American power.
Agents of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration arranged and paid for the bounty hunters who abducted Dr.
Alvarez from his Guadalajara offices in April 1990.
And last Monday, the United States Supreme Court ruled that since a bilateral extradition treaty did not specifically rule out such kidnappings, they were not illegal and Dr.
Alvarez could be brought to trial.


Twelve-Step &amp; Company
LIZA MINNELLI gave a rafter-raising performance at the New York Hilton on Thursday night.
Glittering in sequins, she sang a sampling of her greatest hits as everyone had hoped.
She opened her set with "I Can See Clearly Now," which elicited knowing smiles from the audience, among them Calvin and Kelly Klein, Bill and Judith Moyers, Sanford I. Weill, James D. Robinson 3d and Archibald Cox Jr.
She belted out songs with titles like "Sorry I Asked" and "So What." But she surprised everyone by altering the lyrics to "Cabaret," in which Elsie is supposed to have died "of too much pills and liquor." The song concludes, "When I go I'm going like Elsie."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
OUT OF THE ARCHIVES
The Amerique Septentrionale map, dated 1746 and covering North America, Central America and the Caribbean, is one of many maps and map- making and surveyor's tools from the 18th and 19th centuries that will be on view at Philipsburg Manor in Tarrytown through the end of August.


The Kirov Ballet Keeps Turning Toward the West
Nothing better illustrates the distance Russia has traveled culturally in recent years than the ballets by major 20th-century Western choreographers that the Kirov Ballet will present in New York this summer.
The St.
Petersburg company's two-week season, which begins tomorrow at the Metropolitan Opera House, features several standard Russian classics.
But on July 2 it will offer new productions of George Balanchine's "Apollo" and "Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux" and Antony Tudor's "Leaves Are Fading," along with Balanchine's "Scotch Symphony," which the Kirov danced here in 1989.
Perhaps all but the virtuoso pas de deux would have been suspect in Russia only a few years ago.
Because "Scotch Symphony" is plotless, it exemplifies formalism, which Soviet estheticians considered the most questionable type of art.
Although "Apollo" and "The Leaves Are Fading" have dramatic content, it is expressed indirectly rather than in a clear-cut manner, and thus these works, too, might have been branded formalist.


So This Is an Outfield? Not According to Torre
Dirt was streaked across Howard Johnson's face.
A four-inch gash ran down his right forearm.
A bandage designed to cover the chunk that was missing of his left elbow was torn away.
The uniform was going to require a quart of bleach.
It was a tough, painful and costly night to be an outfielder for the Mets.
It, of course, should be mentioned that it wasn't an easy night to be an infielder, a pitcher or the manager of the Mets, either.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; PEROT SAYS HE WON'T BE SUBPOENAED ON M.I.A.'s
Ross Perot said today that he did not expect to be subpoenaed to testify before a Senate committee about Americans missing in Southeast Asia.
Asked at a campaign stop here what he would do if he received a subpoena, the undeclared Presidential candidate said, without elaborating, "I won't get one."
Mr.
Perot canceled an appearance before Senators earlier this week, leading to discussions of whether subpoena might be needed.


A Warning Against Westchester's Many Levels of Government
SEVEN years ago when Westchester 2000, a public-private research group, unveiled its initial study of how best to prepare for the next century, the survey offered 29 recommendations, most of them challenging and some long sought.
They included a call for an increase in Westchester's housing stock, the elimination of most rent controls, an education consortium to help the neediest districts, improved commuter ride sharing and parking, a countywide 911 emergency system and reassessments of property throughout Westchester.


Hasty Fury on M.I.A.'s
Enthusiastic shouts from Congress for "Boris, Boris!" . . .
A historic breakthrough on slashing nuclear stockpiles . . .
Real momentum on approving an aid package for Russia.
President Yeltsin's summit meeting with President Bush last week moved from success to success.
There was only one cloud -- the confusion Mr.
Yeltsin himself created on the subject of M.I.A.'s, Americans still missing in action in Vietnam, Korea and World War II.
But before the week ended, even that cloud was dispelled by Mr.
Yeltsin's unambiguous pledge to pry the truth from the records of the old Soviet gulag.
Even members of Congress who threatened to hold up U.S. aid to Russia now seem satisfied with the Russian President's assurances.


A NEW FACE FOR AMERICAN LABOR
Dennis Rivera undoubtedly has served his members in the hospital unions well, and for that, he deserves admiration and respect ("A New Face for American Labor," by Sam Roberts, May 10).
Those people, overwhelmingly members of minority groups, deserve every break they can get, and Rivera has seen to that.
Rivera's support of striking workers at The Daily News in 1990 and 1991, however, was confusing at best.
I was a communications consultant to the Chicago Tribune Company during that strike and was initially baffled and later astounded by the active and vigorous help Rivera gave to the Daily News strikers.
He seemed untroubled by the fact that six of the nine unions that struck The News had not a single minority or woman in their ranks when the negotiations began.


'Work Hard, Trust in God, Have No Fear'
TRUMAN
By David McCullough. Illustrated. 1,117 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


For Clinton, Attention Grows, Problems Remain
Bill Clinton is getting 4,000 letters a day, fielding so many requests for broadcast interviews that he canceled plans to buy a half hour of network time last week and generally garnering more attention than he has been able to attract since the emergence of Ross Perot.
But the likely Democratic nominee is also hurting for cash, struggling to boil his message down into vote-getting form and carrying on a loud and nasty spat with Jesse Jackson.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
House
1.
Voter Registration: Vote on passage of a bill to make voter registration easier by allowing people to register by mail and as they apply for or renew their driver's licenses.
Approved 268 to 153, June 16.
2.
Supercollider: Vote on an amendment to an energy and water projects appropriation bill that would eliminate continued funding for the supercollider atom smasher.
Approved 232 to 181, June 17.
3.
Aid to Cities: Vote on passage of a compromise $1.3 billion urban aid package for Los Angeles and other cities.
Approved 249 to 168, June 18. (The Senate approved the bill by voice vote on June 19.)
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
N
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
N
Y
N
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
N
Y 10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
N
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
Y
N
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
5. McGrath (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
9. Manton (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
17. Weiss (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
19. Engel (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
21. Fish (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
Y
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
P
Y
Y
27. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
Y
N
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
33. Nowak (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
N
N
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Abroad at Home; Whatever The King Wants
Nothing the Supreme Court has done lately has aroused such widespread outrage, here and abroad, as its decision that our Government had the right to kidnap a Mexican suspect and bring him to this country for trial.
Governments from Switzerland to Argentina protested.
The Economist of London, that most pro-American paper, said the decision made America "a sponsor of vigilante values."


Jennifer Canaday, Patrick Holleran
Jennifer Bryan Canaday, a daughter of Katherine M. Canaday of Bronxville, N.Y., and Siesel E. Canaday Jr. of Old Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to Patrick Thomas Holleran, a son of Mary Evangeline Holleran of Carlsbad, Calif., and the late Dr.
Walter M. Holleran.
The Rev.
Parker Rossman performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme.
Mrs.
Holleran, 27 years old, is a post-production coordinator at Saban Entertainment, a Burbank, Calif., company that produces cartoons.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father, who is retired, was an investment banker with John Nuveen &amp; Company in New York.


Make Us True Communists, but Not Yet
CHINA IN OUR TIME
The Epic Saga of the People's Republic From the Communist Victory to Tiananmen Square and Beyond.
By Ross Terrill.
Illustrated. 366 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Charlene Gehm and Gary MacDougal
Charlene Gehm, the daughter of Verna M. and Charles W. Gehm of Ormond Beach, Fla., was married in New York on Monday to Gary Edward MacDougal, a son of Lorna Lee and Thomas W. MacDougal of Fallbrook, Calif.
The Rev.
Gary Fertig performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church.
Ms.
Gehm, who is 40 years old and is keeping her name, is an arts management student at New York University.
She was a principal dancer with the Joffrey Ballet in New York.
Her mother, who is retired, was a caterer in Miami.
The bride's father retired as a chemistry teacher at North Miami (Fla.) High School.


Donna Praiss, Christopher Pey
Donna Marie Praiss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Praiss of Haddon Heights, N.J., was married in New York yesterday to Christopher Eduard Pey, a son of Derek C. Pey of Paris and the late Joan F. Pey.
The Rev.
Kevin Madigan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Blessed Sacrament.
Mrs.
Pey, 27 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Kenyon &amp; Kenyon.
She graduated from the University of Delaware and received a J.D. from Boston University.
Her father is an associate professor of urology at the Robert Wood Johnson School of Medicine in New Brunswick, N.J.


L.I.R.R. Police Patrol Crossing Gates
SHORTLY after 4 P.M. on a recent Thursday, Officer Fred Benz of the Long Island Rail Road Police Department was sitting in his patrol car at a grade crossing in New Hyde Park.
He heard the familiar ringing of bells, a signal that the railroad gates were being activated because a train was approaching.
Four seconds later, the gates began to descend.
At the same time Officer Benz saw a red Ford Mustang accelerate around the gates and cross the track, almost hitting the gates.
He followed the driver for three blocks, until the car stopped at a light at Jericho Turnpike, where Officer Benz signaled the driver to pull over.


All About/Men's Fragrances; Scents and the Modern Male
Men's fragrance is the classic Father's Day gift, particularly from wives and children stumped by what to buy for Dad.
But while grateful for the annual sales boost each June, the men's fragrance industry is trying hard to take the seasonal spin off items like cologne, after shave and bath gel.
Manufacturers want to get men into the habit of buying fragrances. (Women currently buy 60 to 70 percent of all men's fragrances, often to wear themselves.) Fragrance makers are also exploring ways to persuade men to acquire wardrobes of scents, with different fragrances for evening, work and play.


A Fat Cat Encounters A Brick Wall
Lives there a soul within reading range of this newspaper who wants to hear more about the politics and personalities of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A., which recently ended its season in Charleston, S.C.?
I doubt it.
Except, perhaps, for those who have gotten a close look at the festival poster created by David Hughes.
It was sold in souvenir shops and displayed, a bit hesitantly, in stores around town.
It shows a giant, fearsome cat with garishly painted red lips, sharp claws, scraggly hair and two enormous breasts topped with scarlet nipples. (One nipple is inscribed with a small heart.) Six more grotesque teats hang from the buxom animal.
It is not a welcoming maternal image.
One paw stomps on a string attached to a bird flying above the cat's head.
The bird looks as if it is choking to death; it croaks out the word "festival" in a comic-strip balloon.
Inscribed above the cat's nose is a large M, beginning the name Menotti.


Susan Van Devanter, J. P. Newell
Susan Earling Van Devanter, the daughter of Ann C. Townsend of Washington and Willis Van Devanter of Poolesville, Md., was married in Washington yesterday to John Philip Newell Jr., a son of Irene P. Newell of Greenwich, Conn., and the late John P. Newell.
The Rev.
Stuart A. Kenworthy performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church, Georgetown.
Ms.
Van Devanter, who is 31 years old and keeping her name, is a health-care marketing consultant in Washington.
She graduated from Skidmore College.


Old Friend Films a Portrait of an Artist
"YOU could safely say," said Klaus Kertess, adjunct curator of drawing at the Whitney Museum of American Art, that Joan Mitchell "is one of the greatest living painters."
Yet when a film maker, Marion Cajori of Setauket, proposed a documentary on the life and work of Ms.
Mitchell, 66, a second-generation Abstract Expressionist, a typical question was why she wanted to make a film about Joni Mitchell, the singer.


Polish Panel Rules Police-File Disclosures Illegal
After stepping into the explosive process of naming Communist informers this month, Poland on Friday pulled back from any further disclosures when the country's constitutional tribunal declared the distribution of the secret police files illegal.
The move reversed a resolution passed by Parliament in late May at an evening session attended by barely half the chamber's deputies.


Romancing the Book . . . Once Again
In story-hungry Hollywood, executives not known for reading are suddenly thumbing eagerly through the classics.
But if Hollywood is desperately seeking material, it also keeps its priorities.
In the film industry, reading and writing are not nearly as important as arithmetic.
Ticket sales remain the ultimate goal, and the challenge is to please the mass audience, not placate scholars or connoisseurs of literature.
When Daily Variety recently announced the sale of a script for a new remake of "The Three Musketeers," it quoted a Disney executive who bragged about the script's "contemporary edge," the hip dialogue and a buddy relationship similar to that of Mel Gibson and Danny Glover in "Lethal Weapon." What's more, the executive claimed, the remake would be faithful to Alexandre Dumas's 1844 novel.


What Happened?
To the Editor:
First there was the hype and hullabaloo over the arrival on Broadway of Ariel Dorfman's play "Death and the Maiden." Then came an article analyzing what went wrong in New York, given that the London version was so widely praised  [ " 'Death and the Maiden' Becomes a Tale of Two Cities," May 10 ] .
Finally, there came a letter by the playwright  [ May 24 ]  offering excuses as to why his play has been misinterpreted and was not nominated for a Tony.


Mutual Funds; The Controversy Over Sales Fees
Should mutual fund investors be allowed to negotiate sales charges, just like investors who buy stocks directly?
Staff members of the Securities and Exchange Commission think so, proposing late last month to change a longstanding rule that gives funds the right to dictate what brokers can charge as commissions.


Making a Difference; Conner Takes the Next Step
Finis F. Conner had already co-founded two successful disk drive companies and retired as a wealthy man when an engineer approached him in 1985 with a new drive design and a business plan.
The resulting company, Conner Peripherals Inc., rode the boom in notebook computers to become one of Silicon Valley's fastest-rising stars.
But earnings growth slowed last year as competitors crowded into the notebook market, and last week Mr.
Conner announced plans to transform his company into a broad-based supplier of data-storage devices for many sizes and types of computers.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SMOKE OVER BIRKENAU By Liana Millu. Jewish Publication Society, $19.95.


Perot's 'Electronic Town Hall' Wouldn't Work; Nixon's Listeners
To the Editor:
In 1969, after Richard M. Nixon's election, I was involved in a test program reminiscent of Ross Perot's "electronic town hall." As an adviser to the campaign and later to the President, I suggested we test a listening post program to get a clearer idea of public needs and interests.
We did not accept the news media-driven wisdom on public opinion and wanted a direct line from public to President.


Treasure-Hunt Ban Is Fought in the Keys
Long before the United States or the state of Florida existed, sailing ships piloted by conquistadors, wealthy traders, pirates and other adventurers plied the seas surrounding the archipelago now known as the Florida Keys.
And when the first American settlers arrived here in the 1820's, it was with visions of the vast riches to be retrieved from the many vessels that were wrecked in skirmishes with pirates or hurricanes on the coral reefs just offshore.
Over the years, searching for sunken treasure has become a respected profession here, providing a livelihood for some and dreams of great wealth for many others.
So when the Federal Government, citing damage to the environment, recently announced a ban on treasure hunting in a 2,800-square-mile area around the Keys, many residents interpreted the decree as an assault on their way of life and vowed to fight back.


Attention Clark Kent: Look Out for Batman!
THE musical "It's a Bird, It's a Plane, It's Superman" has grown used to being slighted.
Despite favorable reviews, the show never caught on.
Harold Prince, who produced and directed the show on Broadway, was quoted as saying that the musical, conceived in anticipation of the Pop art craze, took so long to materialize that it wound up opening after the fad was over.
Pre-empted by "Batman" -- by then a television staple -- "Superman" closed in 1966 after running fewer than four months.


Gephardt at Northwestern
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, urged graduates yesterday at Northwestern University's 134th commencement "to keep your minds open, to welcome change, and to never accept what is -- to work for what can be."
"To enjoy life to its fullest, to live without regrets, requires a discipline, a continuing reminder of how good life really is," he said.


Quotation of the Day
"I see the same kind of exploitation that occurred then, in sweatshops, in the fields, in unscrupulous business practices that occur behind closed doors. It's very sad and it doesn't speak well to our understanding and commitment to children." -- JEFFREY NEWMAN, executive director of the National Child Labor Committee.  [ 1:1. ]


Lydia Denworth and Mark B. Justh
Lydia Lang Denworth, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond K. Denworth Jr. of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in Trappe, Md., to Mark Brian Justh, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian W. Justh of Lewisberry, Pa.
Judge Ronald P. Wertheim of the District of Columbia Superior Court performed the ceremony at the weekend home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Denworth, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Princeton University, as did her husband.
Until recently, she was a researcher for Newsweek in New York.
Her father is a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Drinker Biddle &amp; Reath.
Her mother, Joanne Denworth, is an attorney and is the president of the Pennsylvania Environmental Council.


Graves of Academe
COMPROMISED CAMPUS
The Collaboration of Universities With the Intelligence Community, 1945-1955.
By Sigmund Diamond. 371 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  BOSNIANS RECOUNT SLAUGHTER


Capriati Will Play Again in Mahwah
JENNIFER CAPRIATI announced yesterday she will be back to defend her 1991 title at the Pathmark Tennis Classic, an exhibition tournament starting July 13 in Mahwah, N.J.


Margot Herrera, James Lawrence
Margot Hayden Herrera, the daughter of Philip Herrera and Hayden Herrera, both of New York, was married yesterday to James Elliot Lawrence, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Lawrence, also of New York.
Rabbi Susan Einbinder officiated at the groom's parents' home in Purdys, N.Y.
Ms.
Herrera, who is 30 years old and keeping her name, is an associate editor at Whittle Communications in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a writer and the executive editor at Town &amp; Country magazine in New York.
Her mother is an art historian in New York.


Gepetto's Pals


Miss Swanson, Carl M. Svernlov
Alexandra Maria Swanson, a daughter of Dolores L. Swanson of Montclair, N.J., and the late Edward R. Swanson, was married yesterday to Carl Magnus Svernlov, a son of Birgitta and Dag M. Svernlov of Linkoping, Sweden.
The Rev.
Park P. Dickerson conducted the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Montclair.
Mrs.
Svernlov, 27 years old, is a legal assistant in the New York law firm of Decker Hubbard &amp; Welden.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father was the president and founder of the Edson Tool Manufacturing Company in Belleville, N.J.


Keeping It Utterly Formal
At a wedding, June 18, 6:35 P.M.


Sculptor's Estate Offers Programs
Chesterwood, a landmark estate in the Berkshire Mountains of western Massachusetts, has scheduled new lectures and programs this summer that may add to its appeal as an off-beat showcase of early 20th-century Americana.
The estate, 20 miles south of Pittsfield in the Glendale section of Stockbridge, was the summer home and studio of Daniel Chester French, the sculptor of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington.
Mr.
French purchased the 150-acre property in 1898.
The estate has been operated as a museum since 1969.
There are gardens, woodland paths and views of the surrounding countryside.


At Work on Electric Boxes Between the Ceiling Joists
LARGE-BLADED ceiling or paddle fans are easy to connect to existing ceiling wiring like that of an overhead light.
But to comply with electric codes in many communities, the electrical box containing the wiring, and to which most fans are attached, has to be a special kind.
Using a code-approved box makes a fan less likely to fall from the ceiling.
Unfortunately, installing such a box to replace an existing unapproved box usually makes the job of installing a fan more difficult.


Homespun Fop
I flatter myself that I wear the same clothes every year.
I am proud to think that I keep pace with the habit, contracted in the 1960's, in Vermont, of living in two pairs of jeans to which sweaters and a hunting coat are added in the cold and T-shirts in the warmer months.
My vanity is pleased by the 20-year-old L. L. Bean dirty bucks that rest in my closet and by the worn Pendleton shirts hanging above the bucks.
And it pleases my vanity to think that neither age nor a wider circle of operation has altered the simple habits of my youth.
But like the gambler who cannot admit, even to himself, the extent of his debts, I am incapable of perceiving, let alone admitting, the extent of my wardrobe.
For I am not that simple American guy who lives in his flannel shirt, with never a thought to his rainment.
Nor was I during my youth.
I was, and remain, a fop.
While a young collegian, I learned that everything is accepted in Bohemia save nonconformity, and I shed those articles of apparel in favor of the uniform of that day.
That uniform was enshrined in the 1970's by Ralph Lauren, and he received his inspiration in the same place we Vermont youths received ours: the small-town used-clothing store.
When we walked out of the store, we were five or six dollars poorer and indistinguishable from today's fellow or gal in Polo, Timberland or J. Crew photographs.
Our clothes spoke of traditional work in the outdoors.
And well they should have, for actual farmers had sweated into them.
When I was a kid, men did not think of dress.
Businessmen wore nothing but white shirts, and no man had yet thought to have his hair "styled" - one went for a haircut, and one thought no more of style than one would have an oil change.
But I left the 1950's for the 1960's and Chicago for the counterculture, and learned two things: that one could manipulate one's appearance for a real or potential advantage and that one could delude oneself into considering it something other than personal vanity.
My two-jeans-and-a-flannel-shirt self-delusion followed me from college to salad days in 100 odd jobs and the beginnings of a career in the Chicago theater.
I dressed myself out of the old clothes bins at the Goodwill Industries resale shops.
Honest worker than I was, I pad 25 or 50 cents for each article of clothing - the Harris Tweed sport coats and overcoats, the old flannel and broadcloth shirts, all of which were my uniform in those years.
I paid, I say, next to nothing for the above, and then spent a fortune having them altered.
I would, for example, take in a tweed jacket and instruct the tailor thusly: I want it taken in at the waist.
I want the center vent sewn and a small tuck taken at the bottom of what was the vent, so that the jacket will not "rooster-tail." I want the placket for the cuff buttons closed, and I want the cuffs bound in not more than one-half inch of supple brown leather.
I want the collar-piece covered in the same brown leather, and I want patches of the same on the elbows, those patches to be rather more rectangular than oval.
And through it all I would assure myself that I was simple, honest, et cetera.
Once, during a brief career as a photo model, I bought and had recut an old Brooks Brothers seersucker three-piece suit.
And I had a wide-stripe blue-and-white shirt, with a high, stiff plain-white collar.
And I must confess I bought what for me was that most questionable accouterment, a bow tie.
And bear with me as I relate the straw boater that I bought and the shameful finale - shameful not of itself, I admit, but in a two-pair-of-jeans sort of guy - a walking stick.
I carried, in this drag, a walking stick.
I made the rounds of the agencies that very hot summer, which was probably 1970 or 1971, looking, I suppose, like a cross between Tom Wolfe and Lou Costello.
Until I opened the door of one agency and announed myself to the receptionist, who became taken with the giggles.
And I was reminded of what, as Tolstoy informs us, Napoleon feared above all: he feared la ridicule.
My other encounter with the Demon Ridicule occurred in the same city, slightly later, and concerned hair.
As a kid, I, along with most boys at the time, wore a crew cut.
I hated the crew cut.
I have a head shaped like a block, and I thought the crew cut made me look stupid.
When I went to college, I let my hair grow long.
It did not grow, as was the fashion in those days, to the shoulders, because it could not and at the same time allow me to wear a hat.
I have extremely thick hair, to which nothing much whatever can be done.
When my hair grows past my ears, it flips up, causing me to resemble a water buffalo.
When I entered the work world, I saw that the laxity of the East would not do at all in Chicago, and I cast about for a barber.
I found a fellow who kept my hair thinned-out looking and acceptable, if somewhat nondescript.
He cut my hair for several years, once every three weeks or so, and in the above-mentioned nonstyle.
One day, he asked if he could "try something new." He had just had a brainstorm, and would I experiment along with him?
Well, I submitted and was treated to the surprise of a new appearance.
The barber had cut my hair and then slicked it back, with a vast amount of some super-strength preparation.
Slicked it back, so that it flowed from my hairline to the back of my neck in one ironed-looking progression.
He had cut the sides short and feathered the edges around my neck.
When I got over my shock, I was surprised and a bit frightened to see that I actually liked it.
The new hair style, for it could not be considered a haircut, made me look dangerous.
Yes, I thought I looked dangerous and Italian, or at least Mediterranean.
I thought I looked mean.
I paid the fellow and hurried out to a local pub, where, in the early twilight, I found, as I thought I might, several of my cronies.
I took off my hat, and one acquaintance stopped in the middle of a joke he was telling and said, "Oh, I see you've found Richard Conte's hairdresser."
I made it back to the barber just as he was closing and convinced him to undo what he had done.
I then found another barber and reverted to that crew cut I wore through my formative years, and from which I doubt I shall again diverge.
For the crew cut, you see, is an honest haircut.
It is the haircut of an honest, two-pair-of-jeans working man - a man from Chicago, a man without vanity, whose being stands without need of either introduction or apology.
I saw that my frequenting the old-clothes shops and the subsequent tailors was an affectation not in keeping with my sartorial innocence, and so I let the habit fall.
And I proceeded to take the old clothes I had left to various expensive New York tailors and instruct them how I wished those old clothes copied, so that I could remain both the fashion and the spiritual purity of my youth.


Reading Teacher Learns Another Way to Teach
Suzanne Lanes was a reading teacher who worked with Public School 64's most laggard students, zeroing in on such isolated skills as vowel pairs and contractions.
She did not like labeling students as slow or offering them the barest exposure to good books.
She did not think it was fair to give only weak students the benefits of small classes.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MADE IN U.S.A.
The Secret Histories of the Things That Made America.
By Phil Patton.
Grove Weidenfeld, $24.95.


Pamela Ruddick, W. B. Holding Jr.
Pamela Mull Ruddick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Perry Ruddick of Cedar Grove, N.J., was married yesterday in Siasconset, Mass., to William Burton Holding Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Holding of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Stanley Johnson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Siasconset Union Chapel on Nantucket.
Mrs.
Holding, 28 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is to join the investment department of Kemper Financial Services in Chicago in August.
Her father is the chairman of First Century Partners, a venture-capital concern in New York.


JUNE 14-20/A 'Yes' After Denmark's 'No'; Ireland Puts European Unity Partly Back on Track
Officials of the European Community were breathing easier last week after their next-to-smallest member, Ireland, affirmed its support of efforts to forge a more united Europe.
But when the community opens a summit meeting this week in Lisbon, anxiety may recur.


Wall Street; Mr. Perot, Meet Mr. Frazier
Discontented with the current regime, a plainspoken outsider gives a nod to the electorate and suddenly finds himself an unannounced candidate for office.
His unconventional campaign confounds the experts and challenges the established insiders.
No, he is not from Texas.
He is from Huntington, W. Va., and his name is William M. Frazier.
But advisers to H. Ross Perot could take a leaf or two out of Mr.
Frazier's book.
The West Virginian has already been successful in one of the most unusual races ever held for a seat on a corporate board, winning election last month to the board of the Van Dorn Company in Cleveland.


Look at New Methods Of Printmaking
Why, pray, does Ms.
Harrison consider the Nassau County Museum of Art her particular prey?
Never, ever has this worthy institution received kind words from her quibbling pen.
Why is the show invariably reviewed the last week before the closing of a two-month stay?
I have spent many happy hours at this particular museum.
The quality and variety of the art work brought to Nassau County is truly amazing.


Correction
A subheading on May 31 with an essay about games and literature misattributed a quotation: "I don't take sport seriously. That's what's so wonderful about it." As noted in the essay, the poet quoted was Donald Hall, not Robert Frost.


Pamela Cole, Matthew Wolins
Pamela Cole, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot H. Cole of Washington, was married last evening to Matthew Scott Wolins, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Wolins of Peekskill, N.Y.
Rabbi M. Bruce Lustig performed the ceremony at the Sheraton Carlton Hotel in Washington.
Ms.
Cole, who is keeping her name, is an antiques cataloguer for Rare Art Inc., a decorative arts concern in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow.
Her mother, Miriam Cole, is a personal fashion consultant in Washington.


Stephanie Klein, Arthur Peponis
Stephanie Wilhelmina Klein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Cornelis Klein of Albuquerque, N.M., was married yesterday in Santa Fe, N.M., to Arthur James Peponis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Peponis of Wilmette, Ill.
Bishop Isaiah of Aspendos, Chancellor of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America, performed the ceremony at the Loretto Chapel.
Mrs.
Peponis, 25 years old, graduated from Stanford University.
She received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, as did her husband.
In August she is to become a management consultant in the New York office of the Boston Consulting Group.
Her father is a professor of geology at the University of New Mexico.


Diane Peddie, Edward Kuyper
Diane Lynn Peddie, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Peddie of Grandville, Mich., was married on Friday to Edward Philip Kuyper, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
William Kuyper of Teaneck, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Charnin performed the ceremony at Immanuel Reformed Church in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Mrs.
Kuyper, 22 years old, and her husband, 21, graduated from Hope College.
Her father teaches English and golf at Grandville High School.
Her mother, Gayle Peddie, is a real-estate developer in Grand Rapids.


'Round the World In One Day
For about $1,000 an hour, travelers will be able to circle the globe to commemorate Columbus's voyage 500 years ago.
Participants will leave Lisbon on Oct. 12, Columbus Day, and are to return there 23 hours and 10 minutes later.
They will make the $23,800 journey aboard an Air France Concorde traveling 25,110 miles at an average speed of 1,083.9 miles an hour.
The flight, dubbed Sunchaser One, will make six refueling stops on its Lisbon to Lisbon route: Santo Domingo, Acapulco, Honolulu, Guam, Bangkok and Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
Several point-to-point speed records are expected to be set.
The price includes round-trip flight from the United States to Paris, an overnight stay at the Sofitel Hotel in Paris on Oct. 10, round-trip flight on the Concorde to Lisbon, and a night at the Hotel Ritz Lisboa before the flight leaves. and on returning.


Homespun Fop
I flatter myself that I wear the same clothes every year.
I am proud to think that I keep pace with the habit, contracted in the 1960's, in Vermont, of living in two pairs of jeans to which sweaters and a hunting coat are added in the cold and T-shirts in the warmer months.
My vanity is pleased by the 20-year-old L. L. Bean dirty bucks that rest in my closet and by the worn Pendleton shirts hanging above the bucks.
And it pleases my vanity to think that neither age nor a wider circle of operation has altered the simple habits of my youth.
But like the gambler who cannot admit, even to himself, the extent of his debts, I am incapable of perceiving, let alone admitting, the extent of my wardrobe.
For I am not that simple American guy who lives in his flannel shirt, with never a thought to his rainment.
Nor was I during my youth.
I was, and remain, a fop.
While a young collegian, I learned that everything is accepted in Bohemia save nonconformity, and I shed those articles of apparel in favor of the uniform of that day.
That uniform was enshrined in the 1970's by Ralph Lauren, and he received his inspiration in the same place we Vermont youths received ours: the small-town used-clothing store.
When we walked out of the store, we were five or six dollars poorer and indistinguishable from today's fellow or gal in Polo, Timberland or J. Crew photographs.
Our clothes spoke of traditional work in the outdoors.
And well they should have, for actual farmers had sweated into them.
When I was a kid, men did not think of dress.
Businessmen wore nothing but white shirts, and no man had yet thought to have his hair "styled" - one went for a haircut, and one thought no more of style than one would have an oil change.
But I left the 1950's for the 1960's and Chicago for the counterculture, and learned two things: that one could manipulate one's appearance for a real or potential advantage and that one could delude oneself into considering it something other than personal vanity.
My two-jeans-and-a-flannel-shirt self-delusion followed me from college to salad days in 100 odd jobs and the beginnings of a career in the Chicago theater.
I dressed myself out of the old clothes bins at the Goodwill Industries resale shops.
Honest worker than I was, I pad 25 or 50 cents for each article of clothing - the Harris Tweed sport coats and overcoats, the old flannel and broadcloth shirts, all of which were my uniform in those years.
I paid, I say, next to nothing for the above, and then spent a fortune having them altered.
I would, for example, take in a tweed jacket and instruct the tailor thusly: I want it taken in at the waist.
I want the center vent sewn and a small tuck taken at the bottom of what was the vent, so that the jacket will not "rooster-tail." I want the placket for the cuff buttons closed, and I want the cuffs bound in not more than one-half inch of supple brown leather.
I want the collar-piece covered in the same brown leather, and I want patches of the same on the elbows, those patches to be rather more rectangular than oval.
And through it all I would assure myself that I was simple, honest, et cetera.
Once, during a brief career as a photo model, I bought and had recut an old Brooks Brothers seersucker three-piece suit.
And I had a wide-stripe blue-and-white shirt, with a high, stiff plain-white collar.
And I must confess I bought what for me was that most questionable accouterment, a bow tie.
And bear with me as I relate the straw boater that I bought and the shameful finale - shameful not of itself, I admit, but in a two-pair-of-jeans sort of guy - a walking stick.
I carried, in this drag, a walking stick.
I made the rounds of the agencies that very hot summer, which was probably 1970 or 1971, looking, I suppose, like a cross between Tom Wolfe and Lou Costello.
Until I opened the door of one agency and announed myself to the receptionist, who became taken with the giggles.
And I was reminded of what, as Tolstoy informs us, Napoleon feared above all: he feared la ridicule.
My other encounter with the Demon Ridicule occurred in the same city, slightly later, and concerned hair.
As a kid, I, along with most boys at the time, wore a crew cut.
I hated the crew cut.
I have a head shaped like a block, and I thought the crew cut made me look stupid.
When I went to college, I let my hair grow long.
It did not grow, as was the fashion in those days, to the shoulders, because it could not and at the same time allow me to wear a hat.
I have extremely thick hair, to which nothing much whatever can be done.
When my hair grows past my ears, it flips up, causing me to resemble a water buffalo.
When I entered the work world, I saw that the laxity of the East would not do at all in Chicago, and I cast about for a barber.
I found a fellow who kept my hair thinned-out looking and acceptable, if somewhat nondescript.
He cut my hair for several years, once every three weeks or so, and in the above-mentioned nonstyle.
One day, he asked if he could "try something new." He had just had a brainstorm, and would I experiment along with him?
Well, I submitted and was treated to the surprise of a new appearance.
The barber had cut my hair and then slicked it back, with a vast amount of some super-strength preparation.
Slicked it back, so that it flowed from my hairline to the back of my neck in one ironed-looking progression.
He had cut the sides short and feathered the edges around my neck.
When I got over my shock, I was surprised and a bit frightened to see that I actually liked it.
The new hair style, for it could not be considered a haircut, made me look dangerous.
Yes, I thought I looked dangerous and Italian, or at least Mediterranean.
I thought I looked mean.
I paid the fellow and hurried out to a local pub, where, in the early twilight, I found, as I thought I might, several of my cronies.
I took off my hat, and one acquaintance stopped in the middle of a joke he was telling and said, "Oh, I see you've found Richard Conte's hairdresser."
I made it back to the barber just as he was closing and convinced him to undo what he had done.
I then found another barber and reverted to that crew cut I wore through my formative years, and from which I doubt I shall again diverge.
For the crew cut, you see, is an honest haircut.
It is the haircut of an honest, two-pair-of-jeans working man - a man from Chicago, a man without vanity, whose being stands without need of either introduction or apology.
I saw that my frequenting the old-clothes shops and the subsequent tailors was an affectation not in keeping with my sartorial innocence, and so I let the habit fall.
And I proceeded to take the old clothes I had left to various expensive New York tailors and instruct them how I wished those old clothes copied, so that I could remain both the fashion and the spiritual purity of my youth.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 21, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
21
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
4
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman who, upon regaining consciousness in a hospital, recalls the horrors that brought her there.
3
5
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
4
31
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists in England, Ireland and America.
5
4
MAN OF MY DREAMS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A Victorian beauty inadvertently wins the nobleman she had aspired to marry.
6
3
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
7
21
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
8
2
DARKNESS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A family moves back to a Florida town, where something evil awaits.
9
1
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town; originally published in 1981 as "Coming Attractions."
10
4
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $5.99.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
11
10
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Wynwood, $9.95.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
12
4
WOMAN WITHOUT A PAST, by Phyllis A. Whitney. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A woman journeys to South Carolina to solve the mystery of her birth.
13
1
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Dell, $5.99.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge.
14
9
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world.
15 *
4
VORTEX, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $5.99.) A war in Africa sometime in the future involves Cuba and the United States.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
5
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
3
20
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
4
8
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $5.99.) The tribulations of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
5
9
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
6
57
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
5
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
8
49
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
9
450
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
10
15
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN, by Julia Phillips. (Signet, $6.99.) Life in Hollywood as experienced by a producer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
45
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
9
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
93
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
74
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
13
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


CORRECTIONS
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the East Village misidentified the locale shown.
It was St.
Marks Place between Avenue A and First Avenue, not 10th Street between Avenues A and B.


Drug Is Approved to Treat Prostate Patients
The Food and Drug Administration has approved the marketing of a new drug for treatment of men who have symptom's from enlarged prostate glands, its manufacturer, Merck &amp; Company of Rahway, N.J., said yesterday.
The approval for the drug, Proscar, came late Friday night, a spokesman for Merck said.
Many men using the drug may be able to postpone or avoid surgery for the common ailment.
The drug's generic name is finasteride.
It will be available in late July.


Wendy Powers, E. D. Hollander
Wendy Jane Powers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Jay Powers Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I., was married there yesterday to Edmund David Hollander, a son of Mrs.
Mel W. Kopelman of New York and the late Alvin L. Hollander Jr.
Justice M. Hallsted Christ of State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I., performed the ceremony at the Piping Rock Beach Club.
Mrs.
Hollander, 36 years old, is a recorder player and a teacher at the Lucy Moses School for Music and Dance in New York.
She graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in historical musicology from Columbia University, where she is a doctoral candidate in that subject.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Powers Chemco, a maker and supplier of graphic arts materials in Glen Cove, L.I.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Wednesday
Durable goods, percent change
1.4
0.9
Thursday
Gross domestic product, first quarter
2.4
2.4
G.D.P. deflator
3.1
3.1
Friday
Personal income, percent
0.1
0.2
Personal consumption, percent
0.3
0.2
Capacity utilization in percent
78.3
78.5
Monday: British trade balance  Tuesday: Two-year Treasury note auction *
Senate Judiciary subcommittee looks into sales tactics of life-insurance industry  Wednesday: Five-year Treasury note auction *
Olympia &amp; York bankruptcy hearings in Toronto  Thursday: Import and export prices *
Exisiting home sales  Friday: European summit in Lisbon  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Reds Use the Trade Route as their Road to Get Back Into First Place
At the end of last December's winter meetings, Joe McIlvaine, the San Diego Padres' envious general manager, crowned the Cincinnati Reds, the Kansas City Royals and the Mets "the champions of the mutations." Those teams were the most active of the off season, sending players to and fro in trades and free-agent moves.
For now, the mutations of the Royals and the Mets have turned ugly; only the Reds have molded theirs into a handsome entity.


Corrections
A front-page article last week about Russell Simmons, the head of Rush Communications and Def Jam Records, misstated the relationship of his operations with the rap group Run-D.M.C.
The group is managed by Rush Communications; its music is released by Profile Records.


POSTINGS: Stop, Look and Listen; See House, Hear Concert
Homeowners trying to think of imaginative ways to market their houses might well admire the tack that Barry David Salwen is taking.
He is a concert pianist, and two weeks from today he will give a free concert at an open house that he and his wife, Tamar Gilad, are holding in an attempt to sell their Rockland County, N.Y., home.
"The market today is rather difficult and we thought that an unusual approach might have some success," said Mr.
Salwen, who is leaving the area to become an assistant professor of music at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington.
"And besides, everyone involved, including myself, would have a wonderful time."


Caryn Lea White and Sylvain M. Leroy
Caryn Lea White, the daughter of Betty S. White of East Hampton, L.I., and the late Charles R. White, was married there yesterday to Sylvain Marc Leroy, the son of Louise Leroy of Paris, and the late Jean L. Leroy.
The Rev.
Frederick W. Schulz, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Leroy, 32 years old, is a buyer in New York for the Ross Stores, a national clothing chain.
Her late father was the president of the Market Square Apparel Company in New York.
Her mother is a freelance fashion illustrator.


The Breadboard Ornithopter
To the Editor:
"A Step Closer to Flight as Free as a Bird's" (Technology, May 31) transported me back to somewhere around 1939 -- to Hope Avenue in Passaic, N.J., where Andy Periwiznik and Steve Kuhta were friends of mine, aviation was in its infancy, and we were always throwing balsa gliders instead of baseballs.


Chewing Over the Art Of Automotive Design
JACK TELNACK was looking spiffy in gray-checked suit, dark blue shirt with white collar and patterned blue tie.
But then he's always spiffy, which is no great surprise.
You're supposed to look good when you are the top artist at the nation's second-largest auto company.
In fact, Telnack was marking his fifth anniversary as vice president of design for Ford, and he was doing it by helping to bring a Ford-sponsored retrospective on the life and work of the architect Louis I. Kahn to the Museum of Modern Art in New York.


Treasure-Hunt Ban Is Fought in the Keys
Long before the United States or the state of Florida existed, sailing ships piloted by conquistadors, wealthy traders, pirates and other adventurers plied the seas surrounding the archipelago now known as the Florida Keys.
And when the first American settlers arrived here in the 1820's, it was with visions of the vast riches to be retrieved from the many vessels that were wrecked in skirmishes with pirates or hurricanes on the coral reefs just offshore.
Over the years, searching for sunken treasure has become a respected profession here, providing a livelihood for some and dreams of great wealth for many others.
So when the Federal Government, citing damage to the environment, recently announced a ban on treasure hunting in a 2,800-square-mile area around the Keys, many residents interpreted the decree as an assault on their way of life and vowed to fight back.


Betsy Jo Viener, James Spence Jr.
Betsy Jo Viener, a daughter of Mrs.
Reuben Viener of Richmond and the late Mr.
Viener, was married Tuesday in Rye to James Robert Spence Jr., the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Spence of Armonk, N.Y.
Judge Peter Lane of the Rye Municipal Court, performed the ceremony at the Westchester Country Club.
Mrs.
Spence is a vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her late father was a partner of Viener Metals, a smelting and refining company in Richmond.


Tending the Gardener
Watching a spined soldier bug devour a Mexican bean beetle can make you beautiful.
You start out in the early morning digging out some boulder (for that rosy glow), but then you wander off to look at the white lace flowers.
Pretty soon you're putting up a pole for the pole beans, and before you know it, you're on your back watching a bug drama.
In the twilight.


Tending to Chores When a Barbecue Beckons
THE major planting season has gone by, but gardeners are far from finished.
Vacation planning is under way and there are many other summer activities on the family's priority list.
Just to be sure the gardening essentials are met, here is a brief review to get everyone up to speed for the long haul through the summer days ahead.
Mulch: There is nothing like a good cover on the soil's surface to keep moisture in and weeds out.
Thus far the Northeast has had abundant rainfall and the ground is wet, but it may not stay so through the summer months.
Weeds will have a tough time getting enough light and root hold if they have a layer of mulch to push through.
There is no hard rule as to the best mulch to use.
The two things that should dictate are price and availability.
An ample supply of bark chips (the small ones) make an excellent mulch.
So do grass clippings if not piled too thickly and the lawn has not been treated with an herbicide.
Herbicide residue could be damaging to certain plants, particularly sensitive vegetables like tomatoes.
Other good mulches are spoiled hay (sometimes farmers give this away), shredded leaves, even compost but not peat moss, which looks great for a time but acts like a sponge and absorbs moisture from the soil.
To be effective, the mulch layer should be kept at least two inches thick.


Long's Peak
To the Editor: The article by Susan Benner ("Tackling Colorado's 14,000-Footers," May 24) cheered me immensely, because it proved to me that, unlike on Ayer's Rock, no matter how many feet trample up and down Long's Peak, they don't wear a path.
There doesn't seem to be a rock out of place since I last saw Long Peak's summit in July 1932.


Charlotte O'Shea, Peter Glovin
Charlotte Marie O'Shea, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. O'Shea of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Peter Alan Glovin, a son of Linda Glovin and Robert Glovin, both of Norwood, Mass.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan performed the interfaith ceremony in St.
Michael's Church, with Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman attending.
Mrs.
Glovin is the assistant to the middle-school principal at the Trinity School in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm Burns, Kennedy, Schilling &amp; O'Shea in New York.


Luring Home Buyers With Resort Amenities
BORROWING methods it has employed at resort communities and hotels in other parts of the nation, the Carol Management Company is challenging the slow real estate market with a residential project here that stresses resort amenities and hotel services.
Doral Greens at Arrowwood has 138 residential units under construction on 22.6 acres, surrounded by 20 more acres of open space.
The development is on the 114-acre site of the Doral Arrowwood Resort and Conference Center here, and occupancy is scheduled for early fall.


Commercial Property: Boise, Idaho; Home -- and Corporate Expansion -- on the Range
ALTHOUGH it was already mid-afternoon, the cafeteria at the 220-acre regional campus of Hewlett-Packard Company, on a grassy plain just outside of this midsized city, still reverberated with the buzz of talk.
The need for working space has grown fast at the regional campus here, said Don Curtis, general manager for the company's site operations in Boise, as he walked a visitor through the building.
The vast cafeteria is doubling as conference space until a 180,000-square-foot building -- the seventh to go up since the Boise campus opened in 1973 -- is completed in the fall.


Boning Up on His Natural History


Talking Presidential Heads
Top-rated television appearances of the 1992 Presidential campaign (Nielsen figures provided by the networks, with each rating point representing 921,000 households):
1. Ross Perot, "Today," NBC, June 11, 5.9.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Rockland, Del.; Recycling A '40 Manor
A MANOR built in 1940 by a leader of E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company who was an heir to the duPont family fortune has reopened here following a $3.5 million reconstruction as the chemical company's new banquet and conference center.
The company bought the 28,000-square-foot house and 60 of the original 168 acres in 1990 for $8 million from the estate of Pierre S. duPont 3d.
It had been on the market for more than two years after Mr. du Pont's death in April 1988.


Hear No Bar, Speak No Bar . . .
When the Monkey Bar abruptly closed June 1, New York lost another landmark of the night.
With leopard-print carpet and murals depicting cavorting monkeys, the bar, which opened in 1936 in the Hotel Elysee on East 54th Street, was a favorite of Joe DiMaggio, Ava Gardner, Tallulah Bankhead and Tennessee Williams.
In recent days most of the patrons weren't celebrities.
New hotel managers are remaking the bar and want to preserve the murals, although specific renovations are undecided.
But the old Monkey Bar will live on in many memories.


Like Clockwork, a Police Scandal
In announcing his plan to appoint a special police-corruption investigator last week, Mayor David N. Dinkins celebrated a centenary of sorts.
It has been 100 years since the Rev.
Dr.
Charles H. Parkhurst delivered a rousing sermon against police protection of the rackets that kicked off an uncanny cycle of major police scandals erupting like clockwork just about every 20 years.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Bridgeport, Conn. 89,000  1222 Reservoir Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; renovated, 50- by 100-foot lot; taxes $2,665.
East Hartford, Conn. 125,000
135 Jefferson Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; large master suite w/whirpool bath, h/w floors, solarium; taxes $2,257.
Monroe, Conn. 150,000  70 Turkey Roost Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 27-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, skylights, new furnace, 1 acre; taxes $2,408.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 315,000  43 Florence Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old contemporary; fireplace, country eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $6,705.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 281,500
Byram Lake Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old contemporary ranch; foyer, fireplace, dining room, family room, Oriental gardens, pond, 4 acres; taxes $4,655.
South Salem, N.Y. 352,000  Longview Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 20-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, library, glassed-in porch, study, 2 acres; taxes $7,947.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J. 140,000
687 Amboy Avenue
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; enclosed porches, eat-in-kitchen, close to shopping; taxes $2,742.
Fair Lawn, N.J. 168,000
11-11 Fifth Street
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, 1-car garage, updated furnace and electric; taxes $3,540.
East Williston, L.I. 325,000
99 High Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.


BENEFITS
'Batman' Helps Ronald
June 22 -- A new Ronald McDonald House under construction in Manhattan, to house parents whose children are undergoing treatment in local hospitals, will benefit from a showing of the movie "Batman Returns." The 7 P.M. showing at the Loew's Festival Theater, 6 West 57th Street, will be followed by a party at Le Bar Bat, 311 West 57th Street, from 9 P.M. to midnight.
Tickets, $75, from (914) 277-4800.
Show for AIDS Groups
June 22 -- A special performance of the "Rodgers and Hart Revue," with Elaine Stritch and Margaret Whiting, at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, will benefit the People with AIDS Coalition and Friends in Deed.
The 9 P.M. performance will be followed by a reception with the cast.
Tickets, $100, or $50 for the performance only, from (212) 244-3005.
City Opera Auction Party
June 22 -- Lunches with Dr.
Ruth Westheimer, Mary Tyler Moore or Sidney Sheldon are some of the special occasions to be auctioned by the New York City Opera Guild at Christie's.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by the auction and a buffet supper.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 870-5642.
For Lesbian and Gay Center
June 22 -- The Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center will hold its annual garden party at the center, 208 West 13th Street.
Buffet supper and drinks will be served from 6 to 11 P.M.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 620-7310, $50 at the door.
Sports Celebration
June 22 -- The former hockey player Rod Gilbert will be honored at Mickey Mantle's Restaurant and Sports Bar, 42 Central Park South.
The evening, to include a buffet dinner and dancing, will benefit United Cerebral Palsy of New York City.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 683-6700.
Between Town and Country
June 22 -- Food and wine will be served from 5:30 to 8:30 P.M. at the Hudson River Club, 4 World Financial Center, for the benefit of Farm Hands-City Hands, a group that organizes day and overnight trips to the country for the elderly, the handicapped, homeless families and others.
Tickets, $55, from (212) 255-1780.
On the Waterfront
June 23 -- The Grand Street Settlement, which has been serving needy residents of the Lower East Side for 76 years, is holding a benefit party at Amazon Village, at Pier 25, the Hudson River at North Moore Street.
From 6:30 to 10:30 P.M., there will be food, an open bar and dancing.
Tickets, $50, at the door.
Information: (212) 674-1740.
Women of Achievement
June 23 -- The National Glaucoma Trust, which raises funds for research into the eye disorder, will hold a salute to 37 women of achievement at a black-tie dinner-dance beginning at 7:30 P.M. at the St.
Regis Roof.
Nancy Hogshead, the winner of three gold medals and a silver medal for swimming at the 1984 Olympics, will be the guest of honor.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 757-7880.
Funds for African Artists
June 24 -- Raising scholarship funds for black South African artists is the goal of the African Arts Fund's musical party at Nell's, 246 West 14th Street, from 6 to 10 P.M.
Hugh Masekela will perform, and there will be dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 662-9331.
Museum Expansion
June 24 -- The Dia Center for the Arts will celebrate the acquisition of an additional building to house its collection of contemporary art.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. on the roof of the original site, at 548 West 22d Street, will be followed by a Caribbean buffet, dancing and live reggae music at the new addition, across the street, at 545 West 22d Street.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 431-9232.
Cruise for Northern Ireland
June 24 -- Each summer, Project Children brings Protestant and Roman Catholic children from Northern Ireland to the United States in a personal approach to healing the bitter divisions in their homeland.
A cruise around New York Harbor aboard the paddle steamer De Witt Clinton will raise funds for the project.
Boarding is at 6:30 P.M. at the South Street Seaport; the boat will sail at 7 P.M. and return at 10 P.M.
There will be dancing and a buffet on board.
Tickets, $35, from (201) 385-0710, or at the boat.
Serving Seamen of the World
June 24 -- A dinner-dance at the Marriott Financial Center, 85 West Street, one block south of the World Trade Center, will benefit the work of the Seamen's Church Institute, which has been addressing the needs of sailors around the world since 1834.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $325, from (212) 349-9090, extension 244.
Trees for Israel
June 25 -- The Jewish National Fund will present its annual Tree of Life Award to Valerie B. Salembier, the publisher of Family Circle magazine, at a dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Proceeds of the evening, starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., will go the development of woodlands in American Independence Park in Jerusalem.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 751-4848.
U.N.
Party for World Aid
June 25 -- Technoserve is an organization that teaches the rural poor in many countries how to improve the production, sale and use of agricultural crops.
The Peruvian Mission to the United Nations will sponsor a cocktail party with music from 7 to 11 P.M. in the Delegates Dining Room at the United Nations to help raise funds for the group.
Tickets, $75, from (203) 852-0377, or $100 at the door.
Pier Party
June 29 -- The Spanish Institute will benefit from a welcome party for three replicas of the historic caravels, the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria.
The party will start at 7:30 P.M. under a tent on a barge alongside the Intrepid Museum, at Pier 86, 46th Street and the Hudson River.
There will be Spanish food and drinks, and music and dancing with a Spanish and Caribbean flavor.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 628-0420.
For Phoenix House
June 29 -- Phoenix House, the nationwide drug-abuse-services agency, will mark its 25th anniversary with a 7 P.M. cocktail party on the third floor of Saks Fifth Avenue followed by a fashion show by Michael Kors.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 595-5810, Ext. 104.  'Boathouse Rock'
June 29 -- From 8 P.M. until midnight, there will be cocktails, a buffet supper and dancing at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park to benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 682-7440, Ext. 136.
Asian-American Legal Aid
July 9 -- The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund, which addresses the legal needs of Asian-Americans, will hold a fund-raising party from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M. at the Crane Club, 403 Amsterdam Avenue (near 79th Street).
There will be a cash bar.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 966-5932.
Children's Aid Benefit
July 14 -- The Children's Aid Society will hold a beer and punch party for those 25 to 35 years old at the Amazon Village, at Pier 25, the Hudson River at North Moore Street.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 949-4934, or $35 at the door.


Rescuing What Is Left
YESTERDAY was the official start of summer, but it may feel like the beginning of the end to some gardeners.
This is the moment when one's rosy dream of the vegetable garden that feeds the world can crash into a field of weeds and bugs, plagued by cold nights and bone-dry days.
Take my cucumbers, for example.
My cousin Janice always holds off until just about now to plant hers, because she knows that cukes, natives of India, thrive in warm weather.


Elizabeth O'Brien, Robert Anderson
Elizabeth Boody O'Brien, the assistant admissions director at the Robert Louis Stevenson School in Pebble Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to Robert Glenn Anderson, a Spanish teacher at the same boarding school.
Canon Simon Mein performed the Episcopal ceremony at the chapel of the St.
Andrew's School in Middletown, Del.
Mrs.
Anderson, 26 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a daughter of Jonathan B. and Joan D. O'Brien of Middletown.
Her father is the headmaster of St.
Andrew's, where her mother is the associate director of admissions.
Mrs.
Anderson is a granddaughter of Bayard Dominick, the former president of Dominick &amp; Dominick, a New York investment banking firm founded by her family.


Johnson Gains Spot On Canadian Team
Ben Johnson, the Canadian Olympic sprinter whose rise and stunning fall from grace made him one of the world's most controversial track and field figures, completed a dramatic two-year comeback today by earning a berth on Canada's Olympic team.
The 30-year-old sprinter, who was banned for two years after testing positive for using steroids after he won the 100 meters in the 1988 Olympics, earned his berth by finishing second to Bruny Surin, the Canadian 100-meter champion.
Surin's time was 10.11 seconds with Johnson at 10.16.
Atlee Mahorn was third at 10.27.


Perot's 'Electronic Town Hall' Wouldn't Work; Remember Mussolini?
To the Editor:
My thanks to Anna Quindlen for "Waiting for Perot" (column, June 3), in which she makes a comparison to a fascist mind-set that I fear characterizes much of the support for Ross Perot.
I have become increasingly disturbed as the Perot candidacy has gained momentum, evidently due to growing numbers of Americans who want someone to make things work.
Ms.
Quindlen is the first journalist I have read who has made the comparison to Mussolini's promise to make the trains run on time.


UP AND COMING: Brendan Fraser; A Man Schooled for Success
ONCE UPON A TIME, IN January 1991, a 21-year-old named Brendan Fraser, who had one line in an unreleased film, borrowed his mother's Chevrolet Spectrum and drove from Seattle to Hollywood.
On the morning of his arrival, he went to an office on Hollywood and Vine to meet the director Taylor Hackford.
In this fairy tale, the unknown actor didn't get the part.
Instead, over the next 18 months, Brendan Fraser made a television pilot; he starred in a television movie opposite Martin Sheen; and he won the leads in two major feature films.
In one, the just-released "Encino Man," Mr.
Fraser portrays the lovable caveman Link, who is found frozen by two teen-agers, is thawed out and becomes a hip, skateboarding California high school student.
In the fall release "School Ties," he plays David Greene, a young football player who hides his Judaism when he gets a scholarship to an anti-Semitic prep school.


Everyone to City: Drop Dead
"In America, some things never seem to change -- like the ideology of the Democratic Party, the Democratic Congress, and New York City Hall."
-- Vice President Dan Quayle, June 15, 1992.
Purple-robed and pauper-clad,  Raving, rotting, money-mad;  A squirming herd in Mammon's mesh,  A wilderness of human flesh;  Crazed with avarice, lust and rum,  New York, thy name's Delirium.
-- Byron Rufus Newton, 1906.


Iraq Balks at Naming Its Nuclear Suppliers
Iraq is still refusing to name the suppliers of materials and equipment used in the country's clandestine nuclear weapons program despite pledges to do so, the International Atomic Energy Agency said on Friday.
As a result, there is no guarantee that all the nuclear supplies have been declared to inspectors or that Iraq will not try to buy from the same suppliers again, said Dimitri Perricos, who this month headed the agency's 12th inspection trip to Iraq.


Summer Pudding and Other Desserts
PERHAPS I am a chauvinist, but English desserts (or puddings as we call them) have always been among my favorites.
Recently I spent a week in London where I feasted on berries: strawberries heaped in a bowl and served with thick yellowish Devonshire cream, raspberries made into a glistening sauce for poached nectarines that had tender white flesh and, my all time favorite, summer pudding.


Coyote Stages 'Italian American Reconciliation'
LATE in 1988, a captivating little play by John Patrick Shanley burst forth in the Manhattan Theater Club's small downstairs space known as Stage II.
"Italian American Reconciliation" was the play's title.
"A Folk Tale of Little Italy" was the subtitle.
And many, though evidently not
that
many, took to it warmly.
Captivating little plays do not become big-time hits.
And no producers took a chance on transferring this one to a commercial theater, despite the cachet of Mr.
Shanley's awards for his "Moonstruck" screenplay.
After a run of less than two months, "Italian American Reconciliation" seemed destined to become one of those much- talked-about, briefly seen cult plays.


MAKING IT IN THE MAJORS
Marshall wants to have it both ways.
On one hand, she says that " 'women's issue' is a turnoff altogether," and that it is not significant that she is a woman directing women in a film about women who were not recognized for their talents because of their sex.
And then she whimpers and manipulates, using her status as a woman, on the "League" set, to get her way with the actors and technicians.
Isn't she aware of what that behavior portends for the future of other directors who are women and who may not be the sister of Garry Marshall and friend of Art Garfunkel and Whoopi Goldberg?
AUDREY LEE JACOBS
Brooklyn


Topics of The Times; Mail Fraud
Among the least justifiable Congressional perquisites is the right of each member of the House to dump tons of free, self-promotional mail into newly redistricted areas they hope to -- but don't yet -- represent.
Eager to be seen as reformers, House members voted overwhelmingly last April to end this "perk." But the vote was just a charade.
House Democrats made certain that the out-of-district mailing privilege would survive by attaching the ban to a campaign finance reform package that President Bush had already vowed to veto.


For Maple Sap-Tappers, Bucket Overflows
New York farmers produced 30 percent more maple syrup this year than in 1991, according to the state Agricultural Statistics Service.
"Maple producers experienced one of the best sugaring seasons in recent memory," said Keith R. Miller, the statistician who complied the figures.


A Corruption Fighter Says Fear Is the Best Deterrent
The former official whose anti-corruption campaigns earned him the title as the most hated man in New York City's police force says that "fear, gut-wrenching fear" is the strongest deterrent against misconduct.
Exposing dishonest officers was John Guido's beat from 1972 to 1986 when he commanded the Police Department unit that investigated corruption.
In that role, Mr.
Guido reshaped the department's programs to fight corruption in the wake of the Knapp Commission's disclosures of pervasive payoffs and bribes among officers and their supervisors.


COUNTY CHIEF ENDS AN ABORTION BAN
The president of the Cook County Board, Richard J. Phelan, has ordered that elective abortions again be performed at the county's public hospital, a decade after they were banned by a previous board president.
Mr.
Phelan's action drew immediate protests from members of the board.
Since 1980, Cook County Hospital has not performed abortions, except to save the life of the mother.


Guardian of the Newest Wildlife Refuge
THE skunk cabbages that dot the swampy sections of the Wallkill River flood plain were already as big as beach balls.
Fiddlehead ferns, coveted by urban gourmets, were poised to unfurl, and yellow-and-black-striped tiger swallowtails fluttered over them in twos and threes.
Fifty years ago, trains passed by this lush growth on tracks running parallel to the river.
And on a recent afternoon, Sylvia Pelizza walked along that old railroad bed, pointing out wildlife and plants, and spoke about preserving them.


NO BEDFELLOWS
Hauser wonders why women in their 40's have difficulty finding a mate.
The answer is simple, really.
Men are either winners or losers -- quantified according to how much money they make.
When a woman marries a man in his 20's, she is gambling on his prospects of becoming a winner.
By the time a man reaches his 40's, his status is known.
If a second marriage occurs, the winners marry younger and prettier women.
The losers don't marry at all.


Mets Wake Up to Their Nightmare
This past Friday may well prove to be a red-letter day in the history of the Mets franchise.
No, not because the Mets' bottom-of-the-ninth victory over the Cardinals will register as the day the 1992 Mets turned it around.
That's certainly possible but, in looking at all the things that ail the Mets, it's certainly not sane to even think about labeling such a comeback as plausible at this point.


A Studio Wizard Takes a Psychic Journey
In "Street of Dreams," the most anguished song on Lindsey Buckingham's third solo album, "Out of the Cradle," the narrator visits the grave of his father, who has been dead for 10 years, and prays, "Will I ever stop dreaming dreams?" His father's ghost answers, "Never, never, never!" in a vengeful primal scream.
The tormented father-son dialogue, which revolves around the word "lonely," is cast in a dank, echoey setting that suggests Elvis Presley's "Heartbreak Hotel" transformed into a surreal dirge.
As much as any cut on "Out of the Cradle," it demonstrates Mr.
Buckingham's brilliance at using the recording studio to create intricate interior dramas in which ambiance and an allusive pop sensibility matter more than the actual words and music.


N.F.L. Shoulder Pads Include a Chip
Most of the time the National Football League displays its arrogance like a coat of arms.
It's hard to be humble when you're a recession-proof billion-dollar corporation, a monopoly operating with impunity, and you have adoring supporters filling your stadiums and a willing labor pool that literally gives an arm and a leg to work for you.
This week the N.F.L. strutted into the United States District Court in Minneapolis wielding its arrogance like Excalibur, slicing through the plaintiffs during cross-examination in Freeman McNeil v. the National Football League for daring to take a stand against the league's Plan B free agency policy.


The Tallest Fence: Feelings on Race in a White Neighborhood
In a kind of simulcast version of blue-collar America, the mechanics and postal workers of Chicago's Mount Greenwood and Roseland sections emerge each weekend to start the sprinklers and trim the junipers outside prim houses with picture windows.
The two are churchgoing, workaday neighborhoods made up of people who put in overtime to pay the bills, who curse drugs and dandelions with equal indignation and who dream of a better life and maybe even college for their children.


Florio Officials Say Cuts Impossible by Deadline
State Treasurer Samuel F. Crane said today that a Republican budget plan had presented the Florio administration with a host of problems, some of them insurmountable with only 10 days left in the current budget year, unless the Republican legislative majority made some drastic compromises.
Mr.
Crane and Richard F. Keevey, the State Comptroller and director of the Office of Management and Budget, met with reporters today to present the Democratic administration's first detailed response to the $14.6 billion budget plan for the 1993 fiscal year that the Republicans unveiled on Thursday.


Two Neighborhoods, and a Wall Called Race
The two Chicago neighborhoods are just two miles apart, both filled with working-class people who take pride in their children, their lawns, their community.
But one neighborhood is white and the other black, and that makes all the difference.
In insular Mount Greenwood, white residents describe their fear and resentment of the blacks who live so near by in Roseland.
"I don't want to be too close to them," says one woman.
Indeed, some Mount Greenwood homeowners used to live in Roseland, and left when blacks began to move in 30 years ago.


The Family Drama Of Revealing Longtime Secrets
When "The Lost Language of Cranes" is broadcast Wednesday night as part of public television's "Great Performances" series, one of the first images viewers will see is of two people embracing in bed.
The scene is hardly as revealing as those on most daytime and evening soap operas and not nearly as titillating as subjects discussed on talk shows like "Geraldo" and "The Oprah Winfrey Show."
Yet the film, which was co-produced by the British Broadcasting Corporation and WNET in New York, is sure to become part of the debate over programming and financing for public television, because the two rapturous lovers are men.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a caption on the cover of the Travel section today about the Empire Theater in London misidentifies the architect.
He is Thomas Lamb.


Blue Note


Christine Birdsong And Rob White
Christine Brothers Birdsong, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Birdsong Jr. of Franklin, Va., was married yesterday to Wyndham Robertson White 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wyndham R. White 3d of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
James R. Nolan officiated at the Main Street United Methodist Church in Suffolk, Va.
Mrs.
White, 24 years old, is a special education teacher in the Short Pump Elementary School in Richmond.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, where she also earned a master's degree in special education.
Her father is a vice president and the plant manager in Franklin for the Birdsong Peanuts Corporation, which was founded by his grandfather, the late Thomas H. Birdsong.


Cafe Is Italian, but the Chef Is Egyptian
WHAT is baba gannouj doing at Bella?
The name, look and menu at the snazzy storefront cafe in Westbury all say Italian.
So why is the classic Middle Eastern eggplant spread the leadoff hitter?
The answer lies with the restaurant's chef and owner, Mr.
Yousry, who is Egyptian.
He was trained in Italian kitchens, but prepares complimentary Egyptian treats, making Bella an Italian cafe with a tantalizing twist.


Chiefs Extend Schottenheimer's Contract
LAMAR HUNT, owner of the Kansas City Chiefs, says MARTY SCHOTTENHEIMER is his man for all seasons, six more of them, anyway, as the team's head coach.
According to The Kansas City Star, Schottenheimer, who took over the Chiefs in 1989 and has a year to go on his four-year contract, has agreed to a five-year extension.
Financial terms were not disclosed.


Andree Phillips, Connor Haugh
Dr.
Andree Claire Phillips, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Phillips of Regina, Saskatchewan, was married yesterday to Dr.
Connor Joseph Haugh, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Connor Haugh of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The Rev.
Daniel C. Lucey officiated at the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Blessed Sacrament Church in Regina.
Dr.
Phillips, who is 26 years old and keeping her name, will begin her residency in internal medicine at New England Medical Center in Boston in July.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received her M.D. degree from Tufts University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Ipsco Inc., a Canadian steel production company in Regina.
Her mother, Ann Phillips, is a partner in the law firm of Gerrand Mulatz in Regina.


IN SHORT: FICTION
BEGIN TO EXIT HERE A Novel of the Wayward Press. By John Welter. Algonquin, $16.95.


Networking; What License for a Program?
Companies that buy software for multiple desktop computers now typically get one copy of a program and a license to reproduce it a certain number of times.
Called a site license, the agreement is usually a good idea for standard programs like word processors and spreadsheets.
But site licenses vary.
Some require that a copy be purchased for each potential user; their only purpose is to indicate a volume discount.
Others allow for a copy to be placed on a network server but limit the number of users who can gain simultaneous access.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League


At Work on Electric Boxes Between the Ceiling Joists
LARGE-BLADED ceiling or paddle fans are easy to connect to existing ceiling wiring like that of an overhead light.
But to comply with electric codes in many communities, the electrical box containing the wiring, and to which most fans are attached, has to be a special kind.
Using a code-approved box makes a fan less likely to fall from the ceiling.
Unfortunately, installing such a box to replace an existing unapproved box usually makes the job of installing a fan more difficult.


The Tallest Fence: Feelings on Race in a White Neighborhood
In a kind of simulcast version of blue-collar America, the mechanics and postal workers of Chicago's Mount Greenwood and Roseland sections emerge each weekend to start the sprinklers and trim the junipers outside prim houses with picture windows.
The two are churchgoing, workaday neighborhoods made up of people who put in overtime to pay the bills, who curse drugs and dandelions with equal indignation and who dream of a better life and maybe even college for their children.


Europe Weighs Forming Peacekeeping Force
Governments of nine West European countries agreed on Friday to ask the European Community's defense arm to recommend measures to enforce the United Nations embargo against the Serbian-dominated Government of Yugoslavia.
They also agreed that in future instances of civil war like the one that has wracked the Balkans for the past year, they would assign national forces to the defense group, the Western European Union, for humanitarian efforts, peacekeeping tasks, and even peacemaking missions.


Making a Difference; Winning a Measure of Unity for Unix
In the nasty squabble between the International Business Machines Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation over computer operating systems, Roel Pieper is the uninvited guest that neither side wants to notice.
But Mr.
Pieper, who is head of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's Unix System Laboratories, is determined that the operating system that has been a favorite of graduate students, scientists, engineers and computer hackers for more than two decades isn't going to be ignored in the battle for control of the world's desktop computers.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CAST NO SHADOW The Life of the American Spy Who Changed the Course of World War II.
By Mary S. Lovell.
Pantheon, $25.


Koreans Rethink Life in Los Angeles
Jin Lee was one Korean shopkeeper who tried to do everything right.
He held barbecue parties for his black customers, sponsored a neighborhood basketball team, donated money to an anti-gang youth group and was active in a black-Korean church organization.
But when rioting swept the neighborhood where he owned a grocery store, his efforts went for nothing.
Like hundreds of other Korean shopkeepers, he lost his store to fire.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Paper Adjusts Reporting By Asking Its Readers
What DO readers want?
This is a question newspaper editors ask themselves with special ferocity every four years, in time to confront the peculiar spectacle of another Presidential campaign.
Tired of all the griping about reporting on the 1988 campaign, editors of The Charlotte Observer decided this year that there was only one way to answer this question: to ask their readers directly.


Mythomania
No one is a shrewder student of American themes than Ross Perot, and no one believes more ardently than he that his life embodies them.
It stands to reason that no one could build a more fitting and more convincing monument to the man and his mythology than Mr.
Perot himself: it exists on the 17th floor of Perot Systems in Dallas, where the hallways and offices -- particularly his inner sanctum -- do double duty as a Perot museum of awards, honors, gifts and memorabilia.
Here the American dreams that have shaped his life are on display for anyone to view; so too, the myths and themes he would use to guide the nation.
To know the man, you need only know his memorabilia.
A partial inventory includes the following.


You Can't Go Home Again
To the Editor:
The Spanish Government's plan to move Picasso's "Guernica" to the Reina Sofia, Spain's new national museum of contemporary painting, raises a number of ethical and art-historical (if not legal) questions, some of which were touched upon by John Russell in "Was the Prado Right to Flout Picasso's Wishes?"  [ June 7 ] .
Most journalists have accepted the Spanish authorities' dubious line on this undertaking.
"Guernica is owned by the Spanish Government, bought by the Republic; it belongs in the Reina Sofia," that museum's director, Maria del Corral, has been quoted as saying.


Dr. Mackie, E.J. Franklin
Dr.
Barbara Mary Mackie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy E. Mackie of Oceanside, L.I., was married yesterday to Eric John Franklin, the son of Dr.
Ralph Franklin of Salem, S.C., and Mrs.
John Kiger of Davis, Calif.
The Rev.
Dr.
John R. Jablonski performed the ceremony at the South Nassau Unitarian Church in Freeport, L.I.


Jennifer Baker, C. D. Warren
Jennifer Lea Baker, the daughter of John M. Baker of Katonah, N.Y., and Virginia Rynning of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Denis Warren, a son of Barbara Warren of Sedona, Ariz., and the late Hamilton P. Warren.
The Rev.
Robert Sizelove performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Gretchen Warren Chapel of the Verde Valley School in Sedona.
Mrs.
Warren, 30 years old, is a geography teacher and the college counselor at Verde Valley, a private boarding school founded by the bridegroom's parents.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in education from Sacred Heart University in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her father is a residential architect in Katonah.
Her mother is an independent architectural model maker in Weston.
The bride's stepfather, Eivind P. Rynning, is the vice president of international operations in Norwalk, Conn., for the Keyes Fibre Company.
Her stepmother, Elizabeth M. Baker, is a computer systems analyst at the Sperry-Hutchison Company in New York.


Sponsor Defaults
To the Editor:
The article on May 24 about sponsor defaults  [ "For Troubled Co-ops, the Workout Rx" ]  ignores the elephant standing in the middle of the road.
The cause of sponsor defaults is not the real estate market, but the rent-control laws.
Maintenance charges are trending upward to the point where they exceeed statutory rents.
Hence, sponsors are not able to fulfill their obligations to the cooperatives.


Christie Coleman and Todd Kelley
Christie Ann Coleman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Johnny F. Coleman of Livingston, Tenn., was married in Nashville last evening to Todd Russell Kelley, a son of Jean R. Kelley and Brooks M. Kelley, both of Guilford, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
David L. Moore conducted the ceremony at the Woodmont Christian Church
Mrs.
Coleman Kelley, 26 years old, is a nurse practitioner with the Nashville Metropolitan Health Department.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University, where she also earned a master's degree in nursing.
Her mother, Carol Coleman, is the deputy to the Overton County Register of Deeds in Livingston.
The bride's father is president of Mid-State Construction in Livingston.


Allison Hawke, Colum McCann
Allison Kristen Hawke, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger J. Hawke of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Colum McCann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sean McCann of Dublin.
The Rev.
Mario Tong performed the ceremony at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic Church in Centerport, L.I.
Mrs.
McCann, 25 years old, was until recently an administrative assistant in Huntington, L.I., for the New York State Department of Labor.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Brown &amp; Wood.


Orton's Satire Remains Potent
THE British playwright Joe Orton is as well known for his gruesome death at the hands of his jealous lover as he is for his brilliant satires of contemporary society, which is unfortunate.
As the Arena Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale proves with its production of "What the Butler Saw," the decades have not erased Mr.
Orton's power to prick the hot-air balloons of hypocrisy, conventionality and even psychiatry.


A Quiet Celebration of a Century
What might have seemed wildly implausible a decade ago began to look almost inevitable in recent years: that the great pianist Mieczyslaw Horszowski would still be playing near the top of his form at the age of 100.
In fact, Mr.
Horszowski, whose concert career began in his native Poland before the turn of the century, came close.
In January 1991, at the age of 98, he made a wonderfully mellow and assured recording of Bach, Schumann and Chopin for Nonesuch, which was released earlier this year.
He turned 99 last June and was still going strong, touring Europe in the summer and performing with the Chamber Society Orchestra of Philadelphia on Oct. 31.


Claire E. Boland, Martin Arellano
Claire Elaine Boland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Boland of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Martin Matthew Arellano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raul Arellano of San Jose, Calif.
The Rev.
Francis J. Schneider performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Arellano, 31 years old, graduated summa cum laude from St.
John's University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is an assistant vice president of the American Home Products Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Veronica Boland, is a lawyer in the Nassau County Department of Social Services in Mineola.


Fatherhood Lessons
"So now," the son said when they got home from the grandfather's funeral, "you're the patriarch." "Well, I guess so," the father answered with hesitation.
He was uncomfortable with the idea.
Unquestioned authority, patriarchy, was alien to his personality.
What he was comfortable being, simply and fully, was a father.
He decided to become one early, and for the best of reasons.
He loved children, and wanted to share the lessons of his own life.
For him, fathering was not a biological incident but a lifetime work in progress.


The Last Western Hostages Are Freed in Lebanon


BEST SELLERS: June 21, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
113
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
2
3
3
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
3
5
15
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
4
5
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
5
2
6
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) From New York schoolgirl to doyenne of a French chateau: the life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
6
11
4
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
7
6
9
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
8
8
9
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
9
7
10
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
10
14
16
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer try to take possession of Nebraska. (LP)
11
9
6
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Four decades in the lives of the motley residents of the 19th-century Washington Territory.
12
13
19
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry. (LP)
13
2
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
14 *
1
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
15 *
1
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser joins his old friend Hawk to investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
6
7
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) The upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
3
10
3
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Business One Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.
4 *
5
3
CHIEF, by Daryl F. Gates with Diane K. Shah. (Bantam, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who has headed the Los Angeles Police Department since 1978.
5
7
4
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
6
4
9
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
7
8
7
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How powerful monied interests dominate the Government.
8
2
21
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
9
3
31
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
10
1
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
11
11
5
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) The first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
12
1
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
13
13
14
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
14
14
6
PLAYING IN THE DARK, by Toni Morrison. (Harvard University, $14.95.) The novelist-critic's call for literary scholarship that will bring the black experience to the attention of all Americans.
15
1
AFTER HENRY, by Joan Didion. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Essays on contemporary life as viewed in California, New York and Washington.
16 *
15
29
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
1
18
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
2
9
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
4
4
29
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
3
29
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
LEAH, NEW HAMPSHIRE: The Collected Stories of Thomas Williams, by Thomas Williams. (Morrow, $22.) In the main, these are about men -- dramas of male escape involving fishing and hunting, woods, ponds and trails.
CITY OF BOYS: Stories, by Beth Nugent. (Knopf, $20.) A collection with a hypnotic, obsessive quality, exploring knotted relationships and alliances in an uncaring world.
LET THE DEAD BURY THEIR DEAD: And Other Stories, by Randall Kenan. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Linked together, these tales and tall tales evoke a mysterious rural South.
THE STORIES OF JOHN EDGAR WIDEMAN, by John Edgar Wideman. (Pantheon, $25.) A Faulkneresque creation of a whole imagined world -- street corners, bars, churches, family trees -- blossoms in inner-city Pittsburgh.
THINGS NOT SEEN: And Other Stories, by Lynna Williams. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) Vibrant and shapely tales of disasters of the heart, of people haunted by their unrelenting histories.
THE QUICK: A Novella &amp; Stories, by Agnes Rossi. (Norton, $17.95.) The ordinary world becomes extraordinary in these plain-spoken, honest portraits of the working class.
CRASH DIET: Stories, by Jill McCorkle. (Algonquin, $16.95.) Funny, savagely effective glimpses of men who are largely contemptible and women whose salvation lies in plowing through.
IN THE LAND OF MEN: Stories, by Antonya Nelson. (Morrow, $19.) Wonderful and kind stories, set in the Midwest and Southwest, about people in the aftermath of crisis, characters for whom unhappiness isn't tragic -- it's just a fact of life.


'Processing' for Haitians Is Time in a Rural Prison
Throughout Latin America and the Caribbean, the place with the short, harsh name of Krome has become a symbol of the United States as famous as the Statue of Liberty.
For thousands of would-be refugees and immigrants during the last decade, the Immigration and Naturalization Service detention center on Krome Avenue, a two-lane road through rural farmland that separates Miami's suburbs from the Everglades, has been their point of entry into America.
The tales that filter back to friends and relatives, however, tell not of opportunity but of persecution.
During a hunger strike earlier this month to protest the death of one such detainee, 185 Haitians interned at Krome charged that they had been beaten, harassed and deprived of medical care, of their Bibles and of contact with their lawyers and relatives.
Krome, inaccessible by public transportation, is on the opposite side of the county from Little Haiti, and just getting there can be an ordeal for families, many of whom do not own cars to make the 60-mile round trip.
"If they have nothing to hide, why don't they open it up and let people talk to the detainees?" asked Nancy Arnison of the Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee.


Belling The CAT
IN a sex-fearing culture, sex has to be discovered over and over again.
And we, alas, have to read about it.
In the 70's, it was "The Joy of Sex"; in the 80's, it was the G spot, and in the 90's, it's CAT.
And though I'm as politically correct as the next person, I don't mean a nonhuman animal companion of the feline kind.
CAT stands for coital alignment technique.
What's that?
Since I am a writer, not a sexologist, I can only report as a civilian.
But the most superficial research reveals CAT to be a supposedly new sexual technique, about to burst upon the unwary world in a forthcoming book, modestly titled "The Perfect Fit, or How to Achieve Mutual Fulfillment and Monogamous Passion Through the New Intercourse," by Edward Eichel and Philip Nobile (Donald I. Fine, $19.95).


Something New in the Black Box
New telephone answering machines are using computer chips instead of tape to record messages; so are the newest flight data recorders.
Airplane crash investigators can spend weeks decoding magnetic signals from damaged pieces of tape that are supposed to hold a record of every sputtering engine and fluttering flap.
But airliners with the newest equipment will keep their secrets in chips.
The chips are more resistant to fire, cheaper to run and hold more data.
And they can be "read" in minutes.
"I think it's going to give us more reliable recorders," said Dennis Grossi, a recorder specialist with the National Transportation Safety Board, the Federal agency that investigates plane crashes.


Rosemary Breslin, Anthony Dunne
Rosemary Breslin, a daughter of Jimmy Breslin of New York and the late Rosemary D. Breslin, was married in Southampton, L.I., yesterday to Anthony Stephen Dunne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Dunne Jr. of Harwich Port, Mass.
Judge Joan O'Dwyer, an Acting Justice of New York State Supreme Court in Queens, performed the ceremony at the Southampton Bath and Tennis Club.
Ms.
Breslin, who is 35 years old and keeping her name, is a freelance writer in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father is a Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for New York Newsday.
Her stepmother, Ronnie M. Eldridge, is a member of the New York City Council.


Susan Sherman, Leslie Morgenstein
Susan Ann Sherman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Maurice E. Sherman of New York, was married yesterday evening to Leslie Morgenstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Morgenstein of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Sherman, 25, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College, as did her husband.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is an ophthalmologist and an attending surgeon at both Lenox Hill Hospital and the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary.


Jennifer Miller, William Sullivan Jr.
Jennifer Lynne Miller, a daughter of Robert B. Miller Jr. of Battle Creek, Mich., and Joan Firman of North Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to William Michael Sullivan Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sullivan of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph Maguire performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Church in Edgartown, Mass.


Sow, Plant, Prune and Feed
Sow seeds for fall crops, like kale, purple sprouting broccoli and endive.
Sow more beans, carrots, beets and kohlrabi for late crops.
Plant cucumbers, squash and melons.
Plant hot-weather lettuce like red oak leaf or verano in partial shade, or set a latticework frame over the seedbed to protect it from the sun.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; PEROT SAYS HE WON'T BE SUBPOENAED ON M.I.A.'s
Ross Perot said today that he did not expect to be subpoenaed to testify before a Senate committee about Americans missing in Southeast Asia.
Asked at a campaign stop here what he would do if he received a subpoena, the undeclared Presidential candidate said, without elaborating, "I won't get one."
Mr.
Perot canceled an appearance before Senators earlier this week, leading to discussions of whether subpoena might be needed.


And Now, Heeeeeeeere's a Referendum!
So how would the 'Electronic town hall,' the much-advertised engine of Ross Perot's plans for governing the nation, work?
Mr.
Perot promises that if he becomes President he would from time to time, in cahoots with members of Congress and selected experts, lay out the rudiments of a big issue on network television.
Then viewers, organized by Congressional district, would make known their preferred course of action by dialing an 800 number or pressing a button on an interactive gadget or sending in a postcard.
From such polls, President Perot would finally formulate the policies for which television interviewers, without much success, have been badgering him as a candidate.
And then he would get the job done fast.


Lynda Sun, Paul Lee
Lynda Mei-Yun Sun, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rusky Sun of Murray Hill, N.J., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Paul Wah-Sing Lee, the son of Albert Lee of Hong Kong and Linda Yeung of Chantilly, Va.
Judge Arthur Kellman of the White Plains City Court performed the ceremony at Tarrytown House.
Mrs.
Lee, 27 years old, is a brand manager for the Procter &amp; Gamble Company in Hong Kong.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the chairman of Brentsun Realty Corporation, a New York real estate firm.


The Liberation of the Guggenheim
Architecture is like life: a matter of trade-offs.
Right now the best trade-off in New York is at the corner of 89th Street and Fifth Avenue, where the renovation and expansion of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum has left this structure -- one of the greatest buildings of the 20th century -- at once compromised and improved.
Changing a major New York landmark is never a minor matter.
This seven-year, $45 million effort (which meant closing the museum for the last two and a half years) has been a particularly painful saga.
That's partly because Frank Lloyd Wright's extraordinary concrete structure seems designed to repel all attempts to alter it, but also because the architects, Charles Gwathmey and Robert Siegel, so blundered in their initial proposal for a Guggenheim expansion in 1985. (Remember that one? People complained that its big, projecting box would make the Guggenheim look like a water closet.)


A la Carte: A Gourmet Beachhead Is Established on the East End
THERE was a time when the East End was a culinary wasteland.
The short, summer season simply did not generate enough business to attract and hold talented chefs or permanent professional serving staffs.
But in the last decade, a new breed of enterprising owners and chefs started coming to the Island.
These entrepreneurial types provided year-round employment: summers in the Hamptons and winters in restaurants they owned in Manhattan or the Caribbean.


Money Matters in Eastern Europe
TRAVELERS going to eastern Europe this summer will probably find money a source of concern: where to change it, which currency is preferred and where credit cards and traveler's checks are accepted constitute some of the potential hassles.
Russia, other parts of the former Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, the former German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland and Romania are gradually linking up with Western financial networks, but progress is spotty and irregular.
This column contains a roundup of information from bureaus and contributors in Europe at the beginning of June, but it should be supplemented if possible with last-minute data from the place you are going.
No guidebook can be up to date on changes, and this column too will age rapidly.


Tending to Chores When a Barbecue Beckons
THE major planting season has gone by, but gardeners are far from finished.
Vacation planning is under way and there are many other summer activities on the family's priority list.
Just to be sure the gardening essentials are met, here is a brief review to get everyone up to speed for the long haul through the summer days ahead.
Mulch: There is nothing like a good cover on the soil's surface to keep moisture in and weeds out.
Thus far the Northeast has had abundant rainfall and the ground is wet, but it may not stay so through the summer months.
Weeds will have a tough time getting enough light and root hold if they have a layer of mulch to push through.
There is no hard rule as to the best mulch to use.
The two things that should dictate are price and availability.
An ample supply of bark chips (the small ones) make an excellent mulch.
So do grass clippings if not piled too thickly and the lawn has not been treated with an herbicide.
Herbicide residue could be damaging to certain plants, particularly sensitive vegetables like tomatoes.
Other good mulches are spoiled hay (sometimes farmers give this away), shredded leaves, even compost but not peat moss, which looks great for a time but acts like a sponge and absorbs moisture from the soil.
To be effective, the mulch layer should be kept at least two inches thick.


Prints of Tides
No subject has inspired more exciting prints than war, and naval prints are the liveliest of all.
A New York lawyer, Beverley R. Robinson, donated about 1,000 of them to the United States Naval Academy Museum in Annapolis, Md., before he died in 1951, forming the nucleus of a collection now numbering almost 5,000 pieces.
NAVAL PRINTS FROM THE BEVERLEY R. ROBINSON COLLECTION: Volume One, 1514-1791 (United States Naval Academy Museum, Annapolis, Md. 21402-5034, $60) is the first of three projected volumes, fully illustrated, cataloguing the Robinson bequests.
Sigrid Trumpy, the collection's curator, and Deborah F. Morrow-Pigg, the book's designer, have produced a handsome, sturdy slipcased volume.
The dates in its title refer to battles, not to the print making, and the order of reproductions follows the same chronology; that may irritate some people, but the 268 prints and the technical and historical information accompanying them, including useful historical essays by Sari Hornstein, are mightily pleasing.
The original lithographs, etchings, wood cuts and engravings, most of them hand-colored, range from postcard-size impressions to six-foot panoramas.
In a few of these pictures the colors are as sumptuous as oils.
One group of six panels forming a 3.8- by 4.4-
foot
print that records a siege of the port of La Rochelle, France, was made around 1630 by the great Jacques Callot, who could engrave myriads even on a tiny plate; it bristles with hundreds of vessels and thousands of land troops, each precisely depicted and quick with menace.
A 17th-century Dutch engraving of 10 scenes on a single sheet records a whole war with England, including the treaty signing and the fireworks at the victory celebration.
This book brings art -- and, even more compellingly, history -- to life.
For no matter how fascinated a reader may be by the sheer brilliance of the art, after a few pages the hissing and gulping ocean, shouting men, groaning masts and drumming cannons fill the imagination.
No movie could ever carry the mind so deeply into such shining, dreadful seas.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON TO RETURN MONEY RAISED IN TV FORUM
Acknowledging that it made a "technical error," Gov.
Bill Clinton's campaign organization says that it will return all donations it received in response to a half-hour television program last week.
Mr.
Clinton staged a televised question-and-answer session on June 12 that was financed by $395,000 from the Democratic National Committee.
The Republican Party on Friday accused the Democrats of a legal infraction and asked the Federal Election Commission to cut off money for the Clinton campaign.


No Headline
WHEN a group of emotionally handicapped students came to the Washington Headquarters Museum here to bake 18th-century cakes, the curator knew she would have her hands full.
But the members of the White Plains chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution, invited to observe the cooking demonstration at the county-owned museum, also had their hands full -- of museum artifacts they were taking home.
A week later, the members returned in the middle of a visit by a group of Bronx seventh graders.
"The kids were doing the Virginia reel down the front path, and out comes the D.A.R. with boxes of stuff," Virginia M. Carnes, the curator, said last week.
"It was unbelievable."


Pickings Are Good But Hard To Choose
Anyone can list the first four picks, but then the National Basketball Association's 1992 college draft turns into an educated guessing game.
"A crapshoot," said Marty Blake, the league's college scout, referring not only to the probable selections but also to the question of how many of Wednesday's first-round picks will be around by, say, the 1996 Olympics.
And how many from this current crop might qualify as impact players who will contend in four years for Dream Team II?
Shaquille O'Neal, the 7-foot-1-inch Louisiana State center who will be taken by the Orlando Magic in the leadoff position, appears to be the only safe bet.
Charlotte, which is drafting second, is set to select Alonzo Mourning, the 6-10 Georgetown center.


'GRAY'S ANATOMY'
I am the woman referred to as "Azaria" in Spalding Gray's monologue "Gray's Anatomy" (May 17).
I have known Spalding for several years and enjoy his unique sense of humor and wonderful gift for storytelling.
I, of course, have a different perspective on some of the events of his monologue.
I have never considered myself either "new age" or a "healer," nor would I ever suggest that anyone should do a healing sweat lodge (properly called a purification lodge).


Koch Visits Sliwa as Police Inquiry Fails to Yield Shooting Suspect
Parallel investigations by the police and the Guardian Angels have so far yielded no suspects from among the many possible enemies who might have wanted to kill Curtis Sliwa.
"It's still a wide-open investigation," said Lieut.
Kevin Gilmartin of the Ninth Precinct Detective Squad.
"I'm sure he's aggravated a number of people, to say the least."


'Macbeth' Production Puts Accent on Youth
EVEN though it is not set in modern times, the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's first production of season might as well be called Mr. and Mrs.
Macbeth.
In Bonnie J. Monte's staging, the accent is on youth, but these royal usurpers, as played by Marcus Giamatti and Jennifer Wiltsie, are thoroughly mundane and oddly ineffectual.


Abortion Protests Continue in Milwaukee


Money Tips the Equation In Formula One Racing
An often-quoted comment from Formula One officials is that their international form of auto racing is a sport while American racing, such as the Indy-car series and the Winston Cup tour, is closer to a show, with tight technical limits and yellow flags that bunch up a field.
Ron Dennis, the director of McLaren International, the company that includes Formula One's Team McLaren, agrees with that.
But he doesn't think American racing fans should take umbrage.


Atlanta Tennis Is Hailed
To the Sports Editor:
The article by Robin Finn on the Atlanta tennis league ("Tennis League Proud Its Roots Show," The Times, June 10) could be the most important tennis story every printed.
Because all over the country people must be asking, "How can we do the same?" And some probably will, especially if given more specifics about the workings.
Most fans elsewhere have quit or are quitting because of not being able to find suitable competition, or any competition.
One wonders why the United States Tennis Association didn't come up with a plan similar to Atlanta's, or at least publicized that one so it could be copied.
Seventy-one thousand members in the Atlanta tennis league!
That's about one in every 10 people.
And increasing by over 3,000 a year.
And 17,000 tennis courts.
WILFRED MUNGER New York


Tending to Chores When a Barbecue Beckons
THE major planting season has gone by, but gardeners are far from finished.
Vacation planning is under way and there are many other summer activities on the family's priority list.
Just to be sure the gardening essentials are met, here is a brief review to get everyone up to speed for the long haul through the summer days ahead.
Mulch: There is nothing like a good cover on the soil's surface to keep moisture in and weeds out.
Thus far the Northeast has had abundant rainfall and the ground is wet, but it may not stay so through the summer months.
Weeds will have a tough time getting enough light and root hold if they have a layer of mulch to push through.
There is no hard rule as to the best mulch to use.
The two things that should dictate are price and availability.
An ample supply of bark chips (the small ones) make an excellent mulch.
So do grass clippings if not piled too thickly and the lawn has not been treated with an herbicide.
Herbicide residue could be damaging to certain plants, particularly sensitive vegetables like tomatoes.
Other good mulches are spoiled hay (sometimes farmers give this away), shredded leaves, even compost but not peat moss, which looks great for a time but acts like a sponge and absorbs moisture from the soil.
To be effective, the mulch layer should be kept at least two inches thick.


Summer Pudding and Other Desserts
PERHAPS I am a chauvinist, but English desserts (or puddings as we call them) have always been among my favorites.
Recently I spent a week in London where I feasted on berries: strawberries heaped in a bowl and served with thick yellowish Devonshire cream, raspberries made into a glistening sauce for poached nectarines that had tender white flesh and, my all time favorite, summer pudding.


COUNTY CHIEF ENDS AN ABORTION BAN
The president of the Cook County Board, Richard J. Phelan, has ordered that elective abortions again be performed at the county's public hospital, a decade after they were banned by a previous board president.
Mr.
Phelan's action drew immediate protests from members of the board.
Since 1980, Cook County Hospital has not performed abortions, except to save the life of the mother.


Patricia J. Jordan and Vincent J. Vigorita
Patricia Johnson Jordan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Horace L. Johnson Jr. of Overland Park, Kan., was married yesterday in East Hampton, L.I., to Dr.
Vincent John Vigorita, a son of Pauline S. Vigorita of East Hampton and the late Dr.
John L. Vigorita.
The Rev.
Robert F. Capon performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Vigorita is 43 years old and a graduate of the University of Kansas.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her father, who is retired, was an engineer with American Telephone and Telegraph in Kansas City, Kan.


New York Taxis
To the Editor: Regarding "New York Good Buys" (May 17): When urging travelers to "shun taxis" because of savings available on buses, you left out some pertinent information.
Buses charge for each person.
A family of three or four could save money by taking a taxi from La Guardia or Kennedy International Airport to Manhattan.
Buses drop off at certain designated stops, and a taxi may then be required to your location.
Taxis will go directly to your hotel, a major convenience when toting luggage.


Matz Leads Show Jumpers
Michael Matz rode Heisman to his fourth consecutive clean trial today to qualify for the five-member United States Olympic show-jumping team.
The 41-year-old Matz committed his only four faults of the six-trial qualifying process on May 28 in Devon, Pa.
Heisman was the only horse to post perfect scores on both rounds of the trial here today.
Matz, of Collegeville, Pa., also rode Olisco to a second-place finish in the trials with 16.5 faults.
United States team rules require Matz to ride Heisman in the Olympics because it was his higher-finishing horse.


Corrections
A "Conversations" interview on May 17 with Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, misidentified a European conference held in 1878 at which Serbs feel their interests were betrayed.
It was the Congress of Berlin, no Vienna.
Two readers wrote to point out the error last month; this correction was delayed by an editing oversight.


Tina Zabriskie, Robert Constable
Kristine Busch Zabriskie, the daughter of Dr.
John L. Zabriskie Jr. of Bernardsville, N.J., and Madelaine B. DeMelle of Gillette, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Lloyd Constable, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Constable of Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Karen Hybertson performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Constable, who is 27 years old and is known as Tina, is a senior publicist at the Crown Publishing Group in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Colby College.
Her father is a senior vice president of Merck &amp; Company, a pharmaceutical manufacturing company in Rahway, N.J.
She is also the stepdaughter of Adelaide Zabriskie of Bernardsville.


Tech Notes; Extra Quiet In the Nursery
Despite the best efforts of nurses and physicians, premature babies in intensive-care units must often try to sleep in an environment as noisy as a busy street corner.
Alarms, machines and the crying of other babies all encroach.
Responding to the concerns of clinicians and infant development specialists, Natus Medical Inc. has developed a simple solution: small, lightweight earmuffs.
Based in Foster City, Calif., Natus specializes in medical products dedicated to infants from birth to age 1.
It developed its MiniMuffs in the process of designing an automated device for detecting hearing impairment in newborns.


Margot O'Mara, Guy K. Bush
Margot Courtney O'Mara, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. O'Mara of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Guy Knowlton Bush, the son of Mrs.
William M. Bush of Naples, Fla., and the late Dr.
Bush.
The Rev.
Edward Anderson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the ceremony atthe Sconset Union Chapel in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Bush is a private antiques dealer in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the chairman of the executive committee of Quality Care Systems Inc., a health-care cost-containment company in New York.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Correction
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Feb. 16 about Sissinghurst, the garden in England, misstated its policy on admission prices.
A reader's letter, dated June 2, points out that the garden does not reduce its price for the elderly.


Iraq Balks at Naming Its Nuclear Suppliers
Iraq is still refusing to name the suppliers of materials and equipment used in the country's clandestine nuclear weapons program despite pledges to do so, the International Atomic Energy Agency said on Friday.
As a result, there is no guarantee that all the nuclear supplies have been declared to inspectors or that Iraq will not try to buy from the same suppliers again, said Dimitri Perricos, who this month headed the agency's 12th inspection trip to Iraq.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
May 92
Apr. 92
May 91
Rents
177.3
-0.7
+4.7
Homeowner's costs
177.2
-0.7
+4.7
Fuel and utilities
105.3
+1.0
+0.8
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.74
8.79
9.89
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.91
5.99
7.30
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.60
8.65
9.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.74
5.77
7.25
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.64
8.67
9.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.72
5.76
7.12
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.85
8.90
10.17
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.42
6.49
7.72
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.18
4.27
6.40
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.26
8.26
9.24
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Lewis Fails To Qualify In the 100
Sure it was surprising that Carl Lewis failed to win the men's 100-meter final today in the United States track and field trials.
But not finish in the first three?
Not get an opportunity to try for his third straight gold medal in the glamour event of the Olympics?
Carl Lewis?
Incredibly, all of that happened on this miserably hot (95 degrees) and humid (65 percent) afternoon.
The 30-year-old Lewis, the world champion, world-record holder and a lot more, finished sixth in the eight-man final, 2 meters behind the winner.
Then, at a packed news conference, he was full of good cheer.
He pointed not to the debilitating weather nor two false starts nor tight muscles nor anything else except a bad day of racing.


MAKING IT IN THE MAJORS
Penny Marshall is wise not to position herself as a feminist ("Making It in the Majors," by Peggy Orenstein, May 24).
Feminism is not in fashion in the movie industry.
The heads of the eight major studios are men.
If "Thelma and Louise" had been tied to a female director, it might never have been made.
It needed the imprimatur of a member of the boy's club (in this case, Ridley Scott) before it could be financed.
That's the reality of the business right now.
And I sympathize with Marshall's irritation as Orenstein keeps asking her to make a political statement.
Her movies are her statement.
Marshall is on her way to becoming a major film maker.
That she is a woman is really secondary.
Which is not to say that female directors are carbon copies of their male counterparts.
Male directors often see themselves as generals, leading their troops into battle.
The military model isn't that congenial to most women, however.
They're more likely to bring to bear the dynamic of a family.
Authoritarian, sure, but participatory as well.


Topics of The Times; Not So Elite
Some 70,000 New Yorkers gathered one evening last week for Puccini's classic "La Boheme" in just about the finest possible setting.
It was opening night in Central Park for the Metropolitan Opera's 26th season of free outdoor performances, thanks to financial support from Chemical Bank, City Hall and several foundations.
The audience for that one night's performance was nearly half the number of opera lovers who pay to hear America's premier company in its entire regular season.
By the end of this month's eight performances in eight parks, the outdoor attendance will reach a quarter million.


How to Find and Keep a Job, Aided by the Fresh Air Fund
Armed with resumes, Constance Belle plunged into the job market for the first time last month.
The 15-year-old was dressed in a tailored beige suit, white shirt, black shoes and bag.
And she was confident that she had been well prepared for any tough questions from hard-nosed interviewers.
After only one interview, she was hired by the Private Industry Council's Summer Youth Employment Program.
Program officials have not told her exactly what she'll be doing, but she could be working at a variety of jobs ranging from a nurse's assistant to a camp counselor.
It is unlikely, though, that without the Fresh Air Fund, she would be looking forward to the working world.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Williston 325,000
99 High Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Kings Park 137,000
10 Bruce Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, patio; taxes $3,100.
North Massapequa 183,500
24 Oxford Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, 1-car garage; taxes $4,600.
St.
James 262,500
33 High Woods Court  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, family room, deck; taxes $6,900.
Smithtown 215,000
30 Dehan Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new Victorian; dining room, den, basement, hardwood floors, 2-car garage; taxes $5,500.
West Islip 191,000
829 Stanley Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old high ranch; eat-in kitchen, dining room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200.
OTHER AREAS Monroe, Conn. 150,000  70 Turkey Roost Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 27-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, skylights, new furnace, 1 acre; taxes $2,408.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 315,000  43 Florence Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old contemporary; fireplace, country eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $6,705.
Edison, N.J. 140,000
687 Amboy Avenue
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in-kitchen, near shopping; taxes $2,742.


Chance of a Rail Strike Grows as Talks Bog Down
Railway officials and union leaders made little progress in negotiations yesterday, increasing the possibility of a Wednesday strike at Amtrak, Conrail and other rail lines around the nation.
Union officials argue that a strike at Conrail, which carries most of the freight in the Northeast and links up with most major railroads, would cause only limited disruptions.
But Conrail officials and railway analysts say its impact would be felt within days at power utilities and factories throughout the United States.


Results Plus
TENNIS McNeil Wins Eastbourne Tourney  Lori McNeil won the women's final tuneup for Wimbledon by beating Linda Harvey-Wild, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the championship match of the Eastbourne grass-court tournament in England.
Earlier in the day, Harvey-Wild beat Rosilyn Fairbank-Nideffer, 6-1, 6-3, in their rain-interrupted semifinal. (AP)


Update; Bridgehampton Race Track Is Sold for $3.7 Million
The next phase of negotiations over the future of auto racing on Long Island was ushered in on Tuesday when the site of the Bridgehampton Race Track was sold at auction for $3.7 million.
The buyer, Richard M. Rubin, was the majority shareholder in the Bridgehampton Road Races Corporation, which had put the property up for sale at Sotheby's.
Mr.
Rubin's lawyer, Gary Schonwald, said that "for the time being, it's likely he'll have racing continue" at the track, which is on a 518-acre parcel.
But it was not clear if the new owner would try atsome point to develop the property for housing or some other use.


Meg Cox, Richard Leone
Margaret A. Cox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart A. Cox of Pine Knoll Shores, N.C., was married yesterday to Richard C. Leone, the son of Swany Leone of Webster, N.Y., and the late Lucy Leone.
Mayor Marvin Reed of Princeton, N.J., officiated at the Prospect House at Princeton University.
Ms.
Cox, who is known as Meg and will keep her name, is a reporter in New York for The Wall Street Journal, covering the music and book publishing industries.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father, who is retired, was a clerk-treasurer of the Cleveland Heights-University Heights board of education in Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
Her mother, Joann H. Cox, is an artist and calligrapher.


Tending to Chores When a Barbecue Beckons
THE major planting season has gone by, but gardeners are far from finished.
Vacation planning is under way and there are many other summer activities on the family's priority list.
Just to be sure the gardening essentials are met, here is a brief review to get everyone up to speed for the long haul through the summer days ahead.
Mulch: There is nothing like a good cover on the soil's surface to keep moisture in and weeds out.
Thus far the Northeast has had abundant rainfall and the ground is wet, but it may not stay so through the summer months.
Weeds will have a tough time getting enough light and root hold if they have a layer of mulch to push through.
There is no hard rule as to the best mulch to use.
The two things that should dictate are price and availability.
An ample supply of bark chips (the small ones) make an excellent mulch.
So do grass clippings if not piled too thickly and the lawn has not been treated with an herbicide.
Herbicide residue could be damaging to certain plants, particularly sensitive vegetables like tomatoes.
Other good mulches are spoiled hay (sometimes farmers give this away), shredded leaves, even compost but not peat moss, which looks great for a time but acts like a sponge and absorbs moisture from the soil.
To be effective, the mulch layer should be kept at least two inches thick.


or 15 U.S. Parks, A Toll-Free Line To Book Sites
Families or groups who are planning camping trips can now call a toll-free line of the National Park Service to make campsite reservations at any one of its 15 most frequently visited areas.
Campsite reservations for a party of up to six people may be made in one of two ways: on the day prior to arrival, or at least eight weeks in advance.
Larger groups are advised to speak to the superintendent of the individual park before making reservations.
Charges for park entrance and daily use of campsite are payable by Mastercard, Visa, Discover, money order or personal check.
For reservations call (800) 365-2267, Monday to Friday, between 7 A.M. and 6 P.M., Saturday and Sunday between 7 A.M. and 4 P.M., Pacific standard time.


Czechoslovakia's Wall Street Brigade
"Okay, you ex-Commies, let's rock and roll!" The voice of Axl Rose of the Guns 'n' Roses rock band boomed across Prague's vast Spartakiadni stadium, built to display the prowess of Communist athletes but now hosting a hirsute mass of newly capitalistic youths apparently intent on recreating Woodstock.
Strobes flashed, fireworks flared, videos rolled.
The jeans-clad Czechoslovak crowd seemed suitably wowed.
But a small group of neatly coiffed gentlemen in the audience displayed a certain ennui.
Ex-Wall Streeters rather than ex-Communists, they were plainly finding it awkward to rock 'n' roll.


Paterson Prepares to Take 'Who's on First' to Its Heart
A line drive to deep center, beyond Today and Tomorrow, soaring over What and arcing past the outstretched glove of Because, would hit the wooden fence right about where the sign says "Paterson" in large letters.


Amy Weitzmann, Donald Tansill Jr.
Amy Valentine Weitzmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Weitzmann of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Donald Bender Tansill Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tansill, also of Locust Valley.
The Rev.
Charles Colwell, the bride's uncle, performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Tansill, 28 years old, teaches physical education at the Green Vale School in Glen Head, L.I.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
Her father is a building contractor in Locust Valley.


Bauhaus at the Source
THE cultural influence of Germany's short-lived Bauhaus school of design is so pervasive that many of us take it for granted.
In nearly every European and American city, there are buildings designed in the cool, clean style that Bauhaus architects pioneered.
Many of the utensils we see and use every day, from lamps and chairs to ashtrays and silverware, are tributes to the Bauhaus.
And painters who taught there, among them Paul Klee, Wassily Kandinsky, are now recognized as some of the century's finest.
In the 1920's and early 1930's, the Bauhaus was a beacon not only for new ideas in art and design but for all sorts of modernism.
The school's founders believed that fine art and traditional craftsmanship, beauty and function, must be combined into a new, modern kind of design.
Innovators from Marc Chagall to Albert Einstein were drawn into the school's orbit, and it came to symbolize the creative force of European culture.


CORRECTIONS
An article last Sunday about computer simulation of buildings misidentified a participant in an Upper East Side zoning project.
It was a committee appointed by Oculus, the newsletter of the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, not the A.I.A. itself.


HAITI'S SPLIT SEEN AT A SWEARING-IN
His inaugural address was dedicated to the Haitian masses, but the new Prime Minister, Marc L. Bazin, spoke every word in French on Friday at the stifling official gathering of men in dark suits and perfumed women in white dresses.
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, for his swearing-in early last year, had the presidential sash placed on his shoulders by a peasant woman.
Throughout that day, the President, Haiti's first freely elected leader, gave his speeches in a proverb-laden Creole.


Wall Street; Upside Potential in the Chair-Potato Sector
For every dad spending this Father's Day in his La-Z-Boy, there is probably an investor who wishes she had moved the chair-maker out of her portfolio back on Groundhog Day.
La-Z-Boy's stock has reclined almost 20 percent from its January high of $28.75 a share, amid worries over the weak economic recovery.
But Elliott L. Schlang, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, thinks the company looks like a bargain at its current price of less than $24.
With twice the market share of its nearest rival, La-Z-Boy is poised to benefit from any upturn in the furniture industry, Mr.
Schlang said in a recent report.
And improvement is expected in the 1990's, he said, because of a projected 40 percent jump in the number of people between the ages of 35 and 55 -- the peak furniture-buying years.


Leslie Pennington, Robert A. Cohen
Leslie Alexandra Pennington, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Pennington of Wynnewood, Pa., was married yesterday to Robert Andrew Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford I. Cohen of Coral Gables, Fla.
The Rev.
George E. Hollingshead Jr. officiated at the Bryn Mawr Presbyterian Church in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Ms.
Pennington, who is 28 years old and keeping her name, is an interior designer with the Eggers Group, an architectural and planning concern in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and has an associate degree from Parsons School of Design.
Her father is a founding partner of Harvey, Pennington, Herting &amp; Renneisen, a Philadelphia law firm.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Paper Adjusts Reporting By Asking Its Readers
What DO readers want?
This is a question newspaper editors ask themselves with special ferocity every four years, in time to confront the peculiar spectacle of another Presidential campaign.
Tired of all the griping about reporting on the 1988 campaign, editors of The Charlotte Observer decided this year that there was only one way to answer this question: to ask their readers directly.


Literary Chic
To the Editor:
As the author of seven critical books on contemporary literature, I suppose I should be accustomed by now to reviewers who fault me for not discussing certain writers in my books and who ignore my clearly stated reasons for discussing the writers I do discuss.
Jeffery Paine's review of my new book, "Talents and Technicians: Literary Chic and the New Assembly-Line Fiction" (May 10), is a case in point.
I describe in the book's preface the principle governing the selection of the writers discussed, but to clarify matters I would like to explain the process by which I arrived at it.


When Trucks and Trains Unite
For decades, trucking companies and railroads have eyed each other as enemies.
Truckers in many cases convinced shippers that railroads only knew how to move big loads of grain, coal and other commodities long distances, while trucks, they said, could move most anything better.
Railroad executives grumbled but were unable to stem the onslaught, and trucking made huge inroads.
Trucks now transport about 25 percent of the nation's freight, compared with a little more than 5 percent at the end of World War II; railroads move 38 percent of the freight now, down from nearly 70 percent just after the war.


Drifting Above It All, on the Wind
DAN QUAYLE didn't draw as big a crowd.
Float over Long Island in a hot-air balloon, and you become an aerial Pied Piper.
People race out of their houses, pointing and staring.
"Hi, how you-all doing?" the pilot of the balloon, Thomas Wayne Atwell, shouted as he waved to those below from his perch astride a basket's rim.
His passenger did no waving.
Hands were too busy gripping the supports of the tiny basket that was heading higher and higher in the sky.
Those experiencing their first balloon flight expect it to feel like a ride at Coney Island.
Amazingly it is one of the most gentle and serene of experiences.


Mayors in Both Parties Voice Frustration
As the United States Conference of Mayors gathers here for its annual meeting, both Republicans and Democrats are voicing frustration with what they see as the Federal Government's inability to act on even the most pressing matters.
But some hope that the need to gather support in a three-way Presidential race may help break the gridlock.
At a news conference to open the meeting on Friday, the organization's vice president, Mayor William J. Althaus of York, Pa., said the $1.3 billion urban aid bill passed by both houses of Congress on Thursday was "a fine down payment." But he added, "Until last night, seven weeks after the riots in Los Angeles, the Federal Government at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue had enacted nothing."


Perot Is Cited, but Not Embraced, as an Alternative to Clinton
Like millions of other Americans, some politically prominent New Yorkers are flirting with Ross Perot for President, but it is far from clear that they want him to win.
In the last few days, figures from Representative Charles B. Rangel of Harlem to Raymond B. Harding, the leader of the state's Liberal Party, to Felix G. Rohatyn, the financier, have said they could not rule out backing the nation's favorite undeclared candidate.
Mr.
Harding, whose small party depends on political patronage for appointments and jobs, wants to be a player.
Mr.
Rohatyn, a lifelong Democrat and a perpetual prospect for a Democratic cabinet post, wants attention for his goal of rebuilding the nation's economy and infrastructure.
Mr.
Rangel wants respect for urban problems and for his friend Jesse Jackson.


Maia Fitzpatrick, W. J. Carthaus 2d
Maia Kathryn Fitzpatrick, a daughter of Dr.
John J. Fitzpatrick 3d of Topeka, Kan., and the late Gayle S. Fitzpatrick was married yesterday in Boston to William James Carthaus 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Carthaus of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
William F. Salmon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Presentation Church.
Mrs.
Carthaus, 26 years old, is a manager at Filene's in Boston.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Massachusetts in Boston, from which she also received a master's degree in American literature.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Topeka.


When the Camera Lies
JUST as genes are being spliced into the fruits and vegetables we eat, so dazzling and strange new images are being seamlessly woven into the movies, videos and commercials we consume.
Such modern cinematic processes, including "morphing," in which one image can be digitally changed into another by a computer, may turn out to be more than pleasing special effects.
The techniques are already changing the way products are sold and candidates are packaged. (Shall we make the President's eyes an honest, direct blue or go for a sexier blue-green?) But these same techniques are also subtly changing the nature of reality as experienced through moving images.


Judith Schuler, Joseph Miller 3d
Judith Mary Schuler, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Richard E. Schuler of Ithaca, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Joseph H. Miller 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Miller Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Jerome Massimino officiated at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Miller, 25 years old, is a management consultant for Stone &amp; Webster Management Consultants, an engineering consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University, as did her husband, who also received an M.B.A. there.
Her father is a professor of economics and the director of the Waste Management Institute at Cornell University in Ithaca.
He was a New York State public service commissioner under Gov.
Hugh L. Carey and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Linnea Alvord, Steven Pantelick
Linnea Kristina Alvord, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clark Alvord of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Steven Miguel Pantelick, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Steven Pantelick Jr. of Guilford, Conn.
The Rev.
Jordan McConway performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in New Haven.
Mrs.
Pantelick, 22 years old, is a production supervisor at the United States Surgical Corporation in North Haven, Conn.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a district manager for Bytex Corporation, a computer network company in Hartford.
Her mother, Harriet J. Alvord, is an instructor of Swedish at the University of Connecticut in Storrs.


JUNE 14-20/New Poet Laureate; With Wit, Mona Van Duyn Writes of Love and Life
Some critics have praised Mona Van Duyn as a poet who celebrates "married love." It is applause that she would rather not accept, despite these lines from "Late Loving":
" 'Love' is finding the familiar dear." And: " 'In love' is to be taken by surprise." She writes about married love, she says, because she is married; in another kind of relationship, she would write about that.


May Lee and Dr. Jerry Huo
May Lee, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Lee of South Setauket, L.I., was married yesterday in Woodbury, L.I., to Dr.
Jerry Huo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fang Po Huo of New York.
The Rev.
Robert Hullstrung performed the ceremony at the Woodbury United Methodist Church.
Ms.
Lee, who is 27 years old and is retaining her name, graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a financial analyst at Pfizer Inc. in New York.
Her father is the director of research at Pall RAI Inc., a maker of industrial filters in Hauppauge, L.I.
Her mother, Nelly Lee, is the supervisor of the chemistry laboratory at the Veterans Administration hospital in Northport, L.I.


Streetscapes: Model Tenements; Far West on 42d St., A 1901 Innovation
SOME buildings, like the block of model tenements on the East River from 78th to 79th Streets that Peter Kalikow wanted to demolish, attract the fervid attention of preservationists.
In their efforts to save the complex they held walking tours and news conferences and won celebrity endorsements and landmark designation.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
VICTORIAN SUMMER
The surge in popularity of all things Victorian will be explored by the Brookfield Historical Society in a summerlong exhibition at its museum on Route 25, and in a slide presentation by William Hosley, curator of American decorative arts at the Wadsworth Atheneum.


Tibet Without Going There
AT the end of the world, where the Tibetan plateau suddenly teeters off a cliff in one direction and collides against snowcapped peaks in the other, the Xinsi Monastery looms unexpectedly from the golden wheat fields to preside over the landscape.
The red-robed monks come bustling out, the dough on their hands an indication that they have been interrupted in their chores rather than their prayers, and they break into welcoming grins as magnificent as the scenery.
It is a scene from Tibet, more Tibetan than Tibet itself.
Here there are no Chinese troops prowling in the background or Chinese tour leaders curtailing contacts with the monks.


Puck's Pizza Is Expanding, Slice by Slice
Wolfgang Puck, the California chef who pioneered power pizza, is slicing up the pie.
His first by-the-slice shop ($2.50 a slice) opened at Macy's in San Francisco last year.
In August, a 60-seat restaurant is to open at Macy's in the gargantuan Mall of America in Bloomington, Minn.
Mr.
Puck is also talking to MCA Development Company about colonizing Citywalk, a four-block-long development due to open this year in Universal City in Los Angeles.


Corrections
The calendar of events on June 7 misstated the closing date of an exhibition of drawings by Robert Knox at the PMW Gallery in Stamford.
It closes on July 26, not this Friday.


Two Roads Taken, Each Leading to the Heartland
Rodney Crowell and James McMurtry are faces in a crowd of American singer-songwriters.
Since long before their time and probably for long after, the tradition of men picking up guitars and singing about what's on their minds has been thicker than pavement across American cultural history; today, in a world of Nintendo, computerized banking and synthesized keyboards that can recreate any sound in the musical vocabulary, the form should seem almost obsolete.
Instead, it's surviving, intact.
From John Mellencamp to lesser-knowns like Joe Ely and Steve Earle to complete unknowns in clubs and dives everywhere, the male singer-songwriter tradition perseveres.
The form itself is simple: an acoustic guitar, a few basic chords, words.
The style's shallow roots lie in rock-and-roll, the deeper ones in folk, country and blues.
The lyrics are concerned with values, morals, ideals and broken promises -- images of bars and backyards, tales of love gone wrong and distant salvation.
Wherever these singer-songwriters are, and however many people they're singing to, the road they're on usually leads to a mythical place known as the heartland.


Supreme Court Clears the Lane for Reynolds
Several hours after the second day of the United States Olympic track and field trials ended today, Butch Reynolds won his biggest victory in seeking to enter the 400-meter competition despite his two-year suspension for drug use.
The Supreme Court denied a request, without comment, by The Athletics Congress, track and field's national governing body, to set aside an earlier order by Associate Justice John Paul Stevens, who ruled that Reynolds could compete.


Perspectives: Emergency Repairs; Change Is Afoot in a System Under Fire
THE tale told about the city's Emergency Repair Program by John M. Reilly, executive director of the Fordham Bedford Housing Corporation in the Bronx, would ring true to managers and owners of multifamily buildings in lower-income neighborhoods generally.
"Several times crews came in to do work that we had completed," said Mr.
Reilly, whose nonprofit corporation runs 29 buildings with 700 apartments.
"We wound up paying for the visits because the charges for them, plus administrative charges, were on our tax bill."


America's Indoor League Keeps Shrinking
With the World Cup just two years away from its United States debut, soccer fever is probably sweeping the host country, right?
Not if interest in the professional indoor brand of the game is any guide.
After the demise of the Tacoma Stars earlier this month and of the St.
Louis Storm last week, there are just five teams left in the Major Soccer League, and according to one team the owner, of one of them, the end may be in sight.


Lindros Traded to Somewhere on I-95
The Eric Lindros auction took a bizarre twist this afternoon with the Rangers and Philadelphia Flyers both concluding they had struck a deal to land the young star.
As a result of the dispute, National Hockey League officials decided to submit the matter to an independent arbitrator.
And it is the arbitrator who will apparently decide whether the 19-year-old center, who is now the property of the Quebec Nordiques, ends up playing in New York or Philadelphia.


Making a Difference; An Early Start at Success
Anyone who starts a successful business in high school deserves an award.
And that is what 18-year-old Susan E. Behm of Westminster, Colo., received Friday in New York.
Ms.
Behm was given the Women of Enterprise Teen Achiever Award alongside five businesswomen who were honored for surmounting big obstacles to achieve success.
Sponsored by Avon Products Inc. in association with the Small Business Administration, the Women of Enterprise awards were begun in 1987, and the recognition of a teen-ager was added this year.


Seles Can't List Florida as Her Home
A day after one tennis official said that MONICA SELES would play at Wimbledon as a resident of Sarasota, Fla., rather than as a native of Yugoslavia, a more authoritative official said that this would not be the case.
"She asked if possible to be listed from Florida, but that's not a country, so the request isn't possible," the Wimbledon referee, ALAN MILLS, said yesterday.
"We have now heard she wants to be listed as Yugoslavian, so that's it."


Seanna Connor, Matthew Walter
Seanna Scholle Connor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Connor Jr. of Far Hills, N.J., was married yesterday in Osterville, Mass., to Matthew Douglas Walter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Walter of Dublin, Ohio.
The Rev.
Raymond Webster performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Walter, 22 years old, graduated from Williams College, as did her husband.
Her father is a partner in the Newark law firm of Sills Cummis Zuckerman Radin Tischman Epstein &amp; Gross.
Her mother, Susan Connor, is a vice president of New Jersey Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Newark.


Gephardt at Northwestern
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, urged graduates yesterday at Northwestern University's 134th commencement "to keep your minds open, to welcome change, and to never accept what is -- to work for what can be."
"To enjoy life to its fullest, to live without regrets, requires a discipline, a continuing reminder of how good life really is," he said.


In Norwalk, the Musical 'Marilyn and Joe'
IN a mental hospital, nearing the end of her life, Marilyn Monroe remembers a lawsuit alleging that she was responsible for the death of Clark Gable.
"I didn't kill Clark Gable, did I?" she asks Joe DiMaggio, her "only true friend." "I know I wasn't the most punctual on the set, but no one else died of it."
With its curious mixture of ingenuousness and selfishness, spiced by a humorous touch of the macabre, that sounds as though it could have been said by Monroe.


State Bar Acts to Limit How Lawyers Advertise Themselves
Can bad taste be regulated?
Proposed new advertising guidelines for lawyers in Connecticut appear partly aimed at just such a goal, raising prospects for a free-for-all over issues of image, money and free speech.


Israel Presses Building of Roads to Settlements
Rumbling through terraced hills south of Jerusalem, a fleet of yellow bulldozers is carving out a highway to Jewish settlements, the Government's most ambitious road project in the occupied territories.
The effort is part of a building drive that the right-wing coalition of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has pressed without letup in anticipation of a possible change of government after national elections on June 23.


Spreading the Blame?
To the Editor:
In "I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional," Wendy Kaminer criticizes a group of people whose sole aim is to improve their lives and become better, happier human beings.


European Treaty Sponsors Have a Lot to Explain
Faced with a backlash from many Europeans suspicious of plans for still greater regional integration, the European Community has turned uncharacteristically penitent, admitting that it failed to keep the public informed.
The community has also belatedly recognized that many ordinary Europeans fear that Brussels-based bureaucrats are intent on assuming control of their lives.
And it has pledged to limit the community's "meddling" as part of a new campaign to "get closer" to citizens.


Rangers Stay at Home And Draft L.I. Twins
The Islanders looked to the Baltics for their first pick in the National Hockey League draft today.
The Devils looked to western Canada.
But the Rangers looked no farther than their own backyard.
The Rangers, who picked last in the first round because they finished first over all in the regular season, used the 24th choice for Peter Ferraro, a 19-year-old center from Long Island.
Then, as if following a script from a movie designed to warm everyone's hearts, the Rangers chose Ferraro's twin brother, Chris, on the fourth round of the draft.


Another View Of a Musical
I attended the musical "Rappaccini's Daughter" (recently reviewed by Alvin Klein) at the Blooming Grove Theater in Montclair and found it a charming fairy tale.
The roles were well cast; the actors were all attractive and well directed, and spoke and sang with clarity and varying degrees of beauty.
Chester Ludgin, who plays the father, was an imposing, towering presence with matching voice.
The story is set in the 1840's, a far more innocent, romantic period than the present.


Not Miami, Not the Riviera and Not Exactly SoHo
"I feel like I'm in South Beach," said Clara Sasson, sitting at an outdoor table at Jour et Nuit, one of four French restaurants (along with Lucky Strike, La Jumelle and Felix) that have transformed the intersection of West Broadway and Grand Street in SoHo into an exuberant mix of Europeans, motorcycles and models.
"They are trying to recreate the feeling, but there aren't enough convertibles, and there are no palm trees."
Lucky Strike


Multiple Personalities And Need for Data
It was disappointing to read "Sorting Out Multiple Personalities"  [ May 10 ] .
In recent years, the nature of the multiple-personality disorder has not only provided for some colorful film and television productions, but has also entranced some clinicians.
Some mental-health professionals have embraced the concept with a fervor and a conviction reminiscent of some of our 19th-century rural religious sects.
An excellent example of this group's thorough disregard for scientific data to support their contentions is the statement about the incidence of women subjected to serious physical or sexual abuse by the age of 21 at "more than 50 percent."
Conjectures during panel discussions, even at mental-health conventions. cannot take the place of careful research by responsible professionals in our attempts to better understand the cause and treatment of accurately defined psychiatric disorders.
The misuse of the concept of multiple personality is particularly distressing when patients suffer from iatrogenic conditions through the efforts of well-intentioned but misguided mental-health professionals.
STUART L. KEILL, M.D.
Professor, School of Medicine University of Maryland, Baltimore


2 Former Soviet Stars Tie in Chicago Open
TWO former Soviet citizens, Dmitry Gurevich and Gregory Kaidanov, tied for first place in the Chicago Open, May 22-25.
Each scored 6-1 in the Swiss-system tournament at the Ramada Hotel O'Hare, and each took home $3,000.
Gurevich arrived in the United States more than a dozen years ago and won his international master and grandmaster rank as an American.
He lives in Chicago.
Kaidanov was a grandmaster before he arrived in Lexington, Ky., at the end of 1991.


Title IX: A 20-Year Search for Equity; Title IX Is Now an Irresistible Force
During one of the dozens of meetings that college athletic administrators have held in recent months to try to carry out a Federal law requiring that male and female athletes be treated equally, one state university athletic director made a blunt assessment.
There is a train coming down the track, he said, and it's not going to disappear.
This recognition has been two decades coming.
But attention has finally been focused on the issue of equal treatment of the sexes in college athletics as a seminal date approaches.


Lauren Goodyear, Jacob Schramm
Lauren Millett Goodyear, the daughter of Laurence R. Goodyear Jr. of Bethesda, Md., and Toby G. Goodyear of Belle Mead, N.J., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Jacob Barnhart Schramm, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Ray Schramm of Denver.
The Rev.
Gordon Cosby performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Schramm, 27 years old, and her husband, 28, graduated from Yale University.
She teaches English at the Potomac School in McLean, Va.
Mr.
Schramm also received a master's of divinity degree from Harvard University.
He is the director of the Good Shepherd Teen Center in Washington.


Adele M. O'Grady, James Botticelli
Adele Marie O'Grady, a daughter of Marion O'Grady of New York and the late John P. O'Grady, was married yesterday to James Carlo Botticelli, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cosmo R. Botticelli of Rye Brook, N.Y.
The Rev.
Timothy B. Brown performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Isle Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Ms.
O'Grady, who is keeping her name, is the president of the Donellan Birdsall Company, a Brooklyn real-estate firm.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her mother is the firm's chairwoman.


Mutual Funds; How Investors Pay Commissions
In light of the S.E.C.'s proposal to deregulate mutual fund brokerage commissions, it makes sense to look at how investors now pay sales charges.
There are two basic ways: upfront fees paid when shares are purchased, and ongoing annual fees known as 12b-1 charges, named for the S.E.C. rule that authorizes them.
The fund industry, which opposes the S.E.C. proposal, argues that sales charges have dropped over time without regulatory intervention.


Representatives Clash on Redistricting
Unaccustomed pawns in the game of redistricting, frenzied members of Congress from New York have been maneuvering with obvious desperation for the slightest advantage, provoking a series of barely concealed clashes within the delegation.
In one of the latest squabbles, the quintessential Brooklyn schmoozer, Representative Charles E. Schumer, squared off against Representative Jose E. Serrano, the Bronx reformer, who surprised his colleagues by supporting a redistricting plan inimical to incumbents.


Rescue Helicopter Crashes, Killing Nurse
A rescue helicopter flying to the scene of a motorcycle accident crashed on Interstate 91 in Connecticut last night, killing one crew member and critically injuring two others, the police said.
The helicopter, a Lifestar, crashed at 10:40 P.M. as it tried to land at a highway rest area between Exits 19 and 20 near Middletown, the Connecticut State Police said.


Tears and Awe as Patients Return
INSIDE the neonatal intensive-care unit at the County Medical Center, the lights are dim and the tone is hushed.
Three-week-old Natasha lies connected to a respirator, a heart monitor and an infusion pump through which she receives fat, carbohydrates and proteins intravenously.
The baby, born at 24 weeks and weighing 1 pound 6 ounces, wears a pink and blue striped knit cap to conserve heat.
Last Sunday, the medical staff could not give a prognosis for Natasha.
But they could point across the yard to the several hundred families who, amid brilliant sunshine and brightly colored balloons, had come to a reunion party for "graduates" of the unit.


Chamber Festival Opens in Norfolk
AMONG eminent soloists and ensembles at this season's Norfolk Festival -- the summer encampment of the Yale School of Music -- are the pianists Claude Frank, Ilana Vered and Peter Frankl, the clarinetists Michael Webster, Keith Wilson and Charles Neidich, the flutists Samuel Baron and Ransom Wilson, the New York Woodwind Quintet, the Tokyo and Cleveland String Quartets.
The festival gets under way with recitals Thursday and Friday at 8:30 P.M. devoted to "Quartets on the Rise": the Shanghai, St.
Lawrence and Fone ensembles tackling the late Beethoven Quartets.
At the first faculty concert, Saturday evening at 8:30, it's Haydn, Barber and more Beethoven from the Tokyo String Quartet, who will return on July 3 for still more Beethoven, Takemitsu and, with Lilian Kallir, Schumann's E-flat Piano Quartet.


Lynn Schineller, Ronald Jacobe Jr.
Lynn Marie Elizabeth Schineller, a daughter of E. Ronald Schineller of Park Ridge, N.J., and Mona M. Schineller of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Ronald Howard Jacobe Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacobe of Houston.
The Rev.
Peter J. Schineller, the bride's uncle, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church in Ridgewood.


SPLIT IS PREPARED BY CZECHOSLOVAKS
Czechoslovakia gave the appearance today of a nation sliding step by step toward dissolution, but political leaders of the country's two republics stressed that the breakup was not yet sealed.
The 74-year-old union between the Czech and Slovak peoples, who have increasingly been pulled apart in recent months, could end before the year does, according to a prescription laid out in talks that ended early today.


Puerto Rico Trial Revives Questions Over D'Amato
Day after day, an obscure Puerto Rican advertising executive stares gloomily at the jury in a nearly empty Federal courtroom here, as a parade of his friends, business partners and even his father-in-law tell of dozens of sham campaign contributions they made at his behest to the campaigns of a United States Senator in New York.
And while the charges against the executive, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, involve arcane provisions of Federal campaign laws, his trial has become a clear window on the allegations of political favoritism and even influence peddling that have dogged the Senator, Alfonse M. D'Amato, for years.


Antique Show Phone Line
A new 900 telephone line provides information on antique shows and flea markets.
Callers to the Antique Show Hot Line, (900) 903-7469, can choose a region of the United States and then an area within the region.
For example, those requesting the Northeast may pick New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania or the rest of New England.
Then, a recording lists dates of shows for the following week (or further ahead if there are only a few in the week ahead), their locations, sponsors and number of dealers there, and telephone numbers for further information.
The service says its listing contains all the major shows in an area and a sampling of smaller ones.
In the summer, the service lists 8 to 20 shows a week for New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, for example, the service said.
The sponsors, who notify the Hot Line of their shows, do not pay for their listings, according to the service.
The cost of a call is $1.49 a minute, and a call should take three to four minutes, the service's operators say.


Yankees Take Control When Sutcliffe Couldn't
That the Yankees have been struggling to record victories and score runs is no mystery.
That this 14-game trip could bury them is also no secret.
That they would accept any mistakes and gifts from the Orioles is also not a revelation.
So when Baltimore displayed its generosity tonight, the greedy Yankees grabbed anything for free and sprinted to a 9-5 victory at Oriole Park at Camden Yards.
Three runs scored after Baltimore starter Rick Sutcliffe walked batters, and a crippling three-run inning was fueled by a Sutcliffe throwing error.
Three runners also scampered home off the sizzling bat of Mel Hall.


There Was Something Creepy About the Gallery
BAG OF TOYS
Sex, Scandal, and the Death Mask Murder.
By David France.
Illustrated. 350 pp.
New York:  Warner Books. $21.95.


Bonnie Smithers, Francisco Falla
Bonnie Louisa Smithers, a daughter of Charles F. Smithers Jr. of New York and Ruth H. Smithers of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Francisco Javier Falla Castillo, a son of Aida Castillo de Falla of Guatemala City, Guatemala, and the late Arturo V. Falla Cofino.
The Rev.
Arthur A. Archer officiated at the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis Chapel in Niantic, Conn.
Mrs.
Smithers de Falla is the owner of Deliciosa, a specialty food store in Antigua, Guatemala.
She graduated from Hobart and William Smith Colleges.
Her mother is an educational therapist in private practice in New Canaan.
The bride's father is a stockbroker and a senior vice president at Paine Webber in New York.
He is the chairman of the East Side Settlement House in New York, as was his father, the late C. Francis Smithers.


Con Edison and Union Reach Tentative Accord on Contract
Averting a strike that could have affected millions of electric and gas customers in New York City and Westchester County, negotiators for the Consolidated Edison Company and a union representing 13,000 utility workers reached a tentative agreement yesterday evening on a new four-year contract.
The agreement, between the company and Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers of America, came at 7 P.M., only five hours before the old contract expired at midnight.


Q and A
Visiting Japanese Artisans
Q.
Do you know of organizations that offer trips to Japan focusing on the country's arts and crafts and design, perhaps with the possiblity of visiting artists' studios or seeing craftspeople at work? -- Elaine Young, New York, N.Y.


Marilee Kaye, James Greenwald
Marilee Kaye, a daughter of Sylvia Goldenson Kahanowitz of Los Angeles and the late William M. Kahanowitz, was married June 4 to James L. Greenwald, the son of Mrs.
David Bandler of New York and the late Lester Greenwald.
Rabbi Joseph Hurwitz performed the ceremony at Temple Isaiah in Palm Springs, Calif.
Mrs.
Greenwald graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
She retired as the senior vice president of Janic Associates, a media-buying company in Los Angeles.
Her late father was a lawyer in Greensburg, Pa.


Carey Takes the Wheel
Thursday evening at 6, Ronald Carey, the former driver for the United Parcel Service who has sprung to the forefront of the creaky American labor movement, pulls into the driveway of the house in Queens he bought 33 years ago with his father, Joseph.
Carey and his wife, Barbara, who sells housewares part time at Macy's, raised their five children in the two-bedroom, first-floor apartment.
Until his death in October, Joseph Carey lived in the apartment upstairs.
At 56, Ron Carey is a late bloomer for a labor leader.
Trim and robust at 5 foot 10 and 170 pounds, he sheds his suit and puts on blue jeans and a navy sweatshirt.
Dinner tonight is macaroni garnished with baked beans, macaroni with tomato sauce and powdered cheese, iced tea, raw carrots, French bread and, for dessert, blueberry cupcakes and chopped raw fruit.
The Careys' daughters are here -- Pamela Casbarro and her husband, Ralph, Barbara Marchese and Sandra Perrone, who has brought along Shawn, 2, and Gina Marie, an infant.
Like the Careys' sons, Ronald Jr. and Daniel, the daughters live within 20 minutes of the house, and they are always around.
The Casbarros have moved upstairs into the father's apartment.


An Ocean of Contenders After Morgan's Cliff Dive
Just when Gil Morgan was on the verge of making the 92d United States Open a runaway -- after he had crashed through and beyond the 10-under-par barrier and built a seven-shot lead -- the cliffs of Pebble Beach reared up and set up one of the most attractive golf Sundays in memory.
Yes, amazingly, nearly everyone is back in this Open, from Tom Kite to Seve Ballesteros to Nick Faldo to the defending champion, Payne Stewart, even to, bless his heart, Andy Dillard.
Indeed, going into the final round, there are 21 players within four shots, and eight of them have won major championships.


Map Makers Get Lost; As the World Turns on Them
Cartographers of old were slow to change their maps.
In the 15th century, they kept drawing maps faithful to the second-century works of Ptolemy.
Even the startling discoveries of 1492 were a decade old before they began appearing on world maps.
Today's cartographers can't revise them fast enough.
The reunification of Germany, the disintegration of the former Soviet Union and the current turmoil in Yugoslavia have sent them back to the drafting boards time after time, desperately looking over their shoulders at each day's headlines.
No sooner published, their maps are glaringly out-of-date, much to the exasperation of impatient consumers.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; A Revival for the Shakespeare Theater?
CONNECTICUT will soon select a private developer to revive the twice-failed American Shakespeare Festival Theater in Stratford as a nonprofit theater and May-to-October tourist destination.
Sixteen developers have voiced interest in making proposals, to be accompanied by $100,000 security payments, by the July 29 deadline.
The winner will be announced Sept. 1, although the sluggish economy raises doubts that there will be many proposals.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Business View; Executives Are Lending Perot an Ear
On a vacation cruise off Alaska this month with the chief executives of four other large companies, John W. Teets, the chairman of the Dial Corporation, found that one topic came up over and over: Ross Perot.
The conversations were a small but perhaps telling indication that if President Bush believes he can count on support from the corporate executive suite, a solid Republican redoubt if ever there was one, he may be in for a rude surprise.


Russia and Ukraine: Condemned to Get Along
It was scarcely an accident that while Boris N. Yeltsin was politicking his way through Washington, the President of Ukraine, Leonid M. Kravchuk, was in Paris on a state visit of his own.
There, Mr.
Kravchuk not only talked about aid but actually got a little -- credits of 500 million francs, about $95 million.
It must have amused Francois Mitterrand and Mr.
Kravchuk, who are not normally known for their sense of fun.
Mr.
Mitterrand has been a cactus under Washington's saddle for many years now; Mr.
Kravchuk, now the head of an independent state, is Mr.
Yeltsin's biggest foreign-policy headache.


Bedside Manners Improve as More Women Enter Medicine
As Americans become shrewder and more skeptical about the health care business, and as they lose patience with the gruff imperiousness displayed by many practicing physicians, some are beginning to suspect that the best guarantee against insufferable paternalism in a doctor is to make sure the doctor is a woman.
The acrid and longstanding debate over whether women take more naturally to the healing arts than do men has flared anew, fanned by an audacious new book and a growing wealth of data on the sociology of medicine.
Studies have shown that female physicians spend more time with their patients than men do, interrupt them less often and more willingly minister to the poor.
Recent evidence also indicates they embrace new medical technology and aggressive therapies as readily as men.


Tyson Is Attending Islamic Services
It was in November 1988, that MIKE TYSON, wearing a white robe, stepped into a baptismal pool in a Cleveland church, and then, as 700 people, including his mentor, DON KING, and the Rev.
JESSE JACKSON, watched, submerged himself and came up a professed Christian and a member of a Baptist church.
But since beginning his six-year prison sentence on a rape conviction, the former heavyweight champion has been attending Islamic prayer services and study sessions at the Indiana Youth Center.


Perri Peltz, Eric Ruttenberg
Perri Anne Peltz, a news reporter for WNBC-TV in New York, was married Thursday evening to Eric Maximillian Ruttenberg, the executive vice president of Tinicum Inc. in New York.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Ruttenberg, who will continue to use her maiden name professionally, graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Lauren S. Veronis and Robert B. Peltz, both of New York.
Her father is the president of the Peltz Food Corporation, a New York frozen-food distributor.
Her stepfather, John J. Veronis, is the chairman of Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, a New York investment bank.
She is a stepdaughter of Doree Peltz of New York.


Light Lunches (Save Room for Dessert)
CHARISMA in restaurants is as hard to define as it is in people -- and just as difficult to duplicate, which came to mind on visits to the Cafe, a microchip of a place on the main street of New Preston, near the edge of Lake Waramaug.
The Cafe's one room seats a mere 22, with walls that differ from one another, as do the furnishings.
A checkerboard-tile floor, brick fireplace opposite a fieldstone wall, a triple bureau with a top that is covered with the day's desserts, a long hunter green couch against the stone wall (constituting an improvised banquette), bentwood chairs and a decorative hodgepodge of ceramic plates, whimsical sculptures, glass jars, fresh flowers and artificial vegetables add up to idiosyncratic charm.
Everything works, providing a cozy, welcoming setting for some delicious, prepared-to-order dishes made from fresh, natural ingredients.


Q and A
Using an Air-Conditioner Question: I live in a rental apartment in a building converted to a co-op.
I am 82 and do not plan to buy my apartment.
The building has central air-conditioning but there are times before it is turned on in the spring and after it is turned off in the fall, or when it is not working, when my apartment is hot.


Corrections
The "Find of the Week" report in Styles of the Times last Sunday, with the Foraging column, referred incorrectly to the 1992 Jeep Wrangler 4WD at Manhattan-Jeep Eagle.
It is not the only 1992 four-wheel drive convertible around that sells for under $10,000.
The 1992 Suzuki Samurai four-wheel-drive soft-top, for example, has a suggested retail price of $8,499.


Daphne Gerstell And Will Eglin
Daphne Ford Gerstell, a daughter of Barbara K. Gerstell of Greenwich, Conn., and A. Frederick Gerstell of Beverly Hills, Calif., was married yesterday to Thomas Wilson Eglin Jr., a son of Edith B. Eglin of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Thomas W. Eglin.
The Rev.
John Crocker officiated at the Episcopal ceremony at the Watch Hill Chapel in Watch Hill, R.I.
Mrs.
Eglin, 25 years old, graduated from Connecticut College and is studying acting in New York.
Her father is the chief executive officer of Calmat, a producer of cement and concrete in Los Angeles.
She is also a stepdaughter of Joan Gerstell of Beverly Hills.


Joan A. O'Donnell, Stuart Buhrendorf
Joan Anne O'Donnell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremiah J. O'Donnell Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday in Stratton Mountain, Vt., to Stuart Winslow Buhrendorf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick G. Buhrendorf of Westfield, N.J.
The Rev.
John T. Scully performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chapel of the Snows.
Mrs.
Buhrendorf, 27 years old, is an assistant production manager with Cowles Business Media in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Roanoke College.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of J. J. O'Donnell Woolens in New York.


Stargazing
The Kirov Ballet returns to New York tomorrow with an unusually mixed bag of dancers.
Fresh young talent, some of it astonishingly good, and a few familiar faces dominate.
But a new open-door policy allows for guest artists from unexpected places.
Daniel Meja of the Boston Ballet and Maximiliano Guerra of the English National Ballet are appearing as part of an exchange project.
The Bolshoi Ballet, the Kirov's rival, is informally represented, in Leonid Lavrovsky's "Romeo and Juliet," by Nina Ananiashvili, who is on loan from the Moscow company, and Andris Liepa, who left the troupe a few years ago.


Summer Pudding and Other Desserts
PERHAPS I am a chauvinist, but English desserts (or puddings as we call them) have always been among my favorites.
Recently I spent a week in London where I feasted on berries: strawberries heaped in a bowl and served with thick yellowish Devonshire cream, raspberries made into a glistening sauce for poached nectarines that had tender white flesh and, my all time favorite, summer pudding.


Summer League Shows Off N.B.A. Hopefuls
THOUGH he was well covered by his man, Jay Edwards, a former all-America guard at Indiana University, leaped high and connected with a nifty fall-away jump shot from the left baseline.
The shot was worthy of a Michael Jordan playing before a packed house at Chicago Stadium.
But Mr.
Edwards's shot was seen by about 100 basketball fans on a recent evening at the University of New Haven gymnasium in West Haven.
The Tuesday-night crowd, typical for a game involving the New Haven Skyhawks of the eight-year-old United States Basketball League, saw an exciting, well-played contest.
The game started more than an hour late, because an accident on Interstate 95 in Stamford delayed the visiting New Jersey Jammers.
The spectators in the 1,800-seat gymnasium watched the Skyhawks, who had won four of their first five games, open up a 23-point lead in the third quarter only to squander it in the last period and eventually lose the game by two points on a basket at the final buzzer.


PROTESTS IN TIBET REPORTED ON RISE
Pro-independence protests in Tibet have multiplied in the last few months, despite harsh repression, and for the first time there are reliable reports of significant unrest in the Tibetan countryside.
Demonstrations against Chinese rule have occurred periodically in the last five years in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, and occasionally in other large Tibetan cities.
But now the protests seem to be more frequent in Lhasa and are also spreading to remote areas and isolated monasteries not previously involved in political activities.


Caitlin M. Gallagher, Andrew B. Eills
Caitlin Mary Gallagher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher C. Gallagher of Concord, N.H., was married yesterday to Andrew Brewer Eills, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Eills of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard J. Powers performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis Cabrini Church in North Scituate, Mass.
Mrs.
Eills, 25 years old, is the manager of community relations for Wheelabrator Technologies, a trash-to-energy company in Hampton, N.H.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a senior partner in the Concord law firm of Gallagher, Callahan &amp; Gartrell, where her husband is an associate.
Her mother, Ann Gallagher, is the president of Ann Gallagher Associates, a real estate concern in Concord.


No Headline
Brother Gregory W. Nugent, the former president of Manhattan College and a top official at the Catholic University of America, died yesterday at his home on the university campus in Washington.
He was 80 years old.
The apparent cause of death was a heart attack, a university spokeswoman said.


Data Bank/June 21, 1992


Little-Known Impressionist Treasure
UNTIL recently very few people knew about the hoard of French Impressionist paintings in a timber-framed villa in the Swiss spa of Baden.
Two years ago it was at last opened to the public, and so far has attracted nearly 50,000 sightseers.
Visitors to Zurich who care for art and have a few hours to spare will be in for a treat if they take the 15-minute rail trip to Baden, the ancient watering place and modern industrial center 14 miles to the northwest, to get acquainted with the gallery that was long semisecret.
It contains significant works by Cezanne, Corot, Degas, Gauguin, van Gogh, Matisse, Pissarro and Renoir.


Puerto Rico Trial Revives Questions Over D'Amato
Day after day, an obscure Puerto Rican advertising executive stares gloomily at the jury in a nearly empty Federal courtroom here, as a parade of his friends, business partners and even his father-in-law tell of dozens of sham campaign contributions they made at his behest to the campaigns of a United States Senator in New York.
And while the charges against the executive, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, involve arcane provisions of Federal campaign laws, his trial has become a clear window on the allegations of political favoritism and even influence peddling that have dogged the Senator, Alfonse M. D'Amato, for years.


Rebecca Masarof, Scott J. Berman
Rebecca Gabrielle Masarof, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marcus Masarof of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Scott Jeffrey Berman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Berman of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Berman, 26 years old, is a coordinator of special-events planning for MTV Networks in New York.
She graduated from American University, as did her husband.
Her father is a principal in Renrob Fabrics in New York.
Her mother, Louise Masarof, is a library consultant to the Bankers Trust Company in New York.


Diane Forese, Andrew Page
Diane Forese, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Forese of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Page, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Page Jr. of Marblehead, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard Malone performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
Ms.
Forese, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
She received her M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is the vice president of finance at the International Business Machines Corporation in Armonk, N.Y.


The Executive Computer; Medicine, and Common Sense, for Virus Problems
Several months have passed since the computing world awaited with dread the Michelangelo virus, a rogue program that, it was feared, would erase the hard disks of millions of personal computers on March 6.
Michelangelo in fact did far less damage -- only a few hundred PC's were reportedly stricken -- but had an unanticipated effect: It created a demand for millions of dollars of virus protection software.
"The big question, at least to me, is, 'Did the Michelangelo scare do anything long-term and positive for the user community?' " said Pam Kane, president of Panda Systems Inc. in Wilmington, Del., which makes antivirus software.
"People who used a scanner, found Michelangelo and kept their data from being destroyed are fortunate. But did they stop to think, 'Hey, this could happen again. What am I going to do?' "


Insurance Plan Worries Beach Residents
LAST October, the raging winds and high tides of a sudden storm washed out homes in dozens of communities along the Atlantic coast.
It was yet another reminder for shorefront homeowners of the fragility of their claim to the beach.
"We were lucky," said Andy Rudtke, sitting on the deck of his home in Davis Park, a Fire Island community where the Halloween storm swept away three houses.
"In the 30 years that we have been here, we have seen some damage. We had our roof blown off. We lost our deck in a winter blizzard. There is no escaping the part that chance plays when it comes to the forces of nature. It can be frightening."


POSTINGS: New Rochelle Redevelopment; Not So Presto, Changeo!
Midway through redevelopment of the former New Rochelle Academy grounds on Mount Tom Road into a complex called The Greens, buyers' preferences changed.
Unfortunately for the builders, zoning rules did not.
LFM Development of New Rochelle (Howard Loewentheil, Rod Feldman and Peter Murray) had already built 10 houses in clusters of two and three.
With nine more units to go, they discovered that clusters had lost their appeal.
"It seems that the mood of the country has changed to where they would prefer single-family houses," Mr.
Loewentheil said.


Money Matters in Eastern Europe
TRAVELERS going to eastern Europe this summer will probably find money a source of concern: where to change it, which currency is preferred and where credit cards and traveler's checks are accepted constitute some of the potential hassles.
Russia, other parts of the former Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, the former German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland and Romania are gradually linking up with Western financial networks, but progress is spotty and irregular.
This column contains a roundup of information from bureaus and contributors in Europe at the beginning of June, but it should be supplemented if possible with last-minute data from the place you are going.
No guidebook can be up to date on changes, and this column too will age rapidly.


Cynthia Russell, Patrick Brennan
Cynthia Lynn Russell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Russell of Pleasantville, N.Y., was married yesterday in Stockbridge, Mass., to Patrick Kevin Brennan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Brennan of Old Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
Phillip Carr-Harris performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Brennan, 22 years old, graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design and is a freelance illustrator of children's textbooks.
Her father is a vice president of the Chemical Bank Corporation in New York.


JUNE 14-20/A Change for the Defense; Supreme Court Extends Test for Race-Neutral Juries
The Supreme Court made a strong statement against racial discrimination when it ruled last week that defense lawyers in criminal cases cannot reject potential jurors because of race.
The same rule has applied to prosecutors since 1986.
The decision limits the use of peremptory challenges, which allow lawyers to dismiss prospective candidates without giving reasons.
Where exclusions suggest a pattern based on race, the defense now has to show that its choices were "race-neutral."


Catherine Greiner, Thomas Jessop Jr.
Catherine Ann Greiner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
James Greiner of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Thomas Francis Jessop Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Jessop, also of Garden City.
Msgr.
Joseph T. Lahey, the bride's uncle, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church.
Mrs.
Jessop, 25 years old, is a C.P.A. with the accounting firm of Ernst &amp; Young in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is a senior vice president at NBC in New York.


In the City and in the Country
A heady week of benefits -- at the Central Park Zoo and Lincoln Center, and in bucolic upstate New York.


WHERE THE SHINING PATH LEADS
I was interested in the propaganda painting of the Sendero Luminoso illustrating Simon Strong's article "Where the Shining Path Leads" (May 24).
It is a dead rip-off of Eugene Delacroix's "Liberty Leading the People," celebrating the Paris uprising of July 1830.
The bosom of Liberty is more chastely draped, the adoring figure at Liberty's feet in Delacroix's painting has been moved farther into the foreground and provided with a baby and the combatants juggled around a bit, but it is the same picture.
STUART O. LANDRY JR.
Endwell, N.Y.


Clare McHugh, Mark Lasswell
Clare Mary McHugh, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul R. McHugh of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Mark Alan Lasswell, a son of Charles E. Lasswell of Creve Coeur, Mo., and the late Jean Lasswell.
The Rev.
Gabriel Duffy officiated at the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Shrine of the Sacred Heart in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Lasswell, 30 years old, is a reporter at The New York Observer.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is the Henry Phipps Professor of Psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins Medical School in Baltimore and is the psychiatrist in chief at Johns Hopkins Hospital there.
Her mother, Jean McHugh, is a social worker in Baltimore.


Freedom Rings
WHAT THEY ARE: A set of six anodized aluminum rings in red, orange, yellow, green, blue and purple.
Introduced a year ago as a fund-raising item at the San Francisco gay and lesbian community's annual Freedom Day Parade, the rings also come in the form of bracelets, necklaces, earrings, epaulettes, key rings, decorated caps and suspenders.
A set of six rings is about $7.
They're lightweight, fun to fiddle with (the rings turn one's finger into a plastic stack-the-doughnut toy babies play with), deliciously versatile, goofily cheery and unthreatening.
David Spada, the New York artist who designed the rings, hopes they'll be worn by straight people as a universal "pro-tolerance" statement.
WHAT THEY MEAN: A way for gay people to flaunt their wholesomeness.
The rainbow is a stubbornly mainstream, almost Hallmark card emblem, a la unicorns and kittens.
"It symbolizes happiness," Mr.
Spada said.
The colors, he added, "also represent the diversity of our community."


Sympathy for the Dealer
CLOCKERS
By Richard Price. 599 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $22.95.


Yvette Kruger, Joseph Mullaney
Yvette Lorraine Kruger, the daughter of Mary E. and Joe W. Kruger of Naples, Fla., was married yesterday to Joseph Edward Mullaney 3d, a son of Rosemary W. and Joseph E. Mullaney of Boston.
The Rev.
Lynn Carman Bodden performed the ceremony at United Congregational Church in Little Compton, R.I.
Mrs.
Mullaney, 28, is an associate with the Boston law firm of Goodwin, Procter &amp; Hoar.
She is a cum laude graduate of Tufts University and received a law degree from Boston College.
Her father, who is retired, was the general manager of operations for Mercedes Benz of North America Inc. in Montvale, N.J.


Utilities Urged to Find Nuclear Waste Sites
In the wake of Friday's Supreme Court decision that struck down provisions of a Federal law requiring states to dispose of their low-level radioactive waste, officials in the region said yesterday that both the Federal Government and utility companies that operate nuclear power plants must assume responsibility for where and how the waste will be stored.
"Ninety percent of the radioactivity is in nuclear waste from nuclear-power plants, so 90 percent of the problem will remain in the generators and they will have the obligation to get rid of the material," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said in an interview.
"With low-level waste, the Federal Government had also been doing what it has been very good at in recent years -- dumping more obligations on the states while spending more of its money on tax cuts and missiles."


Washing Buddha's Face
IN THE COOL BLUISH MIST OF THE CAMBODIAN DAWN, the hand-carved mountain of stone that is Angkor Wat appears first in silhouette, the temple's massive central towers dwarfing even the tallest of the surrounding jungle trees.
Down the dirt road leading to the temple, the dense grove of banyan and silk-cotton trees gives way to a moat -- 4,800 feet long, wider than stretches of the Mekong River, crossed by a stone causeway that eight centuries ago served as the parade route for elephants that on festival days were draped with Khmer silks and thick ropes of gold.


Louise Corrigan, David A. Havens
Louise Harden Corrigan, a daughter of Mrs.
William M. Corrigan of High Point, N.C., and the late Mr.
Corrigan, was married yesterday to David Atwater Havens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Havens of Gladwyne, Pa.
The Rev.
David Devlin officiated at the ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church in High Point.
Mrs.
Havens, 27 years old, is an account executive with Picone Sport, a women's apparel company in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father retired as the president and treasurer of the Lilly Company, an industrial coatings manufacturer in High Point.


Miss Larrabee, Timothy Cunneen
Jacqueline Marie Larrabee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard P. Larrabee Jr. of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Timothy John Cunneen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Cunneen of Danielson, Conn.
Msgr.
Joseph Boyd performed the ceremony at SS.
John and Paul Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cunneen, 26 years old, is a merchandise coordinator for Lord &amp; Taylor in New York.
She graduated from Lafayette College, as did her husband.
Her father is a senior partner at Dewey Ballantine, a New York law firm.


Talking: The Elderly; Exploring Housing Options
IN the 1980's, the imposing Main Line Philadelphia estate of William J. Austin, the locomotive magnate, was transformed into Beaumont at Bryn Mawr, a 50-acre continuing-care community with 200 villas and 132 apartments ranging in size from 1,050 to 4,000 square feet.
Buyers of co-op units paid $100,000 to $200,000 in 1988 when it opened, and the monthly charges averaged $2,000 for a unit plus $650 for a second occupant.
The charges covered normal maintenance costs, 31 meals a month and weekly housekeeping services.
They also covered up to six months in the community's 50-bed nursing center and a subsidized rate if the stay became permanent.
Monthly charges have since risen by about 12 percent.


CLASSICAL BRIEF
Mahler: 'Das Lied von der Erde'  Waltraud Meier, mezzo-soprano; Siegfried Jerusalem, tenor; Chicago Symphony conducted by Daniel Barenboim.
Erato 45624-2; CD.


Disney Lines
To the Editor: Having spent three wonderful days with my son's family at Disney World-Epcot, I read with particular interest "Visiting Disney's French Kingdom" (May 24).
Apparently the author's family had as good a time there as my similarly aged (12 and 7) grandchildren had in Florida.
But he complains of the "unruly and even chaotic" queues, wondering whether the cause may be that the visitors are Europeans and not Americans.
I was surprised at this doubt, since of course that was the reason.
Queuing is basically an Anglo-Saxon mode of behavior, linked to the English notion of fair play.
When I was raised in Europe, cutting in line was considered a resourcefulness of which the perpetrator was proud.


A Loss for Communism Is a Gain for N.H.L. Draft
Today's National Hockey League draft reflected the changes in world politics, with almost half the players in the first round -- 11 of 24 -- coming from either Czechoslovakia or the former Soviet Union.
Of the three teams in the New York area, only the Islanders went overseas in the first round, choosing Darius Kasparaitis, a defenseman from Lithuania, with the fifth pick over all.
In the second round, 12 of the 24 choices were from the former Soviet Union and Europe, including two from Finland.
The fans in the Forum, perhaps biased toward Canadian talent, booed lightly when several Sergeis were chosen from teams with names like Dynamo. 'It's Snowballing'
"For years, people have looked down on Europe," said Christer Rockstrom, the European scout for the Rangers.
"Now, it's turned the other way. It's a trend, it's snowballing. It might even go too far this year. Hockey people here see players like Jaromir Jagr and Sergei Fedorov and Pavel Bure. How can they not want players like this on their teams?"


Colors and Patterns Make a Show and a Half
THE live side of the Stamford Museum and Nature Center swarms with newborns while the galleries are jumping with the visual jazz of Nicholas Krushenick.
This is a show and a half and it requires not only more space than the museum possesses but also sunglasses -- the better to withstand its colors and patterns.
In his 30-year career, Mr.
Krushenick has shown at every museum in the nation that is worthy of the title and not a few in Europe.
Yet he has never been -- for want of a better term -- a household word.
Something in his art resists exaltation.
It is hard to picture interviewers probing him for personal or esthetic revelations, although many have no doubt tried.
The catalogue introduction by the critic Christian Leigh does little more than praise the artist for negative virtues, as in "Krushenick is never moaning over what we have now come to know as the Endgame of painting" (we have?).


Iran-Contra Inquiry Reawakens, and Ensnares A Reagan Cabinet Member
"I am innocent and will fight this injustice to the end," Caspar W. Weinberger stormed in response to the indictment last week that accused him of perjury in the tangled, and seemingly never-ending, investigation of the Iran-contra affair.
Mr.
Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary, is the first member of Ronald Reagan's Cabinet to be charged with criminal offenses, and the particulars seemed jarringly at odds with his buttoned-up image of propriety and his stubborn opposition, inside the Administration, to the arms-for-hostages deals with Iran.
The five-count indictment, obtained by Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra independent prosecutor, painted a picture of loyalty gone awry.
It says Mr.
Weinberger lied repeatedly to Congressional committees in 1987 and concealed a private diary that prosecutors said contains incriminating evidence.


JUNE 14-20/South Africa; De Klerk Predicts Violence, And 40 Die the Next Night
The African National Congress last week took its battle for majority rule back to the streets and was quickly reminded that, in South Africa, the street can be a deadly and unpredictable place.
First, the congress president, Nelson Mandela, convinced that President F.W. de Klerk's white Government was bent on negotiating its tenure into the next century, launched an escalating campaign of marches and rallies to culminate in a general strike later this summer unless the Government moves more quickly to enfranchise nonwhites.
Mr. de Klerk warned that such tactics created a climate for violence.
The next night attackers shot and slashed the life out of at least 40 blacks, mostly women and children, in the southern Transvaal township of Boipatong.
Was Mr. de Klerk's prophesy self-fulfilling?


Perot's 'Electronic Town Hall' Wouldn't Work; He's for Real
To the Editor:
I was so struck by how out of touch you are with the supporters of Ross Perot in "The No-Party System" (editorial, June 3) that I cut my breakfast short to dash off this note.


Chamber Group Takes the Spotlight
THE unsung heroes at Caramoor are the hard-working members of the resident St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble.
In various configurations, whether pared down to a wind trio or expanded to full symphonic size, these musicians provide a continuity of excellence that is one of the Caramoor Festival's chief lures.
This summer they seem busier than ever, participating in 15 of the 31 concerts at the Caramoor estate in Katonah.
The ensemble's first two chamber recitals and its second orchestral program are scheduled on consecutive days, starting Thursday at 4:15 P.M. with an imaginative program devoted to a Rossini sonata for the unexpected foursome of two violins, cello and double bass, the premiere of "Litany of Sins," commissioned by St.
Luke's from Anthony Davis, and another novelty, the Nonet in F major by Ludwig Spohr.


Fighting Stalls Opening of Sarajevo Airport
Heavy fighting around Sarajevo today forced the United Nations command here to suspend efforts to reopen the city's airport for the airlift needed to bring food, medicine and other desperately needed supplies to an estimated 400,000 citizens.
After an 11-week siege of the city by Serbian nationalist forces, hopes for an end to weeks of growing deprivation were pinned to an early start of the airlift.
Many here fear that without relief supplies starvation will set in and hospitals and other essential services may cease to function altogether.


Contemporary Spanish Dance: New Voices, and No Castanets
Flamenco, Picasso and Almodovar are familiar words to the American public these days, but who would have imagined modern dance as next on the Iberian export list?
While Spain's Olympic Arts Festival and Expo '92 were busy scouting foreign talent, festival directors in the United States were doing some recruiting of their own.
The international dance community is small and tightly knit, and as Spanish contemporary dance companies began to appear on the European festival circuit, word spread that something exciting was happening south of the Pyrenees.
As a result, four such troupes will perform works that feature strikingly individual statements and a distinctly Spanish flavor at Jacob's Pillow in the Berkshires and the American Dance Festival in Durham, N. C., beginning this week.


Price Wars Are Not Good For Profits
All across America last week, money managers typed lower numbers into the spreadsheets on their personal computers and concluded the personal computer industry is in trouble.
When the smoke had cleared, Compaq Computer had lost 13 percent of its market value, Apple was down 18 percent, Dell had lost 33 percent and AST Research had shed 17 percent.
The market value of the four had dropped by $1.9 billion in the week.


BOSNIAN SURVIVORS RECOUNT BRUTALITY AND MASS SLAYINGS
Toward dusk last Sunday, a bus carrying 56 Muslim Slav villagers being held hostage by Serbian nationalist troops was halted on a mountainous country road about 10 miles north of Sarajevo.
The hostages, men between 17 and 63 years old, were told that the bus's radiator had boiled over and that they should lie face-down on the floor while water was fetched from a stream.


Yankees Take Control When Sutcliffe Couldn't
That the Yankees have been struggling to record victories and score runs is no mystery.
That this 14-game trip could bury them is also no secret.
That they would accept any mistakes and gifts from the Orioles is also not a revelation.
So when Baltimore displayed its generosity tonight, the greedy Yankees grabbed anything for free and sprinted to a 9-5 victory at Oriole Park at Camden Yards.
Three runs scored after Baltimore starter Rick Sutcliffe walked batters, and a crippling three-run inning was fueled by a Sutcliffe throwing error.
Three runners also scampered home off the sizzling bat of Mel Hall.


Alaska Flights To the Far East
Alaska Airlines began its second season of service from Anchorage to the Russian Far East this month with an expanded schedule of tours.
The program started 10 days earlier than last summer and the airline is extending it by a month to Sept. 25.
Seven tours, compared with three last year, are available, and China and the Russian port of Vladivostok, have been added.
There are three flights a week nonstop from Anchorage to Magadan with continuing service to Khabarovsk. (One-stop service is offered from Seattle.) The lowest round-trip fares, requiring a 21-day advance purchase, are $1,100 a person, Anchorage to Magadan, and $1,500, Anchorage to Khabarovsk.
Magadan is a city of about 150,000 people on the Sea of Okhotsk, about 2,000 miles west of Anchorage.
Flight time between the two cities is about four hours.
Khabarovsk, a commercial center and river port of 700,000 people, is 1,000 miles south of Magadan, near the Chinese border.
The seven tour packages to the region are from 5 to 15 nights.
Three include trips to Beijing or Harbin, China.
Prices from Anchorage start at $1,418 a person, in double occupancy, for a five-night trip to Magadan and Khabarovsk, including round-trip air fare, hotel, three meals a day, sightseeing and assistance in obtaining documentation.
The top price is $2,949 for 15 nights, visiting Vladivostok, Harbin and Beijing as well as Magadan and Khabarovsk.


Deals and Discounts
KIDS' TICKETS TO BELGIUM Sabena Belgian World Airlines has introduced a "Children Unlimited" campaign providing a free companion ticket for a child 15 or younger with the purchase of a ticket at the advance purchase excursion (APEX) fare or higher.
The program is good from New York, Chicago or Boston to Brussels and more than 30 other European cities served by connecting flights, including Berlin, Budapest, Rome and Zurich. (For Swiss and German cities, the program is limited to children 11 and under.) The lowest qualifying fare from New York to Brussels, the APEX, is $1,071, and must be purchased 21 days in advance.
Travel must begin in the United States in July or August and be completed by Sept. 7.
Call (800) 955-2000.


Profiles; Nine Who Are Leaving Capitol Hill
The number of Congressmen retiring this year in New York and New Jersey -- there have been no retirements in Connecticut -- increased by two last week when Frank Horton of Rochester and Henry Nowak of Buffalo announced that they were leaving.
Under a 1979 statute, Mr.
Horton and several other Congressmen who give up their seats before the end of this year can keep leftover campaign contributions.
Here are the retiring Congressmen and how much they are eligible to keep.
NEW YORK Robert J. Mrazek Democrat, 46, District 3 Elected: 1982
Committees: Appropriations
Reputation: Entered politics as an outspoken liberal insurgent but became an insider on Capital Hill.
Is known for his self-deprecating sense of humor.
Reasons for Leaving: Passed up a House re-election campaign to run for the Senate; dropped out of the Senate race after it was reported that he had 920 bank overdrafts.
Future Plans: Undecided.
Parting Thoughts: "I understand the people are mad. And they have every right to be. People perceive the failure of Congress to address the health- care crisis, and that we have ignored the deficit. They know we have done nothing to create jobs."
Campaign Funds Available: Not eligible.
Frank Horton Republican, District 29 Finger Lakes and East Rochester Elected: 1961
Committees: Government Operations (ranking minority member), Post Office and Civil Service.
Reputation: Dean of the State's congressional delegation, who had an important role in fostering legislative oversight of the Federal Government.
Reasons for Leaving: Redistricting.
Campaign Funds Available: Eligible to keep about $158,000.
Raymond J. McGrath Republican, District 5 Long Island Elected: 1980
Committees: Ways and Means.
Reputation: Practical minded moderate who used his position on Ways and Means to benefit his district and the state.
Reasons for Leaving: Spend more time with his wife and family.
Parting Thoughts: If you look at the announced retirees, you will see that the middle ranks of Congress have been thinned out with a bulldozer.
These are the members most capable of leading and forging new policy.
We will be left with older members with pride of authorship in the status quo, and younger members without the experience to govern.
Henry Novack Democrat, District 33 Elected: 1974
Committees: Public Works and Transportation Science, Space and Technology.
Reputation: Used his seat on the Public Works Committee to secure several hundred million dollars that helped transform and revitalize Buffalo.
Reasons for Leaving: To give his successor a leg up in the Congressional ladder.
Campaign Funds Available: About $190,000, which he said he would donate to charity or to some political organization.
Matthew F. McHugh Democrat, District 28 Catskills and Finger Lakes Elected: 1974
Committees: Approporiations, Standards of Official Conduct, Select Committee on Children, Youth and Families.
Reputation: Respected on both sides of the aisle for his intellectual and personal integrity.
Reasons for Leaving: The continuing toll on his family and his frustration with the inability of Congress and the President to work together.
Parting Thoughts: The people and the politicians have this symbiotic relationship.
Politicians can't get too far out ahead.
But the politicians also have a responsibility to bring people along and to lift them above their parochial interests.
Campaign Funds Available: About $130,000, which he plans to use to pay campaign bills.
The rest will be donated to charity.
David O'B.
Martin Republican, District 26 Northern New York State Elected: 1980
Committees: Armed Services, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.
Reputation: Steady and solid member of the Armed Services Committee.
Campaign Funds Available: Not Eligible.
NEW JERSEY Bernard J. Dwyer Democrat, District 6 Middlesex County Elected: 1980
Committees: Appropriations, Budget
Reputation: Won Federal projects for his district including a bioscience center at Rutgers University and a waste-treatment complex in Edison.
Reasons for Leaving: Redistricting.
Parting Thoughts: I had been giving serious thought to not seeking re-election in 1992 for some months now.
A district in which nearly half of the residents would be new to me and I to them certainly helped finalize my decision.
Robert A. Roe Democrat, District 8 Essex and Passaic Counties Elected: 1969
Committees: Public Works and Transportation (Chairman), Select Committee on Aging.
Reputation: Old-style bread and butter politician, who rose through seniority.
Reasons for Leaving: Has been considering retiring since 1990 and wants to spend more time at home.
Parting Thoughts: I feel that I have given all that I can to the absolute best of my abilities.
Campaign Funds Available: Eligible to keep $547,596, which he said he would donate to chairty.
Frank J. Guarini Democrat, 67, District 14 Elected: 1978.
Committees: Budget; Ways and Means; Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control.
Reputation: An inconclastic Eastern establishment Democrat who boasts a finely tuned political radar.
Reasons for Leaving: Decided the time was right to resume private life.
Campaign Funds Available: $245,219, which he said will not be put to personal use.


Kirsten M. Glass Daren Anderson
Kirsten Margret Glass, a daughter of Louis Glass of Wynnewood, Pa., and Erlis Glass of Strafford, Pa., was married Friday in Bryn Mawr, Pa., to Daren Richard Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Anderson of Westhampton Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles Cary performed the ceremony at the Bryn Mawr Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Anderson, 23 years old, and her husband, 24, are cum laude graduates of Harvard University and medical students at Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Louis S. Glass Associates, urban planning consultants in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
Her mother is a professor of German at Rosemont College.


Deficit Misunderstood
To the Editor:
Martin Mayer declares in "Limit the Debt" (Op-Ed, June 10): "Tens of billions a year pour into Social Security as interest on Treasury bonds, the fund's only asset. These payments to Social Security are treated as income in the budget, reducing the published deficit." This is wrong on two counts.


Get OutOf Town
"I'M a genetic Republican trying to rebel against my chromosomes," Holly Hughes was saying at the reception after Karen Finley's performance at the Kitchen on West 19th Street last weekend.
Ms.
Finley and Ms.
Hughes were two of four performance artists whose applications for grants were denied by the National Endowment for the Arts two years ago, despite favorable recommendations by an advisory panel of artists.
A Federal judge ruled this month that the denial of the grants was unconstitutional.
Ms.
Hughes was a bit uncomfortable in the heat at the Kitchen.
Given the proper invitation, she would have dumped culture for a weekend of nature.
"My mother forced me to work for Nixon as a child," said the pixielike Ms.
Hughes, recalling her formative years in Saginaw, Mich.
"She dropped me off at Republican headquarters to stuff envelopes. It was like Republican day care. When I moved here I tried to work off the karma by waitressing at the Odessa coffee shop in the East Village."


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; A Revival for the Shakespeare Theater?
CONNECTICUT will soon select a private developer to revive the twice-failed American Shakespeare Festival Theater in Stratford as a nonprofit theater and May-to-October tourist destination.
Sixteen developers have voiced interest in making proposals, to be accompanied by $100,000 security payments, by the July 29 deadline.
The winner will be announced Sept. 1, although the sluggish economy raises doubts that there will be many proposals.


THE WORLD: Many Opinions, Few Facts; Why Would Moscow Want U.S. P.O.W.'s?
When evidence that American servicemen were detained in Soviet labor camps in the 1940's and 50's was turned over to a Senate committee last week by the Russians, and President Boris N. Yeltsin suggested that the practice may have extended into the Vietnam era, an obvious question was: For what purpose would Americans have been brought to the Soviet Union?
Some groups and relatives who monitor the missing say that if Moscow did obtain such servicemen from the North Vietnamese, it may have been to learn more about advanced American military technology.


Trying to Redress Imbalance of Power
THE First Pan-American Championships, which ended a week ago in Corpus Christi, Tex., shared features with the simultaneous Earth Summit in Rio De Janeiro: the North had the wealth and the power, and efforts were being made to redress the balance.
The American Contract Bridge League has nearly 200,000 members, and its players have won far more world titles than those of any other country.
In Central and South America there is no country with as many as 5,000 members.
Except for Brazil, which has a coterie of brilliant players, none of these countries has won a world title.


Virginia Ann Grace, Jeb Ball
Virginia Ann Grace, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Grace of Westport, Conn., was married there yesterday to John Eric Ball, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Ball of Westport.
The Rev.
Walter Orlowski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Luke's Church.
Mrs.
Ball, 27 years old, graduated from Merrimack College.
She is an account representative for the Xerox Corporation in New York.
Her father is the manager of contract marketing for Xerox in Stamford, Conn.


Technology; Moving the Common Blood Test Closer to the Patient
Driven to pare expenses in an era of soaring medical costs, hospitals and physicians are looking for equipment that saves on time, labor and money without harming patients.
One promising tool could well be handheld blood analyzers for critical-care use.
The analyzers are meant to bypass expensive and time-consuming in-house laboratories and deliver test results substantially faster.
That would allow doctors to make decisions more quickly and ultimately, doctors and hospital officials say, to lower health-care costs by freeing up beds in intensive-care units.


Look at New Methods Of Printmaking
As a resident of Nassau County and frequent visitor to the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn, I would like to react to Helen A. Harrison's strangely organized and unkind review  [ "Grouping Printmakers by Thematic Categories" ]  of the recent, most exciting exhibit "Graphics: The School of Paris and New York Pop to Post."
This show was on view from Feb. 10 to May 3.
Perhaps Ms.
Harrison cannot be faulted for the appearance of her review until April 26, just one week before the exhibition closed.
This was literally an eye-smashing show, attracting thousands of visitors who did not wait for the last-minute review to go to see it.
The Nassau County Museum gave Long Islanders, and numerous others, the opportunity to see how rapidly and momentously the processes of the art of printmaking today are changing with the unprecedented multiple new techniques that have developed.
Ms.
Harrison did indeed cover this point, along with acknowledging the attraction and the presence in the exhibition of impressive works of the outstanding artists of the day.


STATE DEPT. AIDE TO TESTIFY ON IRAQ
In a compromise with Congress, the Administration has decided to let a committee hear the testimony of a State Department official who warned his superiors in October 1989 of evidence that United States loan guarantees to Iraq had been diverted to weapons, including "nuclear related equipment."
The testimony by the official, Frank Lemay, a State Department legislative management officer, is a concession to the House Judiciary Committee made this week.
The White House denied a committee request earlier in the week to allow the testimony of two Presidential aides: C. Boyden Gray, the White House counsel, and Nicholas Rostow of the National Security Council.


The Elderly And Alcohol
"Drinking by Elderly Underreported"  [ May 31 ]  certainly is a valid description of this problem.
My 78-year-old husband's recent experience with doctors and a Long Island hospital who did not address his alcohol consumption is a perfect example of bad medical management on the part of the health-care profession.


On Sunday; Lunch Lesson: Heading Off Social Gaffes
The limousine left Massapequa, L.I., at 8:14 A.M.
The kids inside looked dazed, barely uttering a word all the way to Manhattan.
"They're exhausted from eighth-grade graduation," said a mother, Jean Lagano.
"Every day it's been a pool party at someone's house."
They tried to remember the last time they'd been to the city.
"I think a funeral in September," said Chris Sadlo.
It figured they were thinking of death.
For $125 apiece the four kids' mothers had signed them up for an all-day seminar at the Ritz-Carlton on manners.


Miami Lawsuit Seeks to Give Homeless a Legal Guarantee
When is a piece of cardboard a valued piece of personal property?
Napping in a public park a constitutional right?
American Civil Liberties Union lawyers, representing Miami's 6,000 homeless people, took the city to Federal court this week to try to force legal answers to these and other questions about the city's treatment of its homeless.
The lawsuit, filed in December 1988, names three homeless men as plaintiffs to represent the city's homeless population.
Lawyers for the legal group asserted that the city and the Miami police department had used local ordinances and state statutes to arrest homeless people arbitrarily and "harass, intimidate and dislocate" them at the behest of merchants and tourism officials.
The legal group says such arbitrary enforcement of the laws amounts to discrimination that is illegal and unconstitutional.


Caviar Set's Trash Expert
Amanda Burden: daughter of Babe Paley, member of the City Planning Commission, expert on garbage.
A recent graduate of Columbia University's master's program in urban planning, Ms.
Burden (above) was given her program's highest prize last month for her thesis on recycling: "Securing a Future for Recycling Processing: The Critical Length to Market Development."


Perot Investigated Bush, Washington Post Reports
After a bruising confrontation with Vice President George Bush over efforts to track down American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia, Ross Perot paid $10,000 to a Washington law firm in 1987 to help uncover information that might prove damaging to Mr.
Bush, The Washington Post reports in its Sunday issue.
The Post said its own investigation of Mr.
Perot's efforts turned up no evidence of improprieties by Mr.
Bush.
Nor did it find evidence that Mr.
Perot or any of his representatives engaged in anything improper in pursuit of their inquiries into Mr.
Bush.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Business View; Executives Are Lending Perot an Ear
On a vacation cruise off Alaska this month with the chief executives of four other large companies, John W. Teets, the chairman of the Dial Corporation, found that one topic came up over and over: Ross Perot.
The conversations were a small but perhaps telling indication that if President Bush believes he can count on support from the corporate executive suite, a solid Republican redoubt if ever there was one, he may be in for a rude surprise.


Conversations/Marina Solodkina; A Russian Immigrant Learns The Maze of Israeli Democracy
Marina Solodkina remembers her arrival in Israel from Moscow last year with the vividness of a rocket's red glare.
In fact, her first memory of her new country
was
a rocket's glare.
Fresh off the plane one late January night during the Gulf War, she and her family were heading toward Jerusalem when Iraq sent Scud missiles screaming this way.
"We saw two rocket attacks from our van as we went from the airport to Jerusalem," Ms.
Solodkina said.
"I remember the driver saying that we'd better get to Jerusalem faster, that we'd be safer here."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
127.10
126.70
138.90
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5750
1.5770
1.8020
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1970
1.1901
1.1433
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8585
1.8515
1.6265
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$340.70
$342.50
$365.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Schools, Losing State Aid, Ponder Sharing Costs
SEVERE losses in state aid to education, coupled with growing concerns over the future of local school districts, are prompting studies to explore reorganizing and consolidating districts.
The State Education Department issued a study a few months ago on reorganizing, including consolidation and sharing administrative and instructional services.
Long Island is one of six regional groups in the two-phase study, which is in the first stage of examining alternatives in districts with minimum enrollments of 1,200, 2,500 and 5,000.


Drug Is Approved to Treat Prostate Patients
The Food and Drug Administration has approved the marketing of a new drug for treatment of men who have symptom's from enlarged prostate glands, its manufacturer, Merck &amp; Company of Rahway, N.J., said yesterday.
The approval for the drug, Proscar, came late Friday night, a spokesman for Merck said.
Many men using the drug may be able to postpone or avoid surgery for the common ailment.
The drug's generic name is finasteride.
It will be available in late July.


Details Given On Suspects In Abduction
As the mystery of the whereabouts of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive who disappeared nearly two months ago, deepened yesterday, new details emerged about a former Exxon security guard and his wife who were arrested Friday on charges of kidnapping.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and New Jersey law-enforcement agencies maintained a wall of silence about where the 57-year-old president of Exxon International might be, or whether he had survived the ordeal that began outside his home in Morris Township, N.J., the morning of April 29.


A Fight for Survival And That's About All
SO there you have it.
Snookered again.
Just when we thought the big boys would give us a clear-cut decision, a resolution, at the least a moral lesson, we are delivered another slice of sport as everyday life.
Doesn't anyone here believe in conflict, tension, three acts, anymore?
The characters were fine.
Evander (Real Deal) Holyfield is a 29-year-old dogged craftsman with a Batman body.
Larry (Easton Assassin) Holmes is a 42-year-old crafty dog with the body of a bouncer who has decided to make it on personality rather than intimidation.
Sometime early in their title match at Caesars Palace Friday night they had simultaneous epiphanies: There is no way I can win this fight convincingly without taking the terrible risk of being hurt, which would not be good for future business.


The Smoke-Filled Ways of Alitalia
To the Editor:
Having disembarked at John F. Kennedy International Airport from Alitalia flight 610 out of Rome on Thursday, June 4, I was astonished to read your June 7 article "Will Alitalia Survive Competition American-Style?" The article proclaimed the success of the airline under Giovanni Bisignani; even more astonishing was to read that Mr.
Bisignani is concerned about fitness and health.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison 140,000
687 Amboy Avenue
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; enclosed porches, eat-in-kitchen, close to shopping; taxes $2,742.
Fair Lawn 168,000
11-11 Fifth Street
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, 1-car garage, updated furnace and electric; taxes $3,540.
Freehold Township 160,000
181 Derby Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, c/a, patio; taxes $3,022.
Hillsborough 181,000
160 Oxford Place
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, remodeled kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,537.
Middletown 152,000
127 Irwin Place
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; central air-conditioning, full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,860.
Piscataway 135,000
910 Mohill Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 16-year-old ranch; fireplace, central air-conditioning, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,545.
OTHER AREAS Monroe, Conn. 150,000  70 Turkey Roost Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 27-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, skylights, new furnace, 1 acre; taxes $2,408.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 315,000  43 Florence Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old contemporary; fireplace, country eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $6,705.
East Williston, L.I. 325,000
99 High Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.


Justices Clear the Way for an Olympic Trial
In a frantic day of appeals and counterappeals, the Supreme Court yesterday granted Butch Reynolds the right to run in the 400-meter competition of the United States Olympic track and field trials even though he was suspended for failing a drug test.
The race will be held today.


Merchants vs. Blind Vendors: A Battle Over Feeding Rights
SUNLIGHT poured through the windows of the State Department of Labor's employee cafeteria here while a steady stream of state workers bearing plastic trays picked up a sandwich here, a soft drink there.
At a row of tables near the windows, solitary diners removed cellophane-wrapped lunches from brown paper bags.
In the center of the room, clusters of employees, their meals finished, chatted or played card games to fill the time before they would have to return to their desks.


Dr. Alvin Knudson Is Dead at 81; Improved Treatment for Veterans
Dr.
Alvin B. C. Knudson, who created and ran the Veterans Administration programs that restored hundreds of thousands of American soldiers injured in World War II, Korea and Vietnam to useful lives, died on Thursday at Fairfax Hospital in Fairfax, Va.
He was 81 years old and lived in Fairfax Station.
He died of cardiopulmonary failure, his family said.


WHERE THE SHINING PATH LEADS
In some measure, United States foreign policy bears some responsibility for the rise of Shining Path and its network of international support.


Nancy Reid Gibbs and Waits May 3d
Nancy Reid Gibbs, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Gibbs of New York, was married yesterday in Chautauqua, N.Y., to Waits May 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
May of Los Alamos, N.M.
The Rev.
Dr.
Ross Mackenzie, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of the Good Shepherd.
Ms.
Gibbs, who is 32 and will retain her name, is a senior editor at Time magazine in New York.
She graduated from Yale University, summa cum laude, and from Oxford University.
Her father, who is retired, was the associate national director of the Boys' Clubs of America.
Her mother, Janet Gibbs, is the director of guidance at Friends Seminary in New York.


Principals Sharing Power to Reshape Education
Like many young teachers, Cheryl Malter dreamed about all she might do in the classroom if only she had more power and more money.
She wanted to buy a kiln so her students could mold pottery.


The Grass Isn't Too High, but the Stakes Are
Wimbledon, the big green one, the only Grand Slam played on a living surface that inspires and respires and sometimes expires along with the players who dare to tread on it, is just two days away, and an anxious Martina Navratilova is testing the lawn.
She's squinting like a jeweler searching for that perfect emerald, a golfer casing out the intangible undulations of the perfect putt.
Navratilova is no gardener, but she knows magic-carpet quality grass when she sees it.
This year marks the 20th anniversary of a Wimbledon career that has brought her a record nine titles on the elusive surface that's all the more prestigious for being almost obsolete.
The current crop, barely 10 months old, irrigated by Friday's deluge and pristine for the moment, makes her smile.


At the Guggenheim, Bigger May Be Better
Even while closed for more than two years of renovation, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum has been the subject of unceasing speculation -- so sweeping are the changes its director, Thomas Krens, has been proposing since 1988, when he took over this revered institution of 20th-century art on upper Fifth Avenue.
A litany has evolved: Mr.
Krens will shortchange New York by dispersing its artistic treasures throughout branches of the Guggenheim.
He is obsessed with deal-making and with courting high-profile businessmen, collectors, curators and politicians who can help him pull off those deals.
The museum has become more about money, power and prestige than about art.


William Tooley, 66, Leader in Care of Newborns
Dr.
William H. Tooley, a leading pediatrician and neonatologist who developed a procedure that has saved the lives of more than 100,000 infants, died on Wednesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 66 years old.
He died after a long illness, a spokesman for the family said.


Ireland With and Without Blarney
Professional story tellers might easily argue that the best tale to come out of Ireland in years is that of the bishop who fathered a love child with an Irish-American woman who turns out to be enthusiastically, even liltingly confessional in this age of baring scars of the heart to public view.
At its factual core, it's a great human story that might expose all sorts of hidden hypocrisies and needs, both in America and in Ireland, but I'm betting that no movie writer touches it with a 10-foot shepherd's crook.
For one thing, it thus far lacks a happy ending to provide easy access to the rising strings, the final panning of the grand sunset and other treacle-risking touches that mass American audiences seem to be increasingly adapting to, rather as they have come to need the Mafia cliches of movie making about another ethnic group that's even more cinematically benighted than the Irish.


The Guggenheim Is Back


Public &amp; Private; Veto Proof
My recollection of first registering to vote is that the process consisted of a young woman, a gymnasium and a clipboard.
I could have told her my name was Vivien Leigh and she wouldn't have known the difference unless she'd seen "Gone With the Wind."
Voter registration, like solid waste management and zoning codes, is one of those issues that has a proven effect on people.
ZZZzzzzzzz.
But last week the issue presented itself in a fashion that made me think about the ways in which we really count ourselves Americans.
And it presented itself in legislation so obvious and so right that George Bush could only deal with it in one way.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
DOCTOR DE SOTO GOES TO AFRICA.
Written and illustrated by William Steig.
Michael di Capua/HarperCollins. $15. (Ages 3 and up) The rodent dentist, hero of a previous tale about the perils of a cross-species practice, returns with his brave and loyal wife, Deborah, to assist an elephant in West Africa who has a terrible toothache.
The good doctor himself is kidnapped by a cranky rhesus monkey, but he survives and supervises his wife as she performs expert molar repair.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House Race; WHITE HOUSE RACE AT EMOTIONAL PEAK MANY WEEKS EARLY
As if the general election were weeks and not four months away, President Bush, Gov.
Bill Clinton and Ross Perot today engaged in the sort of full-blown campaigning that is usually reserved for the home stretch.
Mr.
Bush, echoing the theme Vice President Dan Quayle has been sounding lately to woo conservatives, criticized "liberal elitists" in a speech in Los Angeles.
Then he ventured here, into Mr.
Perot's backyard, where in a reference to the Texas businessman he told the state Republican Convention that there was "too much at stake, as we say here, to buy a pig in a poke."


Business Diary/June 14-19
INTERNATIONAL Boris Yeltsin, Dove and Democrat, Comes to Call on Washington


Target: Declinism
PESSIMIST-BASHING is again with us.
When people feel irritable about the lack of bounce in the economic rebound; when words like
malaise
and phrases like
triple dip
and
creeping decrepitude
are bruited about -- the moment is ripe for yeasayers to pop the pessimists.
As Republicans in 1936 charged that the New Deal had failed to lift the nation out of sustained Depression, supporters of F.D.R. called them
disciples of despair
floundering in a
fountain of fear
.
As Republicans in 1952 blazed away at Harry Truman's "mess in Washington," Democrats -- led, I think, by Adlai Stevenson -- derided the
prophets of gloom and doom
.


Notes With Pleasure
Our Endangered Palates
Peter Mayle alerts us to the loss of one of life's most durable pleasures: the pungent flavors of real (as opposed to overprocessed) cuisines.
This is from "Acquired Tastes" (Bantam).


POSTINGS: Hotel Renovation; New Life for Old Sutton
For nearly 10 years the Sutton Hotel on East 56th Street, near First Avenue, has stood empty as one new owner after another failed in efforts to revive it.
The newest attempt, by a group of Hong Kong investors, is a plan to turn the 74-year-old building into a long-term residence hotel where the minimum stay will be 30 days.
The developer is Alan B. Friedberg of Manhattan.


Krone Is Nearing a First As Her Victories Mount
Julie Krone, who has already won riding championships at Monmouth Park, the Meadowlands and Gulfstream Park, is turning into the homestretch for the big one.
With one month to go, she is the leading jockey at Belmont Park and, almost race by race, is drawing nearer to some racing history.
Unless she fades in the stretch, she will become the first female jockey to win a riding championship in New York.


Bonni Nieschawer, William Smith
BONNI ANN NIESCHAWER rarely notices that William Smith, is 22 years older than she is, except when they're together on a dance floor.
"He knows the Lindy, the Double Lindy, the fox trot, the cha-cha," she said, as if speaking of impossible algebra problems.
"I had to take lessons!"
But others notice their age difference all the time.
"When some people meet us, it's like they're watching a tennis match," said Mr.
Smith, who is 52 years old.
"Their eyes go from me, to her, to me, to her. It's like they're watching McEnroe and Connors. We know they're wondering about us.


Inquiry Into Sicilian Slaying Looks for Mafia Link to Colombia Drug Cartel
A month after the killing of Italy's top Mafia-buster, investigators are trying to unravel many mysteries.
Possibly the most worrisome is whether the assassination was linked to his inquiries into a new and largely unchronicled drive by the Sicilian Mafia and Colombian drug dealers to flood Europe with cocaine and thus expand beyond what narcotics agents call the saturated market of the United States.
Initially, the slaying of the Mafia investigator, Giovanni Falcone, on a highway outside Palermo was attributed to a vendetta against him for bringing over 300 mafiosi to justice in the 1980's, and many still see this as the prime motive.
Another goal was assumed to be preventing Mr.
Falcone from taking a new job at the head of an anti-Mafia superagency this year.


Rachel Sadler, Axel Granholm
Rachel Aleth Sadler, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert W. Sadler of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Axel Victor Granholm, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Granholm of Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peregrine L. Murphy conducted the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Mrs.
Granholm, 33 years old, is the curator of family programs at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and has a master's degree from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is a professor of comparative religion at Sarah Lawrence in Bronxville.


For the Rich in the 80's Cost of Giving Went Up
To the Editor:
Your May 24 discussion of a study by three Treasury Department economists who found a fall in average charitable giving by high-income Americans does not include one of the study's most fascinating findings.
The authors show that if one assumes that the 1979 patterns of charitable giving among the rich persisted into the 1980's, one could predict almost exactly the decline in the 80's.


Polish Panel Rules Police-File Disclosures Illegal
After stepping into the explosive process of naming Communist informers this month, Poland on Friday pulled back from any further disclosures when the country's constitutional tribunal declared the distribution of the secret police files illegal.
The move reversed a resolution passed by Parliament in late May at an evening session attended by barely half the chamber's deputies.


Summer Pudding and Other Desserts
PERHAPS I am a chauvinist, but English desserts (or puddings as we call them) have always been among my favorites.
Recently I spent a week in London where I feasted on berries: strawberries heaped in a bowl and served with thick yellowish Devonshire cream, raspberries made into a glistening sauce for poached nectarines that had tender white flesh and, my all time favorite, summer pudding.


Update; Charges of Mail Fraud Add to House Problems
Five months after the ultra-contemporary house Steven and Sherri West were building in the North Shore enclave of Mill Neck, L.I., burned to the ground in a spectacular fire, arson investigators in Nassau County are still slogging through a long list of potential suspects.
But new problems have arisen for the Wests, who were involved in disputes with architects, building suppliers, contractors, landscapers, neighbors and village officials at the time of the fire.


Sports of The Times; Will the 17th Be a Beauty Or a Beast?
IF golf holes were people, the 17th at Pebble Beach would be both the Beauty and the Beast of the United States Open.
With a green shaped like a mermaid taking a nap, the 209-yard par-3 is perched alongside the yachts and sailboats anchored near the huge rocks of Stillwater Cove and slightly above Carmel Bay's shore.
But unless you hit a perfect tee shot through the wind, your ball will disappear into rough as shaggy as a lion's mane, splat into one of seven surrounding bunkers or bounce into the rocks, if not into the soft surf.


Miss Piggy Snares Her Man at Last
Even before the avalanche of negative reviews, "Housesitter" had a bad reputation.
Friends who had seen the film early described it in terms that ranged from the kindly "It's sort of dull" to the more pointed "If you're going to write about it, why don't you talk about the decline of comedy?" So the best way to say this is just to spit it out: I loved it.
Steve Martin is at his best as a straitlaced architect driven to loony behavior by love.
Goldie Hawn is blithely likable as the scatterbrain who invades his house and his life.
And the director Frank Oz -- whose films include the hilarious "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels" and the dud "What About Bob?" but who will forever be beloved as the voice of Miss Piggy -- has turned a totally nonsensical story into a charmingly nonsensical comedy.


Adults Snap Up A Sad Fairy Tale
At the Fleet Street branch of Books, Etc., a London chain, the first 70 copies of "Diana: Her True Story" sold within the first hour last week.
"If I had the stock, I could have sold another 400 since then," said the manager.
Excerpted in London newspapers and American magazines, the book sympathetically pictures Diana, Princess of Wales, as nearly suicidal in a loveless marriage to an aloof Prince Charles.


Negro Leaguers Deserve Pension
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson certainly has it right ("Here's a Soda for Buck Leonard," The Times, June 1).
The inclusion of the greats of the Negro Leagues in the Hall of Fame at Cooperstown bestows on these players, and also on their teams and teammates, a much too long delayed recognition of their contribution to the game.
However, it is not enough.
The major league clubs and the players' association should establish a fund to provide pensions to the surviving veterans of the Negro Leagues.
These pensions should not be just for the stars but for all the players.
The amount of the pension could be based on the number of seasons played.
WALTER J. NELSON Middlebury, Vt.


The Total Picture At Cal Arts
To the Editor:
I enjoyed the article on Sue Williams, an artist whose work I've admired  [ "An Angry Young Woman Draws a Bead on Men," May 24 ] .
But, as a student at Cal Arts at the same time as Ms.
Williams, I was disturbed by her remarks that the school was "a man's world" and that it "largely ignored" painting.


Trying On Used Fantasies
Since the sun has become a woman's enemy, high noon on a perfect Sunday in Sag Harbor is time to shop.
"I won't set foot on the beach until the sun is almost down," said Lisa Ryall, an actress and model who summers nearby.
Until then, she and other pale-skinned women in big-brimmed straw hats waft along the village's curving main street, poking into antiques and book stores and, inevitably, into the scented air of a vintage-and-new-clothing store called At Havens House, which has just started its second season.


Slice of Life


Gazebos, Slumbering Lions and Seven-Foot-Tall Cranes
Diana is back in gardens across America.
The goddess of the hunt stands tall among the urns, fountains and sleeping lions that proliferated in stone and bronze on both sides of the Atlantic between the Civil War and World War II.
"Clearly, gardens are on everybody's mind right now," David Revere MacFadden, the decorative-arts curator at the Cooper-Hewitt, said after the Manhattan museum's first seminar on garden ornaments last month.
"The garden is the leitmotif of the 90's. It's personal, private, and where you work cooperatively with nature."


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday in the Evening Hours column of Styles of the Times misstated the role of Beth Straus in the donation of the new children's maze at the New York Botanical Garden.
The maze was donated by friends of Mrs.
Straus in honor of her 75th birthday; she was not the donor.


Profiles; Nine Who Are Leaving Capitol Hill
The number of Congressmen retiring this year in New York and New Jersey -- there have been no retirements in Connecticut -- increased by two last week when Frank Horton of Rochester and Henry Nowak of Buffalo announced that they were leaving.
Under a 1979 statute, Mr.
Horton and several other Congressmen who give up their seats before the end of this year can keep leftover campaign contributions.
Here are the retiring Congressmen and how much they are eligible to keep.
NEW YORK Robert J. Mrazek Democrat, 46, District 3 Elected: 1982
Committees: Appropriations
Reputation: Entered politics as an outspoken liberal insurgent but became an insider on Capital Hill.
Is known for his self-deprecating sense of humor.
Reasons for Leaving: Passed up a House re-election campaign to run for the Senate; dropped out of the Senate race after it was reported that he had 920 bank overdrafts.
Future Plans: Undecided.
Parting Thoughts: "I understand the people are mad. And they have every right to be. People perceive the failure of Congress to address the health- care crisis, and that we have ignored the deficit. They know we have done nothing to create jobs."
Campaign Funds Available: Not eligible.
Frank Horton Republican, District 29 Finger Lakes and East Rochester Elected: 1961
Committees: Government Operations (ranking minority member), Post Office and Civil Service.
Reputation: Dean of the State's congressional delegation, who had an important role in fostering legislative oversight of the Federal Government.
Reasons for Leaving: Redistricting.
Campaign Funds Available: Eligible to keep about $158,000.
Raymond J. McGrath Republican, District 5 Long Island Elected: 1980
Committees: Ways and Means.
Reputation: Practical minded moderate who used his position on Ways and Means to benefit his district and the state.
Reasons for Leaving: Spend more time with his wife and family.
Parting Thoughts: If you look at the announced retirees, you will see that the middle ranks of Congress have been thinned out with a bulldozer.
These are the members most capable of leading and forging new policy.
We will be left with older members with pride of authorship in the status quo, and younger members without the experience to govern.
Henry Novack Democrat, District 33 Elected: 1974
Committees: Public Works and Transportation Science, Space and Technology.
Reputation: Used his seat on the Public Works Committee to secure several hundred million dollars that helped transform and revitalize Buffalo.
Reasons for Leaving: To give his successor a leg up in the Congressional ladder.
Campaign Funds Available: About $190,000, which he said he would donate to charity or to some political organization.
Matthew F. McHugh Democrat, District 28 Catskills and Finger Lakes Elected: 1974
Committees: Approporiations, Standards of Official Conduct, Select Committee on Children, Youth and Families.
Reputation: Respected on both sides of the aisle for his intellectual and personal integrity.
Reasons for Leaving: The continuing toll on his family and his frustration with the inability of Congress and the President to work together.
Parting Thoughts: The people and the politicians have this symbiotic relationship.
Politicians can't get too far out ahead.
But the politicians also have a responsibility to bring people along and to lift them above their parochial interests.
Campaign Funds Available: About $130,000, which he plans to use to pay campaign bills.
The rest will be donated to charity.
David O'B.
Martin Republican, District 26 Northern New York State Elected: 1980
Committees: Armed Services, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.
Reputation: Steady and solid member of the Armed Services Committee.
Campaign Funds Available: Not Eligible.
NEW JERSEY Bernard J. Dwyer Democrat, District 6 Middlesex County Elected: 1980
Committees: Appropriations, Budget
Reputation: Won Federal projects for his district including a bioscience center at Rutgers University and a waste-treatment complex in Edison.
Reasons for Leaving: Redistricting.
Parting Thoughts: I had been giving serious thought to not seeking re-election in 1992 for some months now.
A district in which nearly half of the residents would be new to me and I to them certainly helped finalize my decision.
Robert A. Roe Democrat, District 8 Essex and Passaic Counties Elected: 1969
Committees: Public Works and Transportation (Chairman), Select Committee on Aging.
Reputation: Old-style bread and butter politician, who rose through seniority.
Reasons for Leaving: Has been considering retiring since 1990 and wants to spend more time at home.
Parting Thoughts: I feel that I have given all that I can to the absolute best of my abilities.
Campaign Funds Available: Eligible to keep $547,596, which he said he would donate to chairty.
Frank J. Guarini Democrat, 67, District 14 Elected: 1978.
Committees: Budget; Ways and Means; Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control.
Reputation: An inconclastic Eastern establishment Democrat who boasts a finely tuned political radar.
Reasons for Leaving: Decided the time was right to resume private life.
Campaign Funds Available: $245,219, which he said will not be put to personal use.


At Work on Electric Boxes Between the Ceiling Joists
LARGE-BLADED ceiling or paddle fans are easy to connect to existing ceiling wiring like that of an overhead light.
But to comply with electric codes in many communities, the electrical box containing the wiring, and to which most fans are attached, has to be a special kind.
Using a code-approved box makes a fan less likely to fall from the ceiling.
Unfortunately, installing such a box to replace an existing unapproved box usually makes the job of installing a fan more difficult.


Alerts on Bolivia And Tanzania
Although no foreign tourists have been injured or targeted in Bolivia, American visitors are urged to exercise caution and to avoid areas of La Paz and other cities where demonstrations are in progress.
A State Department advisory, dated June 5, also warned of the presence of cholera in almost all parts of the country.
It advised visitors to drink only bottled water and beverages and to insure that food is well cooked and fruit peeled.


A User's Guide to the Foxwoods Casino
SOME 200 miles northeast of the gambling capital of the East Coast, as the sea gull flies, the Foxwoods casino is clearly an offspring of Atlantic City, but with quite a few of its own twists.
Although Connecticut's reaction has been mixed over the advent of legal blackjack, craps, poker and roulette, people hungry for gambling flock to Ledyard with the hopes and assurance of those traveling to Atlantic City or Las Vegas.


Miami Lawsuit Seeks to Give Homeless a Legal Guarantee
When is a piece of cardboard a valued piece of personal property?
Napping in a public park a constitutional right?
American Civil Liberties Union lawyers, representing Miami's 6,000 homeless people, took the city to Federal court this week to try to force legal answers to these and other questions about the city's treatment of its homeless.
The lawsuit, filed in December 1988, names three homeless men as plaintiffs to represent the city's homeless population.
Lawyers for the legal group asserted that the city and the Miami police department had used local ordinances and state statutes to arrest homeless people arbitrarily and "harass, intimidate and dislocate" them at the behest of merchants and tourism officials.
The legal group says such arbitrary enforcement of the laws amounts to discrimination that is illegal and unconstitutional.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
OUR COUNTRY, THE PLANET Forging a Partnership for Survival.
By Shridath Ramphal.
Introduction by Seymour Topping.
Island, cloth, $32; paper, $15.


The Executive Life; A White House Dinner: The Thrill of a Lifetime
"To go to a White House dinner and to sit next to someone who I don't know and who is there because they are a friend of Mrs. Bush, or a famous movie star or someone who gave 8 trillion dollars to the Republican Party is not my idea of fun."
--SENATOR WARREN B. RUDMAN, Republican of New Hampshire, who has turned down seven White House dinner invitations.


STATE DEPT. AIDE TO TESTIFY ON IRAQ
In a compromise with Congress, the Administration has decided to let a committee hear the testimony of a State Department official who warned his superiors in October 1989 of evidence that United States loan guarantees to Iraq had been diverted to weapons, including "nuclear related equipment."
The testimony by the official, Frank Lemay, a State Department legislative management officer, is a concession to the House Judiciary Committee made this week.
The White House denied a committee request earlier in the week to allow the testimony of two Presidential aides: C. Boyden Gray, the White House counsel, and Nicholas Rostow of the National Security Council.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended June 6  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 600,000
164 Perry Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, 3-story house converted from a stable; dining area, 14-ft. ceilings, terrace, 1,800-sq.-ft. of commercial space on the ground floor, 20- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $4,500 (Broker: Kingman Associates)  Greenwich Village 685,000
37 West 12th Street  (Butterfield House)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,950-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, solarium, library, breakfast room; maintenance $1,739, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)  Murray Hill 193,500
251 East 32d Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, den, remodeled kitchen, south exposure; maintenance $682, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  SoHo 945,000
85 Grand Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 4,500-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, 16-ft. ceilings, 12-ft. windows, hardwood floors, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,420, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Bascom &amp; Sears)  Upper East Side 575,000
1050 Park Avenue (86th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, dining area, west exposure, Central Park view; maintenance $1,200, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 217,500
252 West 85th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining room, windowed kitchen, original moldings and details, French doors, 2 exposures; maintenance $645, 48% tax-deductible (Brokers: Harrison Properties-Halstead Property Co.)  BRONX  City Island 200,000
60 Buckley Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Dutch colonial; dining room, fireplace, full basement, 1-car garage, private beach rights, 50- by 65-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Wakefield 232,000
4055 Hill Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary duplex unit; 2 bedrooms. 1 bath in simplex; finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,650 (Broker: Cancro Realty)
BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park 230,000
536 East 18th Street  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family Dutch colonial; dining room, den, full basement, 2-car garage, landmark district, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Wilk Real Estate)  Park Slope 350,000
500 Fourth Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, 4-story limestone; dining room, parlor floor, original moldings and details, south garden, 16.8- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  QUEENS  Bayside 260,000
36-17 212th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, wood-frame house; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Veteran Realty)  Kew Gardens 291,000
105 Mowbra Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, fireplace, den, cathedral-ceiling in living room, full basement, 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,400 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  STATEN ISLAND  Richmondtown 143,500
299 Clarke Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining room, fireplace, sun room, 1-car garage, 49- by 100-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Todt Hill 185,000
63 Potter Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ Schlott Realtors)


HAITI'S SPLIT SEEN AT A SWEARING-IN
His inaugural address was dedicated to the Haitian masses, but the new Prime Minister, Marc L. Bazin, spoke every word in French on Friday at the stifling official gathering of men in dark suits and perfumed women in white dresses.
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, for his swearing-in early last year, had the presidential sash placed on his shoulders by a peasant woman.
Throughout that day, the President, Haiti's first freely elected leader, gave his speeches in a proverb-laden Creole.


New Jersey Tourism And Its Slogans
Regarding the May 24 article on the state's efforts to promote tourism ("A New Strategy for Luring Vacationers"): New Jersey taxpayers may be interested to know about a serviceable slogan I offered at no charge seven or eight years ago ("Come to Life in New Jersey!") in light of the $5 million campaign we will be paying for soon that came up with the preferred tag, "New Jersey: You Should See Us Now!"
When I coined my idea (which I adapted from something I used to hear my golf partner exhorting himself with whenever he left his putts short, "Come to life!"), I sent it to the office of Governor Kean but received no reply.


Traffic Alert
Second Avenue between 96th and 68th streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M. today for the Second Avenue street fair.


Mail Says Roslyn, But Hospital Isn't
Sister Jean Pignone, the fund-raising nun of St.
Francis Hospital, was doing her good works in the Village of Flower Hill, not in the Village of Roslyn  [ "About Long Island: She's a Dynamo, but She Rustles Wheelchairs," May 24 ] .
The Village of Flower Hill was incorporated in 1931, and at 1,095 acres is more than two and a half times the size of the Village of Roslyn, with 381 acres and incorporated in 1932.


European Treaty Sponsors Have a Lot to Explain
Faced with a backlash from many Europeans suspicious of plans for still greater regional integration, the European Community has turned uncharacteristically penitent, admitting that it failed to keep the public informed.
The community has also belatedly recognized that many ordinary Europeans fear that Brussels-based bureaucrats are intent on assuming control of their lives.
And it has pledged to limit the community's "meddling" as part of a new campaign to "get closer" to citizens.


Jobless? Not Quite, but Might as Well Be
To the Editor:
If, as your Business Diary of May 31 notes, jobless claims have declined, it may be that many find themselves in a situation similar to mine.
In January 1991, my hours at work were cut from 35 (considered full time) to 17 1/2.
I have been unable to obtain either an additional part-time or a new full-time position.


JUNE 14-20/360,000 Summer Jobs; Congress Comes Through With $1.3 Billion for Cities
After a month of bargaining and political posturing, Congressional leaders and Administration negotiatiors took a step last week to respond to the Los Angeles riots.
They settled on an aid package for Los Angeles and more than 75 other cities with $1.3 billion in grants, loans and loan subsidies, and both the House and Senate quickly passed the compromise.
The assistance will provide 360,000 city teen-agers with summer jobs in the hope of lessening the possibility of disturbances in the coming hot months.


Commemorating A Church's History
ONE elegant way to raise money is by making commemorative coins.
In the past, several towns have issued their own commemoratives, but only occasionally does a group as small as a single congregation strike an issue, as the Episcopal cathedral in Honolulu has just done.
The Cathedral Church of St.
Andrew in Honolulu has an unusual history, so perhaps it's not so peculiar that it is now making commemorative coins.
It was 130 years ago that King Kamehameha IV donated the land for the church.
His Queen, Emma, was instrumental in raising money to buy the stones for the building.
The King died on Nov. 30, 1863, St.
Andrew's feast day, and four years later, his brother, King Kamehameha V, laid the cornerstone.


Daphne Norfleet, William Lowe
Daphne Beggs Norfleet, a daughter of Diane C. Blow of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Norwood Norfleet, was married yesterday to William Courtney Lowe, a son of Elizabeth C. de Lima of La Canada, Calif., and Robert F. Lowe Jr. of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Lowe, 25 years old, graduated from Rollins College and received a master's degree in elementary education from Manhattanville College.
She recently completed a teaching internship at Greenwich Academy.
Her father was a partner in Reynolds &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Michael Blow of Greenwich.


Something Victorian, Something New
IN an age of high technology, with computers appearing to take over from the human element at every turn, one might expect weddings to reflect the times.
But bridal couples of the 90's are looking to the 19th century and perhaps a more sentimental time.
Georgene Muller Lockwood of Newtown, author of "Your Victorian Wedding: A Modern Guide for the Romantic Bride," sees a parallel between the two eras, particularly in this country.
The period of Queen Victoria's reign, from 1837 to 1901, she recently told a group of engaged couples, was in many respects like modern times.
Technology was changing, the world was in turmoil, the Civil War raged and the population was expanding westward.
"It was more than an era. It was a style, a feeling, a set of ideals," she said.


Details Given On Suspects In Abduction
As the mystery of the whereabouts of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive who disappeared nearly two months ago, deepened yesterday, new details emerged about a former Exxon security guard and his wife who were arrested Friday on charges of kidnapping.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and New Jersey law-enforcement agencies maintained a wall of silence about where the 57-year-old president of Exxon International might be, or whether he had survived the ordeal that began outside his home in Morris Township, N.J., the morning of April 29.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a letter on page 12 of the Travel section today, headed "New York Taxis," omits a passage in some copies.
A corrected copy will appear in the Travel section next Sunday.


Ending a Production Bottleneck for a Promising Cancer Drug
Until recently, officials at the National Cancer Institute feared that a promising new drug extracted from the bark of the yew tree in the Northwest would have to be rationed, and that some desperate patients would end up literally begging for their lives.
Now, in a rapid reversal of fortune, the supply problem seems to be solved, and by a new source that, while still dependent on the yew, avoids killing it.
Furthermore, the drug, taxol, has a competitor hot on its heels that would be equally sparing of the yew trees.
If the two products fulfill the promise they have shown in initial studies, they could produce remissions in tens of thousands of cancer patients who have no other options.
And financial analysts foresee revenues climbing to at least several hundred million dollars for two drug companies, Bristol-Myers Squibb, which produces taxol, and Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, which makes its competitor, taxotere.


No Wonder the Public Is Angry
Congress passed an urban aid bill last week and no one cheered.
Cheer what?
It was a simplified, stripped-down measure to provide emergency loans to victims of the Los Angeles riots and the Chicago flood.
Yet even this limp
emergency
legislation took seven weeks to pass.
Rural legislators fought for a slice of the action.
Liberals fought to load the bill with social services.
Conservatives fought to spend less.
After all that wrangling, Congress settled for less than $1.5 billion in emergency loans plus summer youth job programs in 75 cities.
Given this slovenly performance, is it any wonder that voters look with interest to Ross Perot, who has no governmental record?


Three on Sicily
To the Editor: What a pleasure it was to read not one but three great articles on Sicily, a land I have only recently discovered but have come to love (April 19).
An October-November 1991 Elderhostel program in Palermo under the auspices of Trinity College was my introduction.
Our program was truly enriched, dealing with history, folklore, art, music, political and social situations.
Our trips around the island through exotic countryside, to archeological sites, Norman cathedrals, quaint villages and superb restaurants reinforced the lectures.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on June 14 about logging in the national forests misstated acreages involved in a bill before Congress.
The bill would perserve about two million acres of the Montana Rockies as wilderness and release about four millin acres to the Forest Service, which could open it to logging, mining, grazing and other uses.


Supreme Court Clears the Lane for Reynolds
Several hours after the second day of the United States Olympic track and field trials ended today, Butch Reynolds won his biggest victory in seeking to enter the 400-meter competition despite his two-year suspension for drug use.
The Supreme Court denied a request, without comment, by The Athletics Congress, track and field's national governing body, to set aside an earlier order by Associate Justice John Paul Stevens, who ruled that Reynolds could compete.


Father's Day Fireman: $90
Why do firemen wear yellow slickers?
To keep their pants dry, of course.
But everyone else wears them because they look so cool.
At Havens House has a polyvinyl-chloride-coated cotton knockoff by the Reliable Outerwear Company of New York, in black and yellow, in three-quarter length ($90) or ankle length ($100), with brass clasps and corduroy collar.


Ms. Ottaway, Robert Clark
Alexandra Hyde Ottaway, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Ottaway Jr. of New Paltz, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Edward Clark, a son of Mrs.
Francis C. Clark of Gastonia, N.C., and the late Mr.
Clark.
The Rev.
Cecily P. Broderick y Guerra performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Mrs.
Clark, 31 years old, teaches music at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in music education from New York University.
Her father is a senior vice president and a director of Dow Jones &amp; Company and the chairman of Ottaway Newspapers Inc., a subsidiary of Dow Jones.


Pickings Are Good But Hard To Choose
Anyone can list the first four picks, but then the National Basketball Association's 1992 college draft turns into an educated guessing game.
"A crapshoot," said Marty Blake, the league's college scout, referring not only to the probable selections but also to the question of how many of Wednesday's first-round picks will be around by, say, the 1996 Olympics.
And how many from this current crop might qualify as impact players who will contend in four years for Dream Team II?
Shaquille O'Neal, the 7-foot-1-inch Louisiana State center who will be taken by the Orlando Magic in the leadoff position, appears to be the only safe bet.
Charlotte, which is drafting second, is set to select Alonzo Mourning, the 6-10 Georgetown center.


Mayors in Both Parties Voice Frustration
As the United States Conference of Mayors gathers here for its annual meeting, both Republicans and Democrats are voicing frustration with what they see as the Federal Government's inability to act on even the most pressing matters.
But some hope that the need to gather support in a three-way Presidential race may help break the gridlock.
At a news conference to open the meeting on Friday, the organization's vice president, Mayor William J. Althaus of York, Pa., said the $1.3 billion urban aid bill passed by both houses of Congress on Thursday was "a fine down payment." But he added, "Until last night, seven weeks after the riots in Los Angeles, the Federal Government at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue had enacted nothing."


De Klerk's Visit to Massacre Site Brings New Eruption of Violence
President F. W. de Klerk ventured into this bitter black township today in a show of concern for victims of a massacre on Wednesday, but was chased away by angry residents, leaving behind an ugly mood that soon exploded into more violence.
About 90 minutes after Mr. de Klerk's motorcade fled before residents blaming him for the Wednesday violence, police officers fired assault rifles into a hostile crowd in a skirmish over the body of a man shot by the police a short time earlier.
The number of casualties was not immediately known.


Perot's 'Electronic Town Hall' Wouldn't Work; News Media's Wave
To the Editor:
"Perot's Appeal to the Mainstream Keeps Two-Party Politics Off Stride" (The Week in Review, June 7) asks "What is driving the Perot wave?" and proceeds to give us a lot of answers except the correct one: the news media, both press and electronic, have been driving the wave.


Discrimination: Then and Now
To the Sports Editor:
Commissioner Fay Vincent in "Toward an Even Playing Field for All," (The Times, May 17), asserts that former Negro league players harbor no bitterness against the major leagues.
This an absurd statement.
The commissioner's attitude is a disservice not only to players of the Negro Leagues who experienced overt racism but also to those blacks who are being discriminated against today by the major leagues upper management hiring practices.


Mothers Struggle to Manage On Their Own
INSIDE one of almost every five homes with children younger than 18 in Westchester and in the nation at large, a woman is raising her offspring alone, Census Bureau statistics show.
And although the numbers have decreased slightly in Westchester during the last decade -- there were 19,341 single mothers in the county in 1990 compared with 19,748 in 1980 -- their problems are a source of growing concern.


Where They Stand
BOND had always mistrusted short men.
They grew up from childhood with an inferiority complex.
All their lives, they would strive to be bigger than others who had teased them as a child.
Napoleon had been short.
And Hitler.
It was the short men that created all the trouble in the world. -- Ian Fleming in "Goldfinger"
The exact height of Ross Perot is still under debate.


On the Street; Plunging Waistlines
The fashion world is in an uproar over plunging hemlines, and teen-agers are defying gravity with baggy jeans that are falling down yet still -- somehow -- standing up.
The jeans are worn so low on the hips that they have spawned a new, hobbled way of walking.
This youthful rebellion uses the world of fashion to create a kind of reverse reality.
Baggy jeans began appearing last year on rap musicians.
They adapted the idea from prison inmates who were denied belts and suspenders, causing their trousers to slip low on the hip.
This season, falling-down jeans are reaching precarious extremes, exposing printed undershorts as they slip over the hips.
An older generation is left to recall images of Charlie Chaplin as seen in a distorting circus mirror.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Dogleg Right on the L.I.E.
THOSE who venture on the Long Island Expressway this summer may wish to clip this item.
State Transportation Department officials may wish to clip it, too.
When asked what sections of the service roads are now open, Mel Cooperman of the department said: "No one has ever compiled this. I'll have to get back to you."


Down to Earth
It's dirty business.
That's why one consummate gardener explains, "If you don't have scratches on your arms, blisters on your hands and dirt under your nails, it's a sign you're just an armchair variety." Here's how some serious earth-diggers put themselves together for their pleasurable but filthy work.


Death Penalty Should Be Abolished
If the people of New Jersey think that justice was blind at the Rodney King trial, they would shudder at what goes on at most death-penalty trials and demand that the Legislature abolish, not tighten, the state's capital-punishment law ("Death-Penalty Law Tightened," May 17).
Because the usual defendant in a capital case cannot afford an attorney, he or she is defended by a court-appointed lawyer who may be unskilled or uninterested or have insufficient time to work on the case.
In fact, the lawyer may have all three attributes as well as no money to conduct an investigation, pay expert witnesses or prepare a defense that will refute the prosecution's evidence, sometimes costing hundreds of thousands of dollars to gather.


At Work; Legal Victories for Gay Workers
Gay activism has come a long way since those raucous evenings in the 1950's when a pony dancer used to jump onto the bar at a gay hangout in San Francisco and lead the crowd in choruses of "God Bless Us Nellie Queens." As the gay community prepares to celebrate its annual "pride week," which will culminate next weekend with marches in several cities, gay rights advocates say the effects of years of organizing and educating are finally being seen, nowhere more clearly than in the workplace.
Not only are gay men and lesbians variously stepping, sidling and leaping out of the closet -- according to personal style and the degree of risk they perceive to themselves -- many are no longer willing to tolerate the anti-gay policies and behavior endemic in some workplaces.
"They are more willing to assert their rights than they ever were," said Paula L. Ettelbrick, legal director of the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, a New York-based group that does test-case litigation.


Mel McCombie, Harris Friedberg
Mary Eleanor McCombie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. McCombie of Mount Lebanon, Pa., was married there Thursday to Harris Andrew Friedberg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
I.
H.
Friedberg of Richmond.
The Rev.
Charles F. Brumbaugh performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Ms.
McCombie, who is 37 years old and known as Mel, is keeping her name.
She is an art instructor at Smith College in Northampton, Mass.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College, and received a master's degree in art history from Stanford University and a Ph.D. in art history from the University of Texas at Austin.
Her father is an independent chemical sales representative in Mount Lebanon.
Her mother, Eleanor B. McCombie, is a resource teacher for gifted students in the Mount Lebanon School District.


Perot Investigated Bush, Washington Post Reports
After a bruising confrontation with Vice President George Bush over efforts to track down American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia, Ross Perot paid $10,000 to a Washington law firm in 1987 to help uncover information that might prove damaging to Mr.
Bush, The Washington Post reports in its Sunday issue.
The Post said its own investigation of Mr.
Perot's efforts turned up no evidence of improprieties by Mr.
Bush.
Nor did it find evidence that Mr.
Perot or any of his representatives engaged in anything improper in pursuit of their inquiries into Mr.
Bush.


Sherri Lynn Pancer, Douglas R. Wolf
Sherri Lynn Pancer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Pancer of Metuchen, N.J., was married in Short Hills, N.J., last evening to Douglas Robert Wolf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Wolf of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Barry Friedman performed the ceremony at the Chanticler restaurant.


NO BEDFELLOWS
I don't believe I have ever read a funnier piece about a serious subject than DWF Susan G. Hauser's Hers column "No Bedfellows" (May 31).
She had me in stitches.
Any stand-up comic worth his or her salt could glean dozens of socko one-liners from this masterful and heartfelt swipe at, among other things, the 60's "sexual revolution."


SURFACING
WORD --
"Paleoliberals":
Old-fashioned Democrats (e.g., Walter Mondale).


Update; Judge Approves Settlement On Social Security Cases
A Federal judge in Manhattan has given final approval to a class-action settlement that will force the United States Social Security Administration to reopen tens of thousands of cases in which the Government denied benefits to people who said they could not work because of mental or physical disabilities.
The settlement, which was approved on Friday by Judge Leonard B. Sand ends a controversial cost-cutting practice that began under the Reagan Administration.


Perot's 'Electronic Town Hall' Wouldn't Work
To the Editor:
What evidence is there that Ross Perot's proposed "electronic town hall" (front page, June 6) could work?
Previous attempts to bring democracy into the electronic age have produced mixed, sometimes frightening results.


Avery Has Enough To Beat the Reds
Braves 2, Reds 1
ATLANTA, June 20 (AP) -- Steve Avery survived giving up 11 hits in seven and a third innings as the Atlanta Braves beat the Cincinnati Reds, 2-1, tonight.
The Braves, who have won 18 of their last 21 games, pulled to two and a half games of first-place Cincinnati in the National League West.
Avery (6-5), earning his fourth straight victory, struck out two and walked one before Kent Mercker relieved in the eighth and earned his first save.


At Work on Electric Boxes Between the Ceiling Joists
LARGE-BLADED ceiling or paddle fans are easy to connect to existing ceiling wiring like that of an overhead light.
But to comply with electric codes in many communities, the electrical box containing the wiring, and to which most fans are attached, has to be a special kind.
Using a code-approved box makes a fan less likely to fall from the ceiling.
Unfortunately, installing such a box to replace an existing unapproved box usually makes the job of installing a fan more difficult.


Spreading the Blame?
To the Editor:
I was relieved to see Michael Vincent Miller's review of "I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional," by Wendy Kaminer (May 17), and find I'm not alone in my negative reaction to the proliferation of self-help groups and confessed "recoverers." For several years I have forbidden myself to use the words "dysfunctional," "co-dependent," "in recovery" and the like.
While I'm happy for people whose lives are improved by self-help groups, I dislike this jargon, which is, as Mr.
Miller states, "the language of pseudoknowledge."


Making a Difference; Temperature Is Rising for Mr. Brennan
When Edward A. Brennan took the helm of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company in 1985, the company's future seemed solid.
But it turned shaky as the retailing environment changed, forcing Mr.
Brennan into the role of a cost cutter fighting a defensive battle.
In the last few years, Sears slipped from its position as No. 1 retailer in the United States to No. 3, behind Wal-Mart and K Mart.
And many shareholders have howled for the company's breakup to realize the value of its many parts, which include Allstate, Dean Witter and Coldwell Banker.


INSIDE
No Word on Exxon Official
The whereabouts of a missing Exxon executive remained a mystery; new details emerged about a former Exxon guard and his wife who were charged with kidnapping.
Page 25.
Peering Into the Mafia's Web
Investigators are wondering whether the killing of Italy's top Mafia buster was linked to an organized drive to flood Europe with cocaine.
Page 3.
Sharing Power in Schools
The principal is no longer king in some New York schools, where teams of teachers, school workers and parents set policy.
The experiment has yielded virtues and flaws.
Page 25.


Jill E. Asch, Jeffrey Levenson
Jill Elizabeth Asch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Asch of New York, was married last night to Jeffrey Levenson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Levenson of Atlanta.
Judge Milton Pollack, a judge of the United States District Court in New York, performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Levenson, 26 years old, is a lawyer in the Atlanta office of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
She graduated from Duke University and received a J.D. from Emory University.
Her father is an account supervisor with Gray, Seifert &amp; Company, a money management concern in New York.


Anne A. Ashbey, Louis Pierotti
Anne Avery Ashbey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William N. Ashbey of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to Louis Francis Pierotti, the son of Leonard A. Pierotti of Napa, Calif., and the late Jean K. Pierotti.
The Rev.
Richard Chilson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Helena Church in St.
Helena, Calif.
Mrs.
Ashbey Pierotti, 27 years old, is a producer of television commercials and interactive media for Colossal Pictures in San Francisco.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president at Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her mother, Julia L. Ashbey, also retired, was a judge in Red Bank, N.J., for the Appellate Division of the Superior Court of New Jersey.


Fans Got a Fair Deal Only at Decision Time
It wasn't thrills 'n' chills.
It wasn't a fight that gave cathartic resolution.
Folks booed.
They wanted a war.
What they got was, instead, blunted hostility from Evander Holyfield vs.
Larry Holmes.
When all was said and done, Holyfield won.
He beat a 42-year-old former champion by a decision to retain his heavyweight title in the outdoor arena at Caesars Palace Friday night.
Nobody quibbled about the unanimous 12-round decision, not even the sometimes querulous Bob Arum, Holmes's promoter.
Good decision, Arum said, and didn't his man Holmes surprise you?


Koreans Rethink Life in Los Angeles
Jin Lee was one Korean shopkeeper who tried to do everything right.
He held barbecue parties for his black customers, sponsored a neighborhood basketball team, donated money to an anti-gang youth group and was active in a black-Korean church organization.
But when rioting swept the neighborhood where he owned a grocery store, his efforts went for nothing.
Like hundreds of other Korean shopkeepers, he lost his store to fire.


Japan's Troops May Sail, And the Fear Is Mutual
Later this year Asians may once again witness something that has been all but unthinkable for two generations: The deployment of Japanese troops beyond Japan's own shores, probably into the factional chaos of Cambodia.
The conditions will be dramatically different from those of 1940, when Japan swept through Cambodia as part of its conquest of Southeast Asia.
Rather than carrying the Hinomaru, the Rising Sun flag, the troops of 1992 will wear the blue helmets of United Nations peacekeepers.
But so deep are the scars left by World War II that even the seemingly unthreatening act of sending Japanese forces for humanitarian purposes -- to provide medical care or rebuild hospitals and housing -- has tied the Japanese Government in knots for two years.


Well-Known Artists Join the Crowd at an Art Gallery Auction in Newark
THE Aljira Fine Art Auction in Newark keeps rolling.
But unlike the proverbial stone, it gathers moss.
This year's version -- the fourth -- conducted in two stages on June 1 and June 11, had no fewer than nine honorary chairpeople.
They included the Mayor of Newark, Sharpe James; the director of the Newark Museum, Samuel Miller; two noted actors, John Amos and LeVar Burton, and, even more reassuringly, two senior vice presidents from the financial sector: Dewey Clark of Prudential Reinsurance and Jerome Greco of First Fidelity Bancorporation.
They were accompanied by Elizabeth Christophersen, an arts advocate, and the Rev.
Dr.
William Watley, board chairman for the St.
James Preparatory School, which is scheduled to open in 1994 and will receive a share of the auction proceeds.


Money Matters in Eastern Europe
TRAVELERS going to eastern Europe this summer will probably find money a source of concern: where to change it, which currency is preferred and where credit cards and traveler's checks are accepted constitute some of the potential hassles.
Russia, other parts of the former Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, the former German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland and Romania are gradually linking up with Western financial networks, but progress is spotty and irregular.
This column contains a roundup of information from bureaus and contributors in Europe at the beginning of June, but it should be supplemented if possible with last-minute data from the place you are going.
No guidebook can be up to date on changes, and this column too will age rapidly.


Israel Presses Building of Roads to Settlements
Rumbling through terraced hills south of Jerusalem, a fleet of yellow bulldozers is carving out a highway to Jewish settlements, the Government's most ambitious road project in the occupied territories.
The effort is part of a building drive that the right-wing coalition of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has pressed without letup in anticipation of a possible change of government after national elections on June 23.


For Newcomers And Old-Timers
MANY professional photographers begin their careers as assistants, apprenticing with a master to learn the basics of making pictures.
Then, through on-the-job associations, they find jobs.
For those not so privileged, two new books have arrived with valuable information on what a photographer has to know to work today, and how to pursue a career in photography.
Although they can be read cover to cover, you can profitably dip into them anywhere.


50th Reunion Pays Tribute to a Sarah Lawrence Music Teacher
THE women were 70-something and filled with lively memories of William Schuman, their music teacher of 50 years ago at Sarah Lawrence College here.
Many had kept up with the composer through the years, following his career first as head of the Juilliard School and later as the first president of the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
Because he had meant so much to them as a teacher, mentor and musical guide, many alumni had hoped to see Mr.
Schuman during their reunion weekend here this spring.
The Class of 1942, celebrating its 50th reunion, had invited the composer to attend a ceremony establishing a scholarship fund in his name.
The class had raised $90,000 for the fund.


To the Finalists: Don't Call Us . . .
It is not quite as urgent as David O. Selznick's search for Scarlett, or as spitefully competitive as team-captain selection in Little League, but New York City's hunt for a new director of the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting has come to resemble a little of both.
"It's a rat's nest," said Alan S. Gordon, Eastern Executive Secretary of the Director's Guild, and whose candidate for the job was not considered -- despite his strenuous lobbying effort.


Two Different Approaches to 20th-Century Works
THE show "Federation" at the Hunts Point headquarters of Krasdale Foods was organized by the company's general counsel, Sigmund Balka.
"Mexico, 20th Century Visions," at its White Plains branch, is a joint effort by Mr.
Balka and Jane Farver, the just-departed director of the Lehman College Art Gallery.
It would be hard to find two productions more at odds.
Federation takes its name from the Federation of Modern Painters and Sculptors, founded in 1940 when the word modern had more cachet than it does now.
A decade later, the group issued a manifesto to the effect that their mission was to unite artists "working in contemporary idioms." They also wanted to insure that the term modern art was not pre-empted by cliques concerned with the fashion of the moment, which then would have been Abstract Expressionism.


China and U.S. Agree on Prison-Export Curbs
China and the United States have reached a tentative agreement to prevent the export to America of goods made in Chinese prisons.
A memorandum of understanding, which was reached Thursday by teams of negotiators in Beijing, could resolve a long-running dispute in Chinese-American relations.


'Writers Shouldn't Be Married'
THE INTERIOR CASTLE
The Art and Life of Jean Stafford.
By Ann Hulbert.
Illustrated. 430 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


POSTINGS: 100 West 86th; Ending Years of Vacancy
The number "1" is peeled away from the address above the dingy green padlocked doorway to 100 West 86th Street, a building once called "The Amy," in the Upper West Side/-Central Park West Historic District.
Its red-brick facade, with 52 dilapidated windows, wraps around the southwest corner of Columbus Avenue.
The upper floors of the five-story walk-up, designed by John Prague in 1887, have been vacant for more than 20 years, although shops occupy the ground-floor space, which has been renovated over the years.
Now, once the Landmarks Preservation Commission acts on a proposed rooftop addition, the upper floors are to be gutted and revived with a dozen new apartments.
The job will cost the owner, Marcus Retter, at least $400,000.


Monica S. Ring, Richard Tucker Jr.
Monica Seton Ring, a daughter of Mrs.
Aloysius F. Ring Jr. of Colts Neck, N.J., and the late Mr.
Ring, was married yesterday to Richard Brison Cumming Tucker Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tucker of Ruxton, Md.
Msgr.
John P. O'Connor performed the ceremony at St.
Joan of Arc Church in Orleans, Mass.
Mrs.
Tucker was until recently a product director at the McNeil Consumer Products Company, a pharmaceuticals manufacturer in Fort Washington, Pa.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
Her father was a financial group controller with Johnson &amp; Johnson International in New Brunswick, N.J.


Ferry Sloops Setting Sail for Yonkers Waterfront
WHEN Sojourner Truth finally sails into port here, the boat's happy owners say they might just have a brass band on hand for the welcoming party.
"Whatever we do, we're going to make a very grand entrance," said Douglas O. Maass, president of Ferry Sloops Inc., an all-volunteer environmental and educational organization, which owns the 42-foot sailing vessel.
The boat has been in a temporary mooring since the organization lost its home port eight months ago.


New &amp; Noteworthy
CUBA: A Journey, by Jacobo Timerman.
Translated by Toby Talbot. (Vintage, $9.) Mr.
Timerman, a longtime Argentine journalist, is all too familiar with the abuses of right-wing regimes.
Here, he analyzes the failings of one on the left, Fidel Castro's Cuba, which he visited in 1987. (He has added a new afterword.) In 1990 our reviewer, David Rieff, called the book a "brave and compassionate act of witness."
OMEROS, by Derek Walcott. (Noonday/Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $12.) Omeros is the contemporary Greek word for Homer, and it is indeed the ancient poet -- in a kind of modern-day incarnation -- who inspires Derek Walcott's epic poem.
His characters have Greek names but, like Mr.
Walcott himself, a personal history rooted in the West Indies.
Their principal concerns are not the events of the Trojan War but come from the entire panoply of civilization, from African antiquity to frontier America and present-day Boston and London.
" 'Omeros' derives its extraordinary power not from suspense," Mary Lefkowitz said here in 1990, "but from his ability to capture and express the thoughts of his characters and to re-create . . . the swift mutations of ideas and images in their minds."


Disney Lines
To the Editor: William Schmidt's account "Visiting Disney's French Kingdom" was extremely useful to potential visitors because he included the information that security people would not allow breakfast baguettes (could they have been mistaken for dangerous weapons?) through the main gate.


Leslie Breed and R.D. McLean
Leslie Taft Breed, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Breed Jr. of Swampscott, Mass., was married on Friday in Marblehead, Mass., to Robert David McLean, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward D. McLean of Mankato, Minn.
The Rev.
Thomas Boates performed the Congregational service at the Old North Church.


More Children Are Employed, Often Perilously
After nearly disappearing from American life, child labor has re-emerged and proliferated in the last decade.
Even the recession does not seem to have stemmed the tide, and investigators say many of the children are working in dangerous jobs.
Federal statistics indicate that at least four million children ages 14 to 18 are legally employed.
But about half that many other children work illegally, either because businesses or family members pay them in cash to avoid taxes and minimum wages, or, more ominously, because they work too many hours, late hours, at hazardous jobs, or are under 14 and thus too young to be working at all except on farms.
Children Working Everywhere
No one knows exactly how many children work illegally, but Philip J. Landrigan, chairman of the Department of Community Medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, estimated the number at about 2 million.
Evidence from a variety of sources -- the Labor Department's strike force, the General Accounting Office, states' investigations and emergency-room records -- suggests that children work illegally in the fields, in the garment industry, in fast-food restaurants, on construction sites and in mines, sawmills and gas stations.


Dance in Review
Wild Space
Bessie Schonberg Theater Manhattan
Debra Loewen calls her modern-dance company Wild Space.
She has talked of the unpredictability -- the potential for wildness -- of the human body in motion.
But "Beneath the Surface," a program by the Milwaukee-based troupe that was presented on Thursday night, was surprisingly bland.


World Economies


Continental Savings of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Foreign Affairs; Hear, O Islam
Walking through the overwhelming quiet of Yad Vashem, you remember what this election, what every Israeli election, what Israel itself, is all about.
This silent memorial to the victims of Hitler's mass murder of European Jewry and the world's indifference to their fate reminds you that in Israel the issue is always survival and security.
Here, it is easy to understand hard-liners.
They have reason to react to Arab hatred by building Israel's military power, being tough and giving nothing.
To Israeli hard-liners, the uncaring of nations to Jewish survival is not history -- it is life.


Shari Lynn Lobe, Arthur George Costonis
Shari Lynn Lobe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol I. Lobe of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Arthur George Costonis, a son of Dr.
Arthur C. Costonis of Venice, Fla., and Betti A. Costonis of Westwood, Mass.
Rabbi Israel C. Stein performed the ceremony at Congregation Rodeph Sholom in Bridgeport, Conn.
Mrs.
Costonis, 27 years old, is an associate in the Boston law firm of Nutter, McClennen &amp; Fish.
She graduated from Boston University and its law school.
Her father, who is retired, founded Service Master of Fairfield, a building-restoration company.


Harlem Groups File Suit To Fight Sewage Odors
Embittered by what they see as years of indifference and questionable promises, a consortium of New York environmental groups, community organizations and Harlem residents will file suit against the city today, seeking to force an end to overpowering odors that have become the hallmark of the city's newest sewage plant on the Hudson River in Harlem.
The lawsuit, to be filed in State Supreme Court, marks the first time in the city's history that it has been sued for creating a nuisance caused by smells.
A victory could force New York to spend as much as $100 million in immediate repairs to the $1.3 billion North River Sewage Treatment Plant and millions more in compensation for the severe "physical and psychological discomfort it has caused" residents in nearby Harlem neighborhoods.


Chronicle
The list of people who will be honored tonight at the 10th anniversary of the Candace Awards, given by the National Coalition of 100 Black Women, is impressive indeed: CAMILLE COSBY, the philanthropist; KATHLEEN BATTLE, the soprano; Representative MAXINE WATERS, Democrat of California; QUEEN LATIFAH, the rap star, and JULIE DASH, the film maker, among others.
But for JEWELL JACKSON McCABE, the coalition's chairwoman, there will be one recipient with a special tie: HAROLD (HAL) B. JACKSON.
She will present honors to him and to PERCY E. SUTTON, his partner in the Inner City Broadcasting Company and former Manhattan Borough President.


Cimco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Skyline Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Jazz Festival; Tribute to Coltrane From Charles Lloyd
Jazz festival concerts, given their general predictability, are set up for upsets.
At a tribute to John Coltrane on Saturday night at Carnegie Hall, as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, the long-vanished tenor saxophonist Charles Lloyd came out and gave a lesson in drama, playing miraculously graceful improvisations that had the audience pent up, waiting to explode into a standing ovation.
In the mid-1960's, Mr.
Lloyd became a huge jazz star by popularizing the sound of John Coltrane, who died in 1967.
It drew him scorn from critics; he quickly abandoned the jazz world for Big Sur, Calif., from which he emerged only occasionally.
Mr.
Lloyd, who came in as an outsider, clearly hasn't been loafing, because he performed three original compositions for Coltrane that had some of the more intense improvisations of the year.
Backed by McCoy Tyner on piano, Chip Jackson on bass and Elvin Jones on drums, he repeated heated phrases, recalling the gospel church; stark lines alternated with windy flurries, and his tone moved easily from the guttural to the cottony.


Unique Mobility reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Solution Offered in Reynolds Dispute
After a series of intense telephone conversations late Saturday night and early this morning, officials of the national and international governing bodies for track and field found a possible way to get Butch Reynolds, the suspended 400-meter runner, into the Olympic trials without putting anyone else at risk.
Primo Nebiolo, the president of the world body, the International Amateur Athletic Federation, agreed today to waive the I.A.A.F. rule that would disqualify other athletes who competed against Reynolds, provided a majority vote of the 23-member I.A.A.F. council backed the idea.


Nightly, Nightly: A Lost New York Remembered; Maybe Some Things Never Change, but Most Have Since the First 'Guys and Dolls'
It is along toward 8 bells in the evening, and outside the Martin Beck Theater on West 45th Street a crowd is commencing to accumulate for a new showing of that old musical "Guys and Dolls," which is a very true rendering of stories by Mr.
Damon Runyon, who mostly made them up.
Now we are not putting the rap on revivals, and figuring weight for age, this particular show is real high class -- maybe eternal, even.
But some things have changed since Sky Masterson, the highest roller of them all, first bet he could coax any doll to Havana, and ended up winning that soul-saving Mission Doll, Miss Sarah Brown.
A Musical Fable
So for those on this sidewalk as were not around when crooks were cute, when the show's top ticket price was not $65 but $6.60, when the Alda on Broadway was not Alan but his father, Robert, who played the original Sky, we offer a listener's guide to the shimmering slivers of lost New York in Frank Loesser's lyrics for this "musical fable of Broadway."


Campus Changes Coming, Like It or Not
As athletic departments of universities scramble to add income, just to pay their annually increasing bills, a stepped-up effort to end sex discrimination could soon create significant changes in the makeup of teams and the way colleges conduct their business.
Two decades after the creation of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, enacted 20 years ago tomorrow, colleges are under increasing pressure to comply with the law, conform with the principle of equality of the sexes, and provide more equitable athletic opportunities for women.


I.B.M.-Toshiba Joint Chip Venture
I.B.M. and the Toshiba Corporation are planning to join forces in one of the fastest-growing segments of the semiconductor business, industry executives said this weekend.
The companies are expected to join in developing flash memory chips, a relatively new type that has the potential to replace magnetic disks for permanent information storage in computers.
They are also expected to cooperate in developing products that use such chips.


Yeltsin Voices Russia's Anger at Ethnic Wars Roiling the Old Soviet Empire
President Boris N. Yeltsin returned here today from a successful week in the West and promptly issued a warning about growing Russian impatience with fierce ethnic fighting along the southern rim of the former Soviet empire.
Ethnic Russians and Russian troops are involved in increasingly serious fighting in Moldova, a small former Soviet republic on the border with Romania, with Moldovan forces reportedly destroying 11 tanks of the former Soviet Army since Friday.
Clashes involving Russians also have intensified in the South Ossetia region of Georgia, in the Caucasus region.


Review/Pop; French Antillean Sounds of Insouciance
Malavoi and Marce et Tumpak, two bands from Martinique, offered a contrast of internationalism and local pride when they performed Saturday night at the Ritz.
They were part of a New Music Seminar showcase of French Antillean music and they shared the central rhythm that defines zouk, an easy clip-clopping beat that gives the music an irresistible lilt.
Malavoi has an internationalist approach, with influences from Brazil, the Dominican Republic and France; Marce et Tumpak stay closer to home.
Malavoi performed in two guises.
First its keyboardists, bassist, drummer, percussionist and backup singers accompanied Ralph Thamar, the group's former lead singer, who has started a solo career.
Mr.
Thamar presents himself as the island's answer to France's chanteurs, a crooner with a syncopated undercurrent.
With a suave, light tenor voice, he moved between openly sentimental ballads and uptempo tunes with a certain restraint.


Treasury Auctions Include Notes and Bills
Treasury financings this week include today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills followed by an auction of two-year notes tomorrow and a five-year note auction on Wednesday.
By late on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.60 percent and the six-month at 3.69 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year notes were offered at a price to yield 5.07 percent and the five-year at 6.46 percent.


Peru's Indians Look to Shining Path to Speak of Their Pain
To the Editor:
Thank you for your June 2 Cuzco Journal, which dares to consider Peru's strife in terms of the country's age-old ethnic divisions.
United States journalists who write on Latin America too often ignore discrimination against Indians.
Peru, like Guatemala, suffers levels of ethnic discrimination that readily compare to South Africa's.
In Peru and Guatemala, the demographic split between whites and nonwhites may not be as severe numerically as in the largely nonwhite South Africa.
But in both Latin American countries the violence systematically directed against Indians demands our attention.
With the cold war thawing, newspapers should discard the old frameworks for covering Latin American conflicts.
Preoccupation with the drama and threat of Communist insurgents has tended to obscure the drama of Latin America's Indians struggling for basic human rights.


Naomi Vogelfanger, Marshall Jaffe
Naomi Jo Vogelfanger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Vogelfanger of New York, was married yesterday to Marshall Wayne Jaffe, the son of Mrs.
Henry Jaffe of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Mr.
Jaffe.
Rabbi Max Ticktin, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Jaffe, 31 years old, is a designer of contemporary furniture and a ceramicist in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and the Wendell Castle Workshop for Fine Woodworking and Furniture Design.
Her father retired as executive vice president of Lieberman Research Inc., a market research company in New York.


Mets, Starved for Runs, Get to Enjoy a Sunday Bunch
When St.
Louis's Todd Zeile deposited David Cone's first pitch of the second inning over the left-field fence yesterday, the Mets, or at least their disenchanted followers, had every right to believe the game was over.
Just a look at the numbers, after all, show that the Mets don't have a propensity for comebacks.
But in an afternoon appropriately dubbed "Ripley's Believe It or Not" by Bobby Bonilla, the Mets came back, in a big way, against the Cardinals.
Driven by a most improbable pair of home runs, by Vince Coleman and Dave Gallagher, the Mets put together a rare late-inning rally after trailing by 2-0 and loped off with a 6-2 victory.


Market Place; The Big Cleanup Slows to a Crawl
FOR years the environmental business seemed to have nowhere to go but up.
State and Federal governments kept passing laws requiring ever-cleaner air, water and land, and ordering that messes left over from the past be cleared up.
The Environmental Business Journal, a newsletter that tracks the performance of environmentally oriented companies, said the annual growth rate for the industry in the late 1980's was 15 percent.
And because it was driven by regulations, the industry was supposed to be recession proof, or at least recession resistant.
But that's not what happened.


Will School Taxes Subsidize Whittle's Profits?
To the Editor:
The Edison Project of Whittle Communications, the national private-school venture that Benno C. Schmidt Jr. has resigned as Yale University's president to head (news articles, May 26 and 27), raises an interesting question: Assuming that President Bush's educational voucher plan becomes effective, and the Edison Project schools receive a significant portion of funds formerly allocated to public schools, what are the implications for school taxes in local communities?
Would taxpayers be willing to subsidize a profit-making enterprise without being shareholders?
Would childless taxpayers still be willing to pay school taxes, or the same portion of taxes, when they are being used to support the profits of a few people?
Will those taxpayers whose children attend private or parochial schools, which are not for profit, willingly pay tuition and taxes?


Kathryn C. Kay, Richard A. Gutner
Kathryn Carol Kay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Kay of White Plains, was married yesterday to Richard A. Gutner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Gutner of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Jeffrey Segelman performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Gutner, 28 years old, is an associate group head at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, the New York advertising agency.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, now retired, was the owner of L. Katzenstein &amp; Company, a marine engineering company in New York.


Correction
The headline last Monday on a report about the marriage of Roberta Rettner misidentified the bridegroom.
He is Joseph Nacmias.


Briton Sees AIDS Cutting Population in Parts of Africa
A British scientist has predicted that because of the AIDS epidemic, populations in the worst-afflicted African countries will within 20 years switch over from their present high rate of increase to an actual decrease in numbers.
In Uganda, where 1.5 million people out of a population of 16 million are thought to be infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, the current 3 percent population growth rate is likely to fall to below zero after 2002, with more people dying than being born, the projections say.


Black Neighborhood Faces White World With Bitterness
Twenty years ago, black hopes and white fears were on a collision course in picket-fenced neighborhoods around the nation as blacks pursued the dream of integration and whites ran from it.
What resulted were places like Mount Greenwood and Roseland, two working-class neighborhoods in Chicago two miles apart, one now as black as the other is white.
Sebron and Marian (Mother) Jones did not want it this way.
For them, Roseland represented a ticket out of the ghetto, and a yard of their own.
They were one of the first black families on their block and could not wait to plant the irises and invite company over to see the neighborhood.


Patient Care at Issue in Hospital Affiliation Talks
Enid J. Ford remembers taking her ailing daughter to the emergency room at Kings County Hospital Center several years ago as an exercise in angst.
After six hours in the crowded waiting room, the only doctor on duty prescribed a medication for the girl's stomach pains without a full exam, she said.
A hospital administrator called to hear her complaint was of little help.
Frustrated, they went in search of a private doctor.


Manufacturers Hanover Fades Out
Quietly, at 11:59 P.M.
Friday, the 180-year-old Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company ceased to exist as an independent bank.
By converting Manufacturers into a division of Chemical Bank, from a separate bank owned by the same parent company, the Chemical Banking Corporation, the way is cleared for a complete merging.


WALL STREET BOOM FAILS TO BOLSTER REGION'S ECONOMY
Flush with profits that have surpassed the best years of the booming 1980's, Wall Street is offering glimmers of hope for the battered economies of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, but so far has failed to lift the region out of its recession.
For those who work at investment banking firms, brokerage houses and elsewhere in the securities industry, 1992 has so far proven a romp.
Despite the steep decline in stock values last week, trading volume, profits and paychecks in the industry, which the Government said reached an average of more than $83,000 last year, have all set records.


Taiwan Slowdown Seen
Statistics released over the weekend suggested that Taiwan's economic boom was slowing.
Industrial production rose 3.7 percent in May from a year earlier, its slowest rate this year, the Economics Ministry said on Saturday.
Output fell more than five-tenths of a percent from April on a seasonally adjusted basis, partly because of weakness in some export-related sectors like textiles.
The Government also announced that export orders for Taiwanese goods fell 3.6 percent in May from the previous month, to $6.94 billion, although they did rise 6 percent from a year earlier.


Batman Is Back, and the Money Is Pouring In
Batman has indeed returned.
The newly opened sequel, "Batman Returns," broke box office records over the weekend and is poised to turn into one of the largest-grossing films ever.
Executives at Warner Brothers, which produced and distributed the dark, perverse and hugely expensive comedy, said today that the movie would gross a staggering $46.5 million for the weekend, a record.
The previous weekend record was held by "Batman," the 1989 film that hauled in $42.7 million and then went on to be the sixth-biggest-grossing film in history.


S.E.C. to Vote on Executive-Pay Disclosure
The Securities and Exchange Commission is expected to propose rules this week that would force companies to spell out what they are paying their top executives and allow easier communication among shareholders.
The agency has scheduled for Tuesday a vote by its four commissioners on a plan to require companies to list the pay of executives in charts that would be easier for shareholders to read than the pages of written text now supplied.
The charts, S.E.C. officials say, would enable shareholders to compare executive pay with a company's performance.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled Tony Menendez, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
Sent Scott Bradley, catcher, to Nashville.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Optioned Brad Brink, pitcher, to Scranton Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Mickey Weston, pitcher, from Scranton.


Maryland Federal reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Estimates of Bosnia Dead Rising Fast
As the war here nears the end of its third month, new figures being compiled by human rights monitors in Sarajevo suggest that the scale of the killing may be far greater than previously thought, amounting to 50,000 or more dead, the great majority of them civilians.
The only independent organization in Bosnia and Herzegovina trying to keep track of the death toll with any degree of accuracy, Save Humanity, is preparing a report that will estimate that 40,000 Muslim Slavs have died in the eastern region of the republic alone.


Review/Music; Punk Rock From Japan
Three young Japanese women wearing square-patterned patent-leather jumpers and playing Ramones-style punk rock may seem like a band out of a David Lynch movie, but in reality they make up Shonen Knife.
On Thursday night, the trio took their zany sounds and visuals to the Limelight in Manhattan as part of the New Music Seminar.
Naoko Yamano played simple, distorted chords on a black guitar decorated with colored music notes.
Michie Nakatani picked daintily on a pink bass.
Atsuko Yamano bashed out an energetic if sometimes unsteady rumble on her drums.
All three smiled throughout the whole set, as they played their bizarrely Americanized originals like "Making Plans for Bison" and "Twist Barbie," or cheerfully botched remakes like the Shirelles' "Boys."


Bridge; A high level of play marks the Epson worldwide contest.
Some of the players in the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, played on Friday and Saturday, were playing on a high level and towering above everyone else -- literally.
There were special invitational games in the Eiffel Tower and other tall buildings around the world, including Montreal, London, Rotterdam, Paris and Moscow.
In New York City on Friday night a bunch of world-class players competed on the 86th floor of the Empire State Building, with clouds swirling outside the windows and occasionally, perhaps, in their brains.
The winners, with 65 percent, were Sam and Agnes Lev of Forest Hills, Queens.


Will School Taxes Subsidize Whittle's Profits?; Real Choices Return
To the Editor:
Benno C. Schmidt Jr.'s decision to quit Yale University for Christopher Whittle's attempt to build a new model American school (front page, May 26) is wonderful news.
I hope it foreshadows a massive defection of staff, parents and kids from the increasingly pathological factory schools and a broad public awareness that we can sidestep the crazy apparatus of government monopoly schooling.
Mr.
Whittle deserves great credit for focusing public attention on an easier way to tackle the national school crisis than trusting more tax dollars to yet another "professional" reform initiative.
We've had enough of those.
It's time to give parents and neighborhoods back some real choices, and only a free market can do that.
Mr.
Whittle may be the first, but inevitably others will follow, and all of us will benefit.


Telco Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dr. Lukashok, Michael Plottel
Dr.
Daniella Dorothy Lukashok, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Lukashok of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Eli Plottel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland Plottel, also of New York.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Plottel, 30 years old, is a resident in psychiatry at the New York University Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Smith College and received her M.D. from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y..
Her father is a real-estate developer in New York.


Editor's Story: 25 Years of Creating Glamour"
When Glamour won the 1992 National Magazine Award for public interest for two articles on teen-age pregnancy and abortion, a tall, elegant woman threaded her way through the audience to accept it.
"It is a special thrill," she said, "for a magazine named Glamour to win in a category called public interest for a topic as seethingly controversial as abortion."


Susan C. Perlstein, Michael B. Willet
Dr.
Susan Carol Perlstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham Perlstein of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Bradley Willet, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Willet of Phoenix.
Rabbi Jerry Fischer performed the ceremony at the Wattles Mansion in Hollywood, Calif.
Dr.
Perlstein, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from New York University.
She recently completed a fellowship in clinical child psychology at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center in Torrance, Calif., where her husband just completed his residency in psychiatry.


Washington Talk; New Linkage Hinders Aid for Russia
The concept of "linkage" used to be at the center of negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union, as concessions on one issue often had to be compensated by the other side's backing down somewhere else.
The idea now may be passe diplomatically.
But it is at the heart of political dealings between President Bush and House Democrats over aid to the nations of the former Soviet Union.
The Democrats insist they won't help Russia and the rest if President Bush won't support their efforts to help Americans.


RESULTS PLUS
DIVING  Scoggin Excels in Trials  Matt Scoggin scored seven 10's and Scott Donie overtook Pat Evans yesterday to earn berths on the platform diving team at the United States Olympic trials in Indianapolis.
Scoggin and Donie will join Ellen Owen and Mary Ellen Clark on the platform team in the Olympics.
Julie Ovenhouse, Karen LaFace, Mark Lenzi and Kent Ferguson qualified for the Olympic springboard team.
The average age of this year's Olympians is 26.3 years, making it the oldest American diving team since records first were kept in the 1920's.
It's also the first team since 1948 not to include a returning Olympian. (AP) GOLF  Ammaccapane Wins  Danielle Ammaccapane fought off repeated challenges from Nancy Lopez, Lori West and Muffin Spencer-Devlin to win the Lady Keystone Open in Hershey, Pa., and move to the top of the L.P.G.A. money list.
The victory made Ammaccapane the first three-time winner of the 1992 tour.
Ammaccapane recorded a three-under-par 69 for a 54-hole total of eight-under-par 208 on the 6,348-yard West Course of the Hershey Country Club.
She has won $440,311 this year. (AP) AUTO RACING  Peugeot Is Winner  Peugeot won the Le Mans 24 Hours race yesterday, returning the title to France after a lapse of 12 years.
The winning team -- France's Yannick Dalmas and Britain's Derek Warwick and Mark Blundell -- held first place from the second hour.
They finished more than six laps ahead of a Toyota on the 8.45-mile circuit.
It was the first time since 1980 that a French-built car won the race.
A Le Mans resident, the late Jean Rondeau, constructed and helped drive his car to victory that year before British Jaguars and German Porsches dominated in the 1980's.  (AP) Allison Beats Waltrip: Davey Allison easily won Nascar's Miller Genuine Draft 400 in Brooklyn, Mich., leading 158 of the 200 laps on the two-mile, high-banked Michigan International Speedway oval, including the final 73.
Darrell Waltrip finished second, 3.31 seconds behind. (AP) Andretti Best in Portland: Michael Andretti won the Budweiser-G.I.
Joe's 200 in Portland, Ore., for the third year in a row.
As he did a year ago, Andretti darted ahead of pole-sitter Emerson Fittipaldi at the start.
Fittipaldi finished second, 8.43 seconds behind the winner.
Al Unser Jr. was third. (AP) HARNESS RACING  The Fastest Mile Ever  Artsplace toyed with a field of the country's best pacers in the fastest mile in harness racing history, winning the second leg of the $75,000 Driscoll Series in 1:492//5 on Saturday night at the Meadowlands.
The race was for open-class pacers.
Artsplace made a sweeping move deep in the backstretch to gain the lead.
He turned the last quarter in 272//5 to set the record.
The previous record was 1:493//5 , by Call for Rain and Nihilator. (AP) THOROUGHBRED RACING  Nannerl Wins Vagrancy  Nannerl, the favorite in a field of six older fillies and mares, came from off the pace under Jose Santos for a two-length victory yesterday in the $85,350 Vagrancy Handicap at Belmont Park.
Carrying 116 pounds in the Grade III race, Nannerl rallied from fifth to beat Serape, who was 6 3/4 lengths ahead of Makin Faces.
It was Santos's second winning ride in the Vagrancy; he won aboard Eugene V. Klein's Le Slew in the 1986 renewal of the race.
Nannerl, trained by Scotty Schulhofer, covered seven furlongs on the fast track in 1:222//5 to earn $51,210 for Marablue Farm. (AP) ROWING  Vespers Pair in Games  John Pescatore of Ocean City, N.J., and Peter Sharis of Boxford, Mass., competing for the Vespers Boat Club, won the men's pair without coxswain competition at the United States Olympic Rowing trials in Mercer, N.J., yesterday and earned spots on the Olympic team. (AP)
DOG SHOW  Chow-Chow Is Best  Ch.
Lov-Chow's Risen Star, the top winning Chow-Chow in the nation, added to his record yesterday when he was named best of 1,303 dogs at the Staten Island Kennel Club's 52d show at the Wagner College football stadium.
It was the 21st top award for the red dog owned by Kitty and Joe Vaudo, Cheryl and Tim Lovett and Michael Larriza, who does the handling.
TRIATHLON  New Zealander Prevails  Erin Baker, a New Zealander who lives in Boulder, Colo., won the third round of the Danskin Women's Triathlon Series in White Plains yesterday with an event-record time of 54 minutes 48 seconds.


Tide West Oil reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


Don't Sign on Green Or Points in Between
The autograph frenzy that has fueled baseball signing shows across the country has affected the Open.
U.S.G.A. officials banned the signing of autographs on the course itself and around the putting green, citing the need to protect the players from the possibility of being injured by swarming fans whom they believe are motivated by the current collecting craze.
Autograph signing was restricted to the upper driving range, but the rule was more honored in the breach as spectators asked -- and most golfers signed -- at points all over the course. . . .
Next year's Open is at Baltusrol Golf Club in Springfield, N.J., June 17-20.
Tickets will be sold in a package for $200 per ticket, which includes admission to three practice rounds.
Ticket information is available at (908) 234-9393. . . .
The U.S.G.A. is expected to announce this week that it will award the 1997 Open to Congressional Country Club in Bethesda, Md., site of the 1964 event won by KEN VENTURI.
After Baltusrol in 1993, the Open will be played at Oakmont in Pittsburgh in 1994, Shinnecock Hills on Long Island in 1995.


Acqua Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Essay; Baker's Guilty Knowledge
A Foreign Service officer named Frank Lemay ought to be a hero.
He was the first to warn his bosses at the State Department that Saddam Hussein was using U.S.-backed grain loans to build a nuclear bomb.
In his memorandum of Oct. 13, 1989, he recounted a conversation with four nervous Department of Agriculture officials who had been briefed on a probe into Iraq's multi-billion dollar abuse of the Lavoro bank's Atlanta branch.


Will School taxes Subsidize Whittle's Profits?; Educational Perotism
To the Editor:
As a Yale University alumnus and supporter of public education, I find myself singularly depressed by Benno C. Schmidt Jr.'s decision to devote himself to Christopher Whittle's Edison Project, for all of the reasons Russell Jacoby clearly describes (Op-Ed June 1).
I cannot help seeing that project as being of a piece with the Presidential candidacy of Ross Perot.
Both testify to a willful abandonment of the notion that Americans can aspire to a meaningful public life through common institutions, be they schools or political parties, in which common deliberation and concerted action nurture our sense of collective engagement.


Giving Dad His Due on His Day


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alco Health Distribution Corp., 7.5 million shares, with six million in the United States.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.


Navy Chief Is Mentioned In Weinberger Charges
Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d, already embroiled in an inquiry into the assault of 26 women at a convention of naval aviators last year, has now seen his name surface in a larger scandal: the Iran-contra affair.
Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was indicted last week on felony charges, including lying to Congress about the existence of personal diary entries involving his discussions with other officials about arms sales to Iran.
The indictment twice mentions Mr.
Garrett, who served as the Pentagon's senior lawyer from February 1986 to August 1987 and accompanied Mr.
Weinberger when Congressional investigators questioned the Pentagon chief in 1987.


Review/Operetta; A Decent Relationship, If Only They'd Talk
The Opera Festival of New Jersey, which opened its ninth season this evening at the Lawrenceville School here, is undergoing a transition.
Formerly the June Opera Festival, the company has shortened its name, a change, its music director, Michael Pratt, writes in the season program, intended to "accurately reflect our true performing calendar and to leave us room for a hoped-for expansion someday into the winter."
In the meantime, the festival, like many another arts organization, faces a serious financial crunch.
An envelope stuffed into the program announces, "We've lost 22 percent of our funding," and solicits help in filling the gap.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Bush Aide Assails Perot on Report of Snooping
A top official of President Bush's re-election campaign said today that if recent reports about the use of private investigators by Ross Perot were true the billionaire Texan lacked judgment and did not have respect for the country's laws.
The Bush campaign chairman, Robert M. Teeter, reacted strongly to articles in The Washington Post today and in the New Republic last week reporting that Mr.
Perot had a penchant for hiring private detectives.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common  *
Bio-Imaging Technologies Inc., West Trenton, N.J., is offering to the public a million units at a price of $5 a unit through GKN Securities Corp.
Each unit consists of a common share and a common-stock purchase warrant. *
Hyperion 1999 Term Trust, a newly organized, diversified, closed-end management investment company, is making an initial public offering of 55 million shares at $10 a share through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Hyperion Capital Management will act as investment adviser to the trust. *
Mesa Airlines Inc., Farmington, N.M., is offering 1.36 million shares at $22 a share through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.


Germans Shorten Workweek for Success
To the Editor:
In describing the German formula for national economic success in "The Wages of German Success" (Op-Ed, May 22), Norbert Walter makes a serious but common error.
He fails to stress the major reductions in work time built into Germany's highly productive capital-intensive industrial system.
Using technological progress simultaneously to raise wages and reduce work time has been postwar Germany's greatest economic achievement.
The standard West German workweek consisted of six eight-hour days in 1955.
German unions then pledged themselves to translate the greater productivity made possible by new technology into higher wages and a shorter workweek.
Unionized industrial workers in West Germany achieved the five-day, 40-hour week in the 1960's.
By the early 70's, most nonunion German workers also had 40-hour weekly schedules.


Hilary Kayle and Peter Crist
Hilary Sue Kayle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton P. Kayle of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to Dr.
Peter Alan Crist, a son of John Crist of Beaverton, Ore., and the late Varley Crist.
Acting Justice Robert L. Cohen of the New York State Supreme Court in the Bronx, performed the ceremony at the Ritz Carlton Hotel.
Mrs.
Crist, 39 years old, is a novelist.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Gilbert, Segall &amp; Young.


Enviroq Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Hipotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Broker Survey On Investing
How you feel about money apparently depends a bit on where you are from and what sex you are.
The Quick &amp; Reilly Group, the discount brokerage firm, recently released a survey of 500 active customers.
Among other things, the survey discovered that 45 percent of the men polled call stocks the investment of choice at the moment.
Seventy-eight percent of the customers in the survey were men.


Slovaks Sense Precipice On Path to Independence
While a Slovak nationalist leader has been the driving force in this nation's first steps toward dissolution, many Slovaks seem reluctant to follow all the way to that end.
Hours after the Czech and Slovak leaders, Vaclav Klaus and Vladimir Meciar, reached agreement early Saturday on a "transitional" federal Government, Ada Krnacova was on the phone to friends here in the Slovak capital.


Anjela Herzog, David Maurer
Anjela Herzog, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Herzog of Marina Del Rey, Calif., was married yesterday to David Maurer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert C. Maurer of Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Allen Freehling performed the ceremony at the Upper Bel-Air Bay Club in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
Mrs.
Maurer, 25 years old, owns and operates Wallflower Designs, a floral design company in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is the principal in James P. Herzog Inc., which provides legal services in Marina Del Rey.
Her mother is an artist.


Quality Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Callon Consolidated Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


From Whirlybird To Chasing Birdies
DARRYL DONOVAN admits his golf game became a little rusty when he was in the Army, but he did get pretty good in an attack helicopter.
That was Donovan's previous specialty during his seven years in the service, including two at nearby Fort Ord, before leaving in 1991 to try golf full time.
Playing in his first United States Open, he impressively made the cut ahead of some of golf's top names before fading to 76's on Saturday and Sunday.
Donovan, 32 years old, grew up near Miami, played golf on his high school team while also pursuing his other interest: horses.
He was a hot-walker in Hialeah, then moved up to New Jersey and was grooming, then training horses at the Meadowlands.
After that he bounced around three colleges before finally ending up as an assistant pro in Oklahoma City.
While there, he listened to the war stories of a few retired aviators, and that inspired him to apply to flight school.


Lisa Bell Lowen, Daniel Gordin
Lisa Bell Lowen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur E. Lowen of Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel Gordin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Gordin of Summerton, S.C.
Rabbi Zvi Teitelbaum performed the ceremony at the Capital Hilton in Washington.
Mrs.
Gordin, 31 years old, is the Washington office manager for Gov.
Walter J. Hickel of Alaska.
She is a graduate of Connecticut College.
Her father retired as a financial consultant and stockbroker.


4 Teen-Agers Shot, One Fatally, as Summer Starts
The police say shootings of teen-agers in New York are particularly common in summer, when more young people stay out late.
Yesterday, the first full day of summer, four teen-agers were shot, one fatally, in four separate incidents.
The police said they had made no arrests and had no suspects in the shootings.
But Sgt.
Nick Vreeland, a police spokesman, said the shooters in such incidents are often other teen-agers.


Reviews/Music; All So Very Angry, and All So Very Loud
Rage was translated as blaring guitars and raised voices at a New-Music Seminar show on Wednesday night at the Academy.
Babes in Toyland from New York, the 3D's from New Zealand and Therapy from Northern Ireland all aimed for catharsis through pandemonium.
Of the three bands, Babes in Toyland were the most primal.
The three-woman group presents lovers' quarrels as life-and-death battles.
Many of the songs are in two contrasting sections, with Kat Bjelland, on guitar, singing conversationally in one, then letting lose a throat-tearing rasp and a high scream in the other.
The music is stark and open, somewhere between heavy metal and Sonic Youth, with a large debt to the late-1970's punk band, the Slits; Lee Ranaldo of Sonic Youth produced the band's next album, due in August on Reprise Records.
Babes in Toyland's music may be too stark; while the first songs in Wednesday's set had a brutal impact, that impact waned when song after song used similar gambits.


Thinking Ahead to Fall


Chronicle
When former Justice Sybil Hart Kooper of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in New York died of breast cancer in December, a group of her colleagues and friends decided that it was time for prominent women in the law to marshal their forces against the disease.
They recruited six organizations and 26 individuals to form the Judges and Lawyers Breast Cancer Alert, and they plan to use the courthouse to educate women about the disease and their positions to lobby for increased research.


Caretenders HealthCorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Navy Offers Its Regrets for an Errant Letter
Because of a mix-up, the sailor cleared of blame for the explosion aboard the battleship Iowa that killed him and 46 shipmates three years ago was recently invited by letter to join the Navy Reserve.
The Navy has apologized for the letter, sent to Gunner's Mate Clayton M. Hartwig at his parents' address here.


Continental Pharma reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Keep the Special Counsel
The indictment last week of Caspar W. Weinberger on charges that he concealed his and President Reagan's knowledge of the Iran-contra affair has fueled conservative attacks on the independent counsel law in general and Lawrence E. Walsh in particular.
Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, called Mr.
Walsh and his aides "assassins." A Wall Street Journal editorial accused the Iran-contra prosecutors of seeking "to criminalize policy differences" -- as if lying to evade Congressional oversight and public accountability were a mere "policy difference."


To Build a Course . . . Or to Knock It
Still available: the only undeveloped lot on the Pebble Beach Golf Links, a 1.6-acre plot in a corner by the 15th green and 16th fairway.
The price is $2.5 million.
You can build a house on it, but it might have to have some funny angles, because you can't cut down any of the trees. . . .
Although Pebble Beach draws wide praise for its challenge and beauty, one golfer who wasn't immediately impressed was IAN WOOSNAM of Wales.
Woosnam complained of some blind shots and said of the 107-yard, seventh hole, "I thought they were kidding. It looks like a practice hole." Woosnam later tried to clarify his remarks by saying: "There's a lot of great holes on this course. Please write that."


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 14; Solo by the Silos
Big Sky, Great Plains.
You don't know how huge a state Montana is until you cross it at 12 miles an hour.
Nothing makes a cyclist feel smaller than the prairie country of Montana, the fourth-largest state in the country.
Mile after endless mile of hot, windy, treeless wheat fields and grazing land greeted the Coast to Coast Bicycle Classic riders after our thrilling ride through the Rockies in Glacier National Park.
We have entered perhaps the toughest period of the 48-day trip: 10 days or so in one of the nation's empty quarters.
As I rode solo the last few days, my mind began to run on empty as the mountains receded in my rear-view mirror.
The only thing that seemed to filter through the haze of exhausting 80- and 100-mile days were bits of Woody Guthrie songs, such as "this ribbon of highway," from the song "This Land Is Your Land".
Like several of my fellow riders, I have been on an emotional roller coaster.
Why on earth, I wonder sometimes, am I here, and not riding through lovely northern New Jersey with my pals from the New York Cycle Club?
Why spend so many lonely, weary hours in an alien landscape punctuated just occasionally by a tiny town or a grain elevator?


If the Price Is High, It's Just Open Season
What would a resort like Pebble Beach be without exorbitantly priced golf-related merchandise in the upscale stores around the lodge?
Among the items available were these:


The Yeast of the East: Brewers Continue on the Rise
Brewers 4, Indians 2
MILWAUKEE, June 21 (AP) -- B. J. Surhoff singled home the go-ahead run in the sixth inning as the Milwaukee Brewers took advantage of shaky fielding by left fielder Thomas Howard to beat the Cleveland Indians, 4-2, today for their 14th victory in 20 games.
The Brewers, held to two hits by Jack Armstrong (2-8) through five innings, scored twice in the sixth.


Reinhold Niebuhr's Long Shadow
Yesterday marked the centennial of Reinhold Niebuhr -- preacher, theologian, political philosopher, educator, one of the great Americans of the century.
He cast an intellectual spell on my generation; though his Christian realism passed out of fashion in the hippie 60's and 70's and yuppie 70's and 80's, it is enjoying a revival in the disenchanted 90's.
Niebuhr is currently a subject of acrid dispute between liberals and conservatives, each claiming him.
He was a minister's son, born in Missouri.
Deciding to become a minister, he went to Yale Divinity School, where he felt like "a mongrel among thoroughbreds." He came to Union Theological Seminary in New York in 1928 and taught there for the next third of a century -- taught there and taught everywhere.
Until he suffered a stroke in 1952, he swept across the country and around the world, delivering sermons, lectures, political speeches, pouring out books and articles on theology, history, foreign policy, politics and culture.


Dr. Anita Kestin, Jerry H. Elmer
Dr.
Anita Susan Kestin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Kestin of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Jerry Howard Elmer, the son of Lee Elmer of Great Neck, L.I., and Fred Elmer of Piermont, N.Y.
Rabbi Leslie Y. Gutterman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Providence.
Dr.
Kestin, 36 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a staff hematologist at the Medical Center of Central Massachusetts in Worcester and an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Massachusetts there.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.D. from Brown University.
Her father is a professor emeritus of engineering at Brown.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Regulators have approved Merck's promising new drug to treat benign enlarged prostate, an often-painful condition affecting millions of American men over 50 years old.
Analysts said the drug would be a bonanza for Merck.  [ Page D1. ]
ICC Technologies has built an air-conditioning system that uses water in place of ozone-destroying chemicals -- and provides cooling for a fraction of the energy of conventional systems.  [ D1. ]


Books of The Times; Back When 'Ostrogoth' Was Not a Dirty Word
Raptor  By Gary Jennings  Illustrated. 980 pages. Doubleday. $25.
At the end of "Raptor," Gary Jennings's latest boisterously imaginative historical extravaganza, there is an afterword ostensibly written by a sixth-century Roman Senator to whom the manuscript of the book has been entrusted.
He observes of the chronicle that if it "is not outright and incredible invention, it is so scandalously impious, blasphemous, scurrilous and obscene as to offend and disgust any reader who is not a professional historian like myself, well practiced in dispassionate objectivity."


Good Health -- and Good Politics
Speaker Thomas Foley is committed to bringing health care reform to a House vote before next month's Democratic convention.
Standing in the way of his election-year strategy is a fractured membership, split between contradictory approaches to reform.
But consensus may not be as far out of reach as it looks.
Many Democrats have taken a hard second look at the approach called managed competition and like what they see.
Managed competition, which has always seemed the best idea for insurance reform on the merits, may now become the best approach for political reasons as well.


Will School Taxes Subsidize Whittle's Profits?; Freed by Computers
To the Editor:
Today's microcomputer technology has the power to provide customized education for our nation's inner-city poor, increase the student's self-esteem and reduce the peer pressure to disrupt school classrooms and join gangs.
Educational executives and entrepreneurs who want to revolutionize our educational systems using our new technology and the government educational voucher systems should be encouraged.
Nonjudgmental computer education can do much to create a more equal educational opportunity for all children.
Learning and testing can be integrated with a gamelike feel that enhances self-esteem.
The effect of judgmental teacher attitudes is reduced, and the ability to audit the equality of education is increased.
Just having children use a computer creates a valuable job and life skill.
The remaining part of education can be in group activities and athletics.
Education can then be more fun, customized and spontaneous.


Della Femina Officially Resigns
Jerry Della Femina officially resigned Friday morning from Della Femina McNamee Inc. after a yearlong feud with the agency's French parent, Euro RSCG.
The financial terms of the separation were estimated to be in the seven figures.
Louise McNamee, the president and chief operating officer, will succeed Mr.
Della Femina as chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Della Femina, 56 years old, is the creator of the name Meow Mix; wrote "From Those Wonderful Folks Who Brought You Pearl Harbor," with Charles Sopkin, and created the advertising for WABC-TV's Eyewitness News that highlighted a report on the Willowbrook hospital for the mentally ill.


Camille Serchuk, Edward Segal
Camille Serchuk, the daughter of Ivan Serchuk of Waccabuc, N.Y., and Phoebe Satlin of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was married yesterday to Edward Alan Segal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Segal of New York.
Rabbi James E. Ponet performed the ceremony at the Inn at Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Mrs.
Segal, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a Ph.D candidate in art history at Yale University.
Her father is a senior partner in Serchuk &amp; Zelermyer, a White Plains law firm.
Her mother, who is retired, was an accountant in New York.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Sheldon Satlin of Fort Lauderale.


Talk in Washington Heights: Fear, Drugs, and Now Corruption
Three generations of Adriano Espaillat's family have lived in the 34th Police Precinct in Washington Heights, a neighborhood where relatives' businesses have flourished and some still greet the family members by name when they walk down the street.
It is only when Mr.
Espaillat thinks about the fourth generation -- his own children -- that he wonders whether it is time to concede that in the struggle between civility and the chaos created by the growing drug culture, the bad guys are winning.


This Sand Wedge Is Not for Display
The United States Golf Association wants a piece of history, but TOM WATSON won't give it to them.
The sand wedge that Watson used for his remarkable chip-in to win the Open at Pebble Beach in 1972 remains at his house in Mission Hills, Kan., despite repeated requests from the U.S.G.A. that he donate it to the museum at its headquarters in Far Hills, N.J.


Naval Training Changes to Curb Sex Harassment
At the school here that trains elite "Top Gun" pilots, the Navy has begun experimenting with a timely addition to its standard curriculum.
Along with aviation and technical subjects, trainees are now being taught the same message about sexual harassment that is being posted on bulletin boards at bases all over the country: "Not in Our Navy."
The Navy's name for the course that has already been tested on 35 future pilots and flight officers at the Pensacola Naval Air Station is "core values" education.
If the experimental program, which began May 18 and ends July 1, wins the approval of top Navy officials in Washington, as expected, it will become a permanent and obligatory part of training for all 576,000 active duty personnel in the Navy, perhaps as soon as the end of 1992.


Review/Ballet; Robbins and Martins Use Verdi and Barber
There was an extra electricity in the air when the New York City Ballet performed at the New York State Theater on Friday night.
Mikhail Baryshnikov was dancing, with Yvonne Borree, in "Duo Concertant," one of George Balanchine's most romantic pas de deux.
But Jerome Robbins and Peter Martins contributed, too, to an exuberant evening of dance.
Mr.
Robbins responds to his Verdi score in "The Four Seasons" with lighthearted, often technically demanding dancing that has a Russian largeness of scale.
Snowflakes shiver, blown by two high-flying, prankster winds in "Winter," led by Todd Williams, Robert Wersinger and Jenifer Ringer.
The promising young Ms.
Ringer revealed an unexpected gift for comedy as an earthy soubrette of a head snowflake, but was uncharacteristically heavy in the role.


Perry London, 61, Psychologist; Noted for His Studies of Altruism
Perry London, a psychologist and educator who studied the altruistic behavior of people who rescued Jews from the Holocaust, died on Friday at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 61 years old and lived in Edison, N.J.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Lisa Sliwa Accuses 9th Precinct of Bungling Investigation
Lisa Sliwa accused detectives from the Ninth Precinct in New York City yesterday of dragging their heels in investigating the shooting of her husband, Curtis, and called on Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown to appoint detectives from another precinct to take over the case.
"I'm not indicting the New York Police Department as a whole," Mrs.
Sliwa said.
"I'm just saying there's something rotten in the Ninth Precinct, and there has been for a long time."


Reviews/Music; Ringo And a Band Of Stars
If George was the quiet one, Paul was the cute one and John was the smart one, then Ringo was the goofy one.
His downturned eyes give him a look of perennial puppy-dog sweetness; he bounces back and forth when he drums, as if the very notion of rhythm makes him want to hop out of his seat.
Buoyant, harmless and a trifle dense, he was the Beatle who always got picked on in the film "A Hard Day's Night." "That's me, happy-go-lucky," said Mr.
Starr from the stage of Radio City Music Hall on Friday night, where he led his All-Starr Band in the first of two performances.
A happy-go-lucky, star-splattered spectacle it was.
Besides the stars on the stage -- the band included the keyboardist Burton Cummings of the Guess Who, the guitarist Joe Walsh and and the bassist Timothy B. Schmit of the Eagles, the guitarists Dave Edmunds and Nils Lofgren, Todd Rundgren, and Mr.
Starr's son Zack Starkey on drums -- there were stars on the curtain, stars on the monitors, a star on Mr.
Starr's bass drum and a star-shaped lighting rig.
The agenda for the evening genuinely seemed to be having fun.
Throughout the show, Mr.
Lofgren and Mr.
Rundgren raced around the stage, hurtled the monitors and kicked and spun as if to shake the years from their frames.
Mr.
Starr himself seemed to glow in the audience's reception.
"What's my name?" he said at the outset.
Later he accepted bouquets and shook hands with nearly the entire front row.


Staying Cool and Saving the Ozone
Using a new device that sucks nearly all water vapor out of the air, a small air-conditioning company here has built a cooling system that uses ordinary water in place of ozone-destroying chemicals -- and provides cooling for a small fraction of the energy of conventional systems.
The system is at an early stage of development.
But its potential is enormous.
If it succeeds, a radically different approach to cooling could emerge that would reduce the demand for electricity.
That, in turn, would reduce the use of fuels by utilities that supply electricity.
Burning less fuel would reduce the emission of the pollutants that form acid rain and smog, and of carbon dioxide, which is believed to cause global warming.


U.S. Basketball 'Cannon Fodder' Is Worthy of Praise
The real stars didn't arrive here until later in the day, long after the college players who will serve as their scrimmage partners had returned from a two-hour morning practice at the University of California at San Diego.
No one seemed to notice the college players.
In another year, players like Bobby Hurley and Grant Hill of Duke, Anfernee Hardaway of Memphis State and Jamal Mashburn of Kentucky would probably have been part of the United States men's basketball team that would compete at the Summer Olympics.
This year, with the Games in Barcelona, Spain, next month, they are merely members of the development team.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WALL STREET REBOUND COULD PAY DIVIDENDS


I.B.M. to Introduce Software for the Blind
I.B.M. plans to introduce today a software program that enables blind users to take advantage of the "graphical user interface" that comes with its OS/2 operating system.
A graphical interface increases the ease of use and productivity by letting users issue orders to the computer by clicking a mouse device on icons and menus, instead of typing in commands.
It has not been available before to blind computer operators.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; JEWISH GROUP SAYS PEROT SIMPLY MADE A DONATION
Officials of the American Jewish Committee say that a $100,000 contribution the group received last month from Ross Perot had nothing to do with reports that Mr.
Perot belonged to private clubs that had no Jewish members.
The Wall Street Journal reported on Friday that Mr.
Perot sent the check to the organization weeks after he resigned from the two clubs in Dallas.
Jaime Kelstein, the group's fund-raising director disputed that interpretation of the contribution.
"There's no connection with that at all," he said.


Caralyn Cohen and Steven P. Fuld
Caralyn Hope Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mr.
Jerry L. Cohen of New York, was married yesterday to Steven Paul Fuld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth A. Fuld of New York.
Rabbi Irving Spielman officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Fuld, 25 years old, was until recently the production assistant of the Off Broadway musical "Eating Raoul." She is a graduate of Emory University, as is the bridegroom.
Her father is the chairman of Wm.
A.
White/Grubb &amp; Ellis Inc., a real-estate concern in New York.
He is also an owner and the president of the New Jersey Nets basketball team.
Her mother, Adrianne Cohen, is a theatrical investor and producer in New York.


Wiener Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


The Fine-Tuning of Courier's Machinelike Game
By winning the Australian Open and methodically defending his French Open title, Jim Courier is halfway to a Grand Slam in 1992, the first American in 54 years to be in that position.
This year, Courier, the No. 1-ranked male tennis player in the world, has compiled a tour-leading 23-match undefeated streak during which he's lost just three sets and won all six tie breakers he has been in.
He has never won Wimbledon, and his game, which emanates from baseline aggression, is not tailored to the grass surface.
But nobody seems able to write him out of the running for the tournament that starts today.


Trail in Kidnapping Case Leads to Carolina Resort
Several days before his arrest on charges of kidnapping an Exxon executive, Arthur D. Seale visited the luxurious South Carolina resort of Hilton Head Island, reminisced about his life there in the mid-1980's and mused about living there again and buying a marina, a woman who said she had dinner with him on the island recalled today.
Mr.
Seale was calm, casual, upbeat and apparently eager to resettle in Hilton Head, said the woman, who dined with her husband and Mr.
Seale at Kyoto, a Japanese restaurant at the resort.


It's the Scorer's Turn To Throw Out King
Jeff King of the Pittsburgh Pirates thought he was the fifth player in baseball history to be caught stealing twice in the same inning.
Not so fast.
King singled to start the Pirates' third inning last Monday against Philadelphia, then was apparently picked off first by catcher Darren Daulton.
When pitcher Terry Mulholland stumbled in the basepath as King scrambled back toward first in a rundown, King was awarded second for interference.


Accounts
*
Farm Credit Bank, Baltimore, to Williams Whittle Associates, Alexandria, Va., for a corporate campaign for the bank and 15 of its affiliated agricultural credit associations, after a review that included the incumbent, Barker, Campbell, Farley, Virginia Beach, Va.
Billings were not disclosed. *
The University of California at Los Angeles to Frankfurt Gips Balkind, Los Angeles, for a national television campaign.
The agency also picked up the trade print account of Leiber &amp; Stoller, the song-writing team whose past efforts include "Hound Dog," "Kansas City" and "Stand by Me." Billings were not disclosed for either account.


Man Planning to Be Wed Killed by Driver
A 28-year-old auto mechanic was killed by a hit-and-run driver early yesterday as he was leaving a Bronx restaurant where he and friends had been celebrating his upcoming wedding.
About half an hour later, the police arrested the suspected driver and a passenger.


Batya Elbaum and Daniel Messinger
Batya Elbaum, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Elbaum of Milwaukee, was married yesterday in Westport, Conn., to Daniel Solomon Messinger, a son of Dr.
Eli Messinger and Ruth W. Messinger, both of New York.
Rabbi Alan W. Miller performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilfred Wyler, grandparents of the groom.
Ms.
Elbaum, 42 years old, is retaining her name.
She and her husband are doctoral students in psychology at the University of Utah.
She is a graduate of the University of Wisconsin at Madison and received a master's degree in linguistics from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father, who is retired, owned an embroidery and custom quilting store in Milwaukee.
Her mother, Esther Elbaum, also retired, was a librarian at Marquette University.


Paris Asked to Admit Vichy's Crimes Against Jews
More than 200 French intellectuals and artists have called on President Francois Mitterrand to recognize and officially proclaim that France's collaborationist Vichy Government was responsible for crimes against Jews in World War II.
They urged the President to make such a statement to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the first major roundup of 13,000 French and foreign Jews on July 16 and 17, 1942.
Of some 76,000 Jews deported to death camps from France under the Nazi occupation, only 2,500 survived.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 22: MONDAY


Sports of the Times; A Kite Steady in the Wind
IN other moments, Tom Kite had steamed silently and politely when he was reminded that he was the best golfer never to have won a major championship.
But now, with the United States Open trophy glistening next to him, he finally acknowledged how much the question about the absence of a major title had annoyed him.
"Bugged the living daylights out of me," he said.


Fair Juries, in Black and White
Six years ago, striking down prosecutors' race-based challenges to prospective jurors, the Supreme Court began a needed cleansing of America's criminal justice system.
Now, in a Georgia case, the Court applies the same principles to prevent the defense, too, from striking jurors for purely racial reasons.
This steady progress toward nondiscriminatory jury selection, while not free of problems, has written a bright chapter in the high court's history.
Ordinarily, lawyers can refuse a certain number of potential jurors by using peremptory "strikes," which do not have to be justified.
Racial discrimination in jury selection has been a Federal crime for more than a century, yet lawyers have long managed to create one-race juries with discretionary strikes beyond a judge's scrutiny.


Review/Music; A Night of Progeny Opens Caramoor Festival
With so many outdoor music festivals in the vicinity of New York City, it can be easy to regard them as a generic mass.
Musically, that impulse is not far off the mark, for although each has a resident ensemble, the programs are largely dictated by the roving band of soloists and conductors who buzz from festival to festival like bees touring a flower garden, usually playing the same handful of works wherever they go.
The extent to which each festival has its own personality is a function of entirely extra-musical details, like setting and scenery.
The Caramoor Music Festival, which opened here tonight, takes place on the estate created by Walter and Lucie Bigelow Rosen, a retreat where gentility and eccentricity cohabit in comfort.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; 3 Dailies Join Hands to Cut Cost of News
INCREASINGLY, newspapers in a specific region sell advertising cooperatively.
But three New Jersey dailies are trying to apply the same principle to news coverage.
The Record, which covers much of northern New Jersey from its base in Hackensack, and The News Tribune in Woodbridge, both owned by the Borg family, are on the verge of pooling some news coverage with The Asbury Park Press, owned by the Plangere family.


New Drug Approved For Merck
Federal regulators have approved Merck &amp; Company's promising new drug to treat benign enlarged prostate, an often-painful condition affecting millions of American men over 50 years old.
Pharmaceutical industry analysts said the drug, called Proscar, would be a bonanza for Merck.
Physicians who specialize in prostate problems said yesterday that they hoped Proscar would allow many men to avoid a common form of surgery that costs $7,000 to $8,000 and is sometimes repeated after five years.
Americans spend at least $3 billion annually for prostate surgery.


Millard A. Ring, 76, Immigration Lawyer
Millard A. Ring, a retired immigration and customs lawyer who represented many foreign artists and performers, died on Wednesday at his home in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 76 years old.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Marcade Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Measurex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Theater; One Love Enhancer: Me Garden, You Gardener
In Peter Parnell's first play, "Sorrows of Stephen," the hero was obsessed with Goethe and the idea of love.
In Mr.
Parnell's new play, "Flaubert's Latest," the hero is a Flaubertiste, the author's most ardent admirer.
Where "Sorrows of Stephen" was an engaging romantic comedy with literary undertones, the new work is self-consciously literary.
Although there is incidental amusement in the comedy at Playwrights Horizons, one has to sift it from the preciousness.
As a playwright, Mr.
Parnell is known for his erudition; his "Romance Language" was crowded with famous authors and characters from American literature.
He is knowledgeable about the arts, but he is relentless in calling attention to that knowledge.


Mountain Voice Shares Ageless, Magic Tales
Someone recently asked Ray Hicks how he met his wife.
He answered straightforwardly enough:
The problem with his first girlfriend was that she was poor and raggedy, so Ray got her fixed up, but other boys then lured her away . . . so Ray courted her niece, but the niece's mother was a witch, who learned from reading tobacco stems that Ray wasn't really in love . . . so he went walking with a third girl, who took him to a fortune teller, who read some coffee grounds . . .


Northern Telecom Has New Way to Aim Fiber-Optic Beam
Northern Telecom, a huge Canadian manufacturer of telecommunications equipment, has announced an advance in a crucial aspect of fiber-optics transmission.
Fiber optics, which can convey vast amounts of data with blindingly fast pulses of light, is currently far too expensive to install in homes or businesses.
The advance would significantly reduce the cost of essential parts of a fiber-optic line, but would not reduce the large loss of light that contributes to the expense.


ISRAELIS TO VOTE, FACING CHALLENGES, FEARING STALEMATE
When Israelis vote on Tuesday, they will determine the shape of a new government to shepherd them through what may be some of the biggest changes in their history.
Yet paradoxically, the final weekend of the parliamentary election campaign ended today with the politicians having discussed few of the dominant issues in any depth.


Pioneer Fed Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Only in New York: Garbage Disposers, Banned, Stir Debate
New York is a city where convenience can always be purchased.
Too busy to shop for a new car?
No problem, dealers make house calls.
Need a cellular phone after midnight, a 10-gallon drum of tortilla chips, or a 17th-century medical book?
This is the place.
You can even buy a garbage disposer. Just don't get caught using it.


Vietnam Dead Hailed on Father's Day
Mike McCoy, whose father was killed in action in Vietnam in September 1964, said he had never celebrated Father's Day until today, when he joined more than 300 other surviving sons and daughters of Vietnam veterans at the memorial to their fathers.
"This is the first Father's Day card I have ever given," said Mr.
McCoy, 34 years old, of Riverside, Calif.
His expression was as somber as the overcast skies and the distant granite wall.


MacGregor Sports &amp; Fitness reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  2 STEPS BACK IN SOUTH AFRICA  The abyss between the African National Congress and the Government in South Africa is deepening, and both sides are stepping back, raising questions about the likelihood of an effective compromise.
A1  MATTERS OF SUBSTANCE IN ISRAEL  The world is watching Israel in the countdown to critical parliamentary elections, but few of the dominant issues have been discussed by the politicians in any depth.
A1


Jewelmasters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


'Totally Hot, Totally Cool,' Long-Haired Barbie Is a Hit
BIG hair is back, in the toy world at least.
Mattel Inc. has a surprise hit on its hands with its Totally Hair Barbie, a doll with a mane of synthetic tresses that reaches Barbie's ankles.


Four Injured, Including a Child, in Brooklyn Car Crash


IN SHIFT, TEHERAN REINS IN THE ARTS
The Iranian Government has suspended performances of an acclaimed theatrical production here, signaling that a two-month period of greater tolerance of artistic expression is now over.
The reversal comes as part of a conservative response to anti-Government rioting over housing evictions in eight major cities in recent weeks.
And it comes despite major victories by pragmatic supporters of President Hashemi Rafsanjani in parliamentary elections six weeks ago.


Miscellany
*
The American Association of Advertising Agencies, supported by the Association of National Advertisers, has asked the Advertising Research Foundation to review a recent study of pharmaceutical advertising.
The study concluded that most ads for prescription drugs that appeared in medical journals might violate Federal Food and Drug Administration regulations. *
The New York City Commission on Human Rights said it had asked its community relations bureau to look into advertising for the Daffy's clothing chain created by Follis DeVito Verdi, New York.
Advocates for the mentally ill complained that Daffy's print advertisements showing a straitjacket were offensive.


Catherine G. Scholz, Paul W. Brient
Catherine Grace Scholz, the daughter of Drs.
Wilfried W. Scholz and Angela L. Scholz of Latham, N.Y., was married yesterday to Paul William Brient, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce W. Brient of Gainesville, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Joseph C. Williamson, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Brient, 25 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton, from which her husband graduated summa cum laude and as a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
Until recently, she was a research assistant at the American Institute of Physics in New York.
Both her parents are professors of physics at the State University of New York in Albany.


Israel Softens Threat Against Palestinians For Meeting Arafat
Israel today softened its threat to arrest Palestinian peace negotiators who flouted Israeli law last week by publicly embracing Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Instead of being arrested as soon as they return to Israel, as the Government previously threatened, the Palestinians will simply be investigated, a police spokeswoman said, suggesting that legal measures might be taken later.


Dimark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Unveils His Economic Blueprint
Gov.
Bill Clinton, seeking to hone his campaign message, proposed an economic plan today that called for sharp increases in taxes on the rich and on corporations, and major revisions and reallocations of government spending of all kinds.
Mr.
Clinton, the winner of the Democratic primary campaign, refined and attached price tags to ideas he has mentioned before, and he also made some significant new proposals.


Women Now Talk Back To Ladies' Home Journal
For more than a century, The Ladies' Home Journal has been talking to the women of America.
Now it is asking women to talk back.
And they are.
By the thousands.
In its April issue, the magazine ran an article titled, "Abortion -- Notes from the War Zone," followed by a box with three questions on abortion.
Readers were asked to call a "900" telephone number with their opinions; 30,000 readers responded.


Review/Television; Jackie Mason Forgoes His Stand-Up Routine
Jackie Mason, comic, is taking himself quite seriously on "The Jackie Mason Show," a new Mondays-at-8 P.M. series on Channel 9.
This is the television equivalent of those radio call-in shows on which opinions, informed or not, are full to bursting with sound and fury.
Here, though, the host works not off telephone callers but off a studio audience, described by the producers as Mr.
Mason's "handpicked celebrity audience of newsmakers." Of course, one person's celebrity can be another's loudmouth.
The premiere two weeks ago featured assorted members of the working press, both print and electronic, in a heated session that touched on everything from the Ross Perot phenomenon to Irangate, even managing to conclude at one point that adultery is a pointless election issue.
"Nixon is the only President that never committed adultery," Mr.
Mason insisted, "and look at him." Tonight the theme will be "Lawyers," with the lineup scheduled to include Eric Naiburg, Albert Krieger.
Barry Slotnick, Joel Siegal, Raoul Lionel Felder -- in short, most of the usual suspects.


System Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Dodgers Tie Mark For Futility
Astros 2, Dodgers 0
HOUSTON, June 21 (AP) -- The Dodgers lost their 10th consecutive game today, matching the club record since moving to Los Angeles in 1958, as Butch Henry and Doug Jones combined on a seven-hitter in Houston's 2-0 victory.
The last-place Dodgers, who have lost 14 of their last 18 games, also dropped 10 straight in August 1961.
The franchise record for consecutive losses is 16, set by the 1944 Brooklyn Dodgers.


Standard Commercial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Art; A Small Show Within an Enormous One
The best thing about "Documenta 9," the international exhibition of contemporary art that opened here on June 13, is that within its enormous, shapeless mass of artworks a rather good, relatively small show of installation art struggles to be free.
One of the bad things -- and there are several -- is that the show is so big and unfocused that it seems to be without standards.
Almost any artist working today could have been in it.


Helicopter Crashes in Connecticut, Killing Flight Nurse


Sue Elliott, Barry Tuckwell
Sue Elliott, the daughter of Lila Levitan of Rockville, Md., was married yesterday to Barry Tuckwell, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Tuckwell.
Cantor Siegfried Rowe performed the ceremony at the Fountain Head Country Club in Hagerstown, Md.
Mrs.
Tuckwell, 40 years old, is the director of customer relations for the Potomac Edison Company in Hagerstown.
She graduated from the University of Maryland in College Park, and received an M.B.A. from Frostburg State University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Topps Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Working on a Railroad In His Own Backyard
FRANK Field spent 20 years working for other people's railroads. Now, he runs his own.
Each Sunday, Mr.
Field puts on his conductor's uniform and directs operations of the Peconic County Miniature Railroad, which winds for two miles around Mr.
Field's backyard and the former municipal dump next door.


Judy L. Faust, William Hartnett
Judy L. Faust, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Monroe G. Faust of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Y. Hartnett, a son of Ambrose J. Hartnett of Chatham, Mass., and Mrs.
Stephen Lulis of Rehoboth Beach, Del.
Rabbi Fredric Dworkin officiated at the Hammond Museum in North Salem, N.Y., with the Rev.
Roland Ghirlando, a Roman Catholic priest, assisting.
Mrs.
Hartnett, 36 years old, is the managing editor of Working Woman magazine in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father, a former executive vice president of William Iselin &amp; Company, a financial institution, is a consultant to the Nationsbanc and Commercial Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Lucie Faust, is a special-education teacher in the Edgewood School in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater
Metropolitan Opera House
American Ballet Theater's nine-week season ended Saturday night with a floral note and a Danish-American touch.
As the dancers joined hands for a communal bow after performing splendidly in the final ballet, Jiri Kylian's "Sinfonietta," flowers rained down from the audience.


Will School Taxes Subsidize Whittle's Profits?; Get-Rich-Quick Scheme
To the Editor:
"Those Campus C.E.O.'s" (Op-Ed, June 1) by Russell Jacoby discusses the Whittle Communications-Benno C. Schmidt Jr. determination to bypass America's public school system and develop a national, for-profit system.
"McSchool" seems a most appropriate characterization.
Who are these "educators" who would reduce the number of teachers in the classrooms and replace them by a bank of electronic equipment?
Have they ever participated in the joy of teaching and of learning that takes place between student and mentor?
Do they really think a gaggle of electronic doodads can replace the stimulation of the classroom as led by a teacher who is in love with the art?


South Africa: Back to Brink; A Massacre Lays Bare The Still-Yawning Gap
Among the bitter placards that greeted President F. W. de Klerk on his visit to the Boipatong massacre site on Saturday was one that bypassed the anger of the moment to tap a deeper rage.
Daubed in white paint on a scrap of plastic that was waved aloft by a young township man were these words: "White man is Satan."


Prism Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


MSR Exploration Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reviews/Jazz Festival; Tito Puente's Brand of Extroversion
In Avery Fisher Hall's acoustics, most amplified music becomes tinny and scattered, while the sharp accents of percussion ricochet wildly around the hall's hard surfaces.
It's a particularly tough room for salsa and Latin jazz, the program for Saturday night's JVC jazz festival concert by Oscar D'Leon's band and Tito Puente's Latin Jazz All-Stars.
They ignored the messy and sometimes inept sound, while they did their jobs.
For Mr.
Puente, Latin jazz is an outpouring of virtuosity, both the quiet kind involved in blending be-bop and Afro-Cuban rhythms and the bravura of soloists spouting thousands of notes per chorus.


Tokyo Stock Market Plunges
Stock prices were down sharply in Tokyo today, as the Nikkei index of 225 issues closed below 16,000 for the first time since October 1986.
The Nikkei ended the day's session down 598.65 points, or 3.62 percent, to 15,921.22.
The index had dipped as low as 15,885.79.


Brother Gregory W. Nugent, 80, Leading Catholic Educator, Dies
Brother Gregory W. Nugent, the former president of Manhattan College and a top official at the Catholic University of America, died on Saturday at his home on the university campus in Washington.
He was 80 years old.
The apparent cause of death was a heart attack, a university spokeswoman said.


Reviews/Jazz Festival; Small Glimpses of the Gillespie Craft
The trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie was the added attraction at last year's JVC Jazz Festival, showing up at concerts unannounced, breaking up audiences with just a raised eyebrow or two or a sly sideward glance.
Mr.
Gillespie, reveling in anarchy, imbued everything he did with an air of the carnival.
He was badly missed at the opening show of this year's JVC Jazz Festival, his own 75th birthday tribute at Carnegie Hall on Friday night.
Mr.
Gillespie, who is recovering from an illness, couldn't make it.
And though the tribute went off well enough, with moments of individual brilliance from various improvisers, the entire event, subdued and a bit directionless, sorely needed Mr.
Gillespie's help.
It was a body without a head.


Coloradans Raise Voices Against Jet Fighters' Din
In the lonely shadows of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, hermit monks live in spartan huts and go for a week at a time without conversation.
But the prayerful silence of the Carmelite monastery here is often shattered by fighter jets zooming overhead.
As troops and planes are being recalled from overseas, and the military budget shrinks, the Air Force is trying to expand its share of air space around the country for training missions.
The Air Force reasons it can save time and fuel by holding these missions closer to air bases rather than in faraway areas designated for training.


Mmmmm, Good! Leary Dines
What did Tim Leary have tucked inside his glove tonight?
Why was the Yankee pitcher in such a rush to remove the object that he apparently stuffed in his mouth as umpires approached the mound in the fifth inning?
Whether it was sandpaper or something else that could be used to deface a baseball, Leary seemed to be caught reaching into his glove and placing something in his mouth on a television replay tonight.
It happened seconds after Baltimore Manager Johnny Oates walked out of his dugout with what he said was a doctored foul ball and asked home plate umpire Terry Kraft to check Leary.


INSIDE
Economic Blueprint Issued For a Clinton Presidency
Gov.
Bill Clinton laid out an economic plan for his Presidency that included higher taxes on the rich and a major revamping of Federal priorities.
He said he would particularly increase spending on programs that "put people first." Page A14.
Yeltsin Issues Warning
President Boris N. Yeltsin, back home, says Russia will not stand for the deadly ethnic clashes sweeping Moldova and Georgia.
Page A3.
The Roxy?
Hollanderize?
For those too young to have known New York in the days of the original "Guys and Dolls," a guide to shimmering slivers of the lost city in Frank Loesser's lyrics.
Page B1.
Kite Wins U.S.
Open
Tom Kite as he sank a birdie putt en route to winning the first major title in his otherwise illustrious career, in the 92d United States Open at Pebble Beach, Calif.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Hardly a New Wave For U.S. Swim Team
Janet Evans, no longer a pool shark of the teen-aged variety, was forced to lighten up on the ice cream and French fries to remain competitive in the middle distances.
Pablo Morales, after a three-year layoff, found inspiration in some of his 50-year-old pupils.
Matt Biondi dropped several events from his repertory and started paying attention to his retirement fund.


Joe Cordell, 64, Leader In Walter Industries
Joe B. Cordell, the recently retired head of Walter Industries, died on Thursday at Memorial Hospital in Tampa, Fla.
He was 64 years old and lived in Tampa.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday


Reviews/Music; Rap Performed Live: A Wavering Case
Will rap's live concerts ever match the variety and subtlety of rap records?
A New Music Seminar showcase on Wednesday afternoon at the Ritz held out only occasional hope.
Yo-Yo, Das EFX, Main Source and House of Pain each performed a handful of songs over recorded backing tracks, some adding the scratching of a live disk jockey.
The words varied from smart to self-aggrandizing to simple-minded, while too much of the music came across as variations on an overpowering drumbeat.
Except for Yo-Yo, the only female performer, the rappers all had a similar stage act: striding around the stage as if they were hanging out on a street corner.
The music played by D. J. Flex during the extended breaks between performers showed far more imagination than the live efforts.


Editorial Notebook; Convention as Theater
They're getting Madison Square Garden ready for the Democratic National Convention, now just three weeks away, and the talk is of which network lucked out and got the best sky box (CNN), whether the curved podium will look better than the angled ones of old (yes) and who will get to speak during "super prime time" (not known yet).
What about the Garden's purple and aqua seats?
Should they be slipcovered in red, white and blue? (Definitely.) And where should Hillary Clinton sit? (Hint: where the TV cameras can't miss her.)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; FROM 'SWEDISH BIKINI TEAM' ADS TO PEROT?
Hal Riney, the advertising executive who helped create Ronald Reagan's "Morning in America" commercials in 1984 and more recently the "Swedish bikini team" theme for Old Milwaukee Beer, may participate in the advertising for Ross Perot.
James Squires, a Perot spokesman, said it would be premature to say that Mr.
Riney was working for the Perot campaign, but he acknowledged that a crew from Mr.
Riney's agency, Hal Riney &amp; Partners, had videotaped a Perot rally in Sacramento for possible advertising use.
Mr.
Riney, of San Francisco, built a reputation in the 1980's for creativity with campaigns like those for Bartles &amp; Jaymes wine coolers and for Saturn cars.
Mr.
Riney's Old Milwaukee commercials have been criticized by people who see the portrayals of scantily clad women in blond wigs as degrading to women.


Talk Is Cheap, but Profitable, on TV
Two years ago, Montel Williams, a former marine and naval officer, was making motivational speeches to high school students.
Now he talks on national television to child prostitutes, white supremacists, big-breasted women, kids with guns and thin women who love fat men.


Kite Beats the Elements, but It Isn't a Breeze
On a day that asked the ultimate of the world's best golfers on perhaps the world's best golf course, Tom Kite finally had all the answers in a major championship as he won the 92d United States Open today by two shots over Jeff Sluman.
In winds that buffeted Pebble Beach's famed Cliffs of Doom at better than 35 miles per hour, the 42-year-old Kite successfully handled a golf course that seemed to consist of steel wool and Formica.
He also handled two golfers, Sluman and Colin Montgomerie, who hit shots seemingly touched by destiny, and managed, as well, to fight off his own potentially destructive demons from disappointments past.


A Passion for Polo
FRED COUPLES's wife, DEBORAH, was the subject of a profile in The London Daily Mail last month.
She was labeled Superwoman for her devotion to a wide range of interests, from interior design, to giving tennis lessons, to high-goal polo.


Fearing Reduced Benefits, 250 Suffolk Officers Seek to Retire
More than 250 Suffolk County police officers, fearing reduced pension benefits, have filed for retirement within the last two weeks as Suffolk legislators debated an across-the-board pay cut for all county employees.
The County Legislature is expected to vote this week on the pay issue and an additional proposal by County Executive Robert Gaffney, a Republican, to lay off 1,300 county workers, including 300 police officers.
The moves are required to win Albany's approval of a county proposal to borrow up to $91 million to close a $110 million budget gap in this year's $1.3 billion budget.


Jeanne Bachelor, Jonathan S. Lavine
Jeanne Diane Bachelor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Bachelor of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Scott Lavine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerrold Lavine of Providence, R.I.
Rabbi William Horn performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.
Mrs.
Lavine, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She also received an M.B.A. from Harvard, as did her husband.
Her father, formerly a vice chairman of Drexel Burnham Lambert, is a private investor in Short Hills, N.J.


Hoping Lightning Won't Strike at All
Thunder and lightning make infrequent appearances on the Monterey peninsula, but the U.S.G.A. was taking no chances after what happened last year at the Open at Hazeltine in Minnesota.
There, one spectator was killed and five injured when lightning struck a tree near the 11th tee during the first round.
The incident heightened awareness throughout the golf world to the dangers of lightning on the course.


Dance in Review
Dance Brazil
St. Mark's Church Manhattan
When Rosangela Silvestre's "Tent of the Miracles" allowed its cast to dance, it was exhilarating.
The two-act work, which Dance Brazil presented Friday night, concluded with an evocation of traditional Bahia festivals in Brazil.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater
Metropolitan Opera House
Robert Wallace is about as solemn a young pyrotechnist as they come.
And so there was an extra fascination to his role debut as Peter in Michael Smuin's "Peter and the Wolf," presented on Saturday afternoon.
Would Mr.
Wallace be able to lighten up as Peter?
He did, in an engaging performance that captured the character's spunky insouciance.


Union Officials Predict Easy Ratification of Contract With Con Edison
After 11th-hour negotiations prevented a possible strike by 13,000 Consolidated Edison workers, union officials confidently predicted yesterday that a tentative four-year pact would be overwhelmingly ratified by union members.
"The possibility of rejection is minuscule," said Joe Flaherty, president of Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers of America.
He called the contract, tentatively approved by negotiators on Saturday night, the best in the nation for utility workers.


At the 7th, It Was Ready, Aim, Hope
How can a hole that looks so easy be so difficult?
That was the question Tom Kite posed about Pebble Beach's short, par-3 seventh hole after he won the 92d United States Open here today.
And Kite had played the hole as well as anyone and better than most, sinking a 20-yard chip shot from the left rough today for a birdie 2 while most of his colleagues were struggling for pars and bogeys.


Spectrum Information Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


Reviews/Jazz Festival; Musical Slapstick Contrasts With Happiness on Piano
An attempt to leaven the JVC Jazz Festival with humor was the basis for a Saturday night concert at the Equitable Auditorium called "Jazz for the Fun of It." The fun was provided by three singers and songwriters -- Dave Frishberg, Mose Allison and Jay Leonhart -- along with Eddy Davis's seven-piece band, the New York Society for the Preservation of Illegitimate Music, a group that is primarily intent on preserving the musical slapstick of Spike Jones.
The three singers provided their own accompaniment: Mr.
Frishberg alone at the piano, Mr.
Allison on piano with Ratzo Harris on drums and Mr.
Leonhart leading a trio with the pianist Bill Charlap and the drummer Danny Gottlieb.
Not surprisingly, their concentration was on lyrics that were often wry or witty, occasionally ironic, even sentimental and with some references to jazz musicians or the jazz world.


Waging a 10-Year Battle For a Place to Call Home
Nearly a decade ago, after searching in vain for an apartment she could afford, Renee Coleman returned with her 10-year-old son and 7-year-old daughter to the Gordon Heights, L.I., house where her five brothers, her sister, her parents and her grandmother lived.
"After I divorced," she recalled, "I wasn't able to afford housing on my own so I moved back home with my parents."


Lisa Anne Capra, Timothy Davis
Dr.
Lisa Anne Capra, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Capra of Boston, was married yesterday to Dr.
Timothy Powell Davis, a son of William J. Davis of Houston and the late Lois P. Davis.
The Rev.
Barbara Livingston, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Cochran Chapel at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
Mrs.
Capra-Davis is a resident in pediatrics at the Floating Hospital of New England Medical Center in Boston.
She graduated from Yale University.
She received her M.D. from Baylor College of Medicine, as did her husband.
Her father is the director of planned giving at Phillips Academy.
Her grandfather the late Peter Capra was the executive director of the Boys' Club of New York.
Her mother, Kathleen Capra, is a taxpayer specialist with the Treasury Department in Boston.


People
*
Harry Taylor was named co-advertising director of Out magazine, New York, a new position.
He had been the fashion and fragrance manager of Spin magazine, New York. *
Milijana Novakovic was named brodcast production coordinator at Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, a new position.
She had been an associate producer at Zwiren/Ayer, Chicago.
Doug Githens, an art director, was named senior art director.
Keith Clark was named director of data base marketing, a new position.
He had been manager of data base marketing at Leo Burnett Co., Chicago.


Elissa Bishop, Randolph Becker
Elissa Beryl Bishop and the Rev.
Dr.
Randolph W. Becker were married yesterday at the Unitarian Universalist Church of Central Nassau in Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles Magistro performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Becker, 44 years old, is the vice president of American Coin Portfolios of New York, a wholesale dealer in rare coins in Hicksville, L.I.
She graduated from Hunter College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Kaufman of New Hyde Park, L.I.
Her father is the president of the Electronics Writers and Editors Inc., an electronics textbook publishing company in New Hyde Park.


TCBY Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


California Amplifier reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Spate of Redemptions Creates a Predicament
The record number of municipal bond redemptions scheduled to begin next week has begun to push prices up -- and yields down -- and is expected to set off a scramble among investors suddenly laden with billions of unexpected dollars.
For those investors, the unpleasant reality in the new world of low interest rates will be that the higher-income, low-risk securities that were plentiful in the early 1980's, when double-digit rates made municipals so attractive, are long gone.
And investors now have no choice but to accept significantly less income, even if they accept higher-risk municipals.


Graf and Stich Are Itching for a Repeat Performance
Just a year ago, Michael Stich was a nobody and Steffi Graf was a mess.
This year, each is defending a Wimbledon title and both say they possess sufficient gumption to insure that neither the whims of the grass nor the wishes of their challengers will detour them from an obvious mission as the tournament starts on Monday.
"I've been waiting for this for a long time," said Graf, who went without a victory in five Grand Slam events -- an unheard-of drought for her -- before capturing her third Wimbledon championship last year.


Coc Nam Journal; Where Shells Once Whistled, Trade Now Hums
The towns and villages that Vietnam vowed 13 years ago never to rebuild are humming with more life than ever before.
Caravans of porters wind along the mountain paths that link Vietnam and China, bent under huge bales of cloth, tools and household utensils, sacks of dried fish, eels, turtles and frogs or the many herbs and leaves that people on both sides use to try to cure their ills.


Joyner-Kersee Wins, and Worries
Jackie Joyner-Kersee is so good in the heptathlon that when she wins but fails to break or threaten her world record, people want to know why.
Perhaps everyone, including Jackie and her husband and coach, Bob Kersee, expect too much too often.
So today, although she easily won in the United States Olympic track and field trials despite debilitating heat, shaky concentration and an aching ankle, she did not impress herself or her coach.


U.N. Official for Cambodia Pressures the Khmer Rouge
The chief United Nations official for Cambodia today told signers of a peace accord that the Khmer Rouge were "regrettably violating the agreement" by refusing to disarm and were creating "an obstacle to all United Nations operations" in the country.
The comments, by Yasushi Akashi, came at a 32-nation conference aimed at obtaining large financial pledges to rebuild the Cambodia's devastated infrastructure and repratriate more than 350,000 refugees.
Mr.
Akashi's statements were among the strongest yet in his recent campaign to force the Khmer Rouge to abide by the accord, which was signed in Paris in October.
The conference, however, has been overshadowed by increasing violence in the Cambodian countryside, most of which is attributed to the Khmer Rouge, whose control of the country in the 1970's resulted in the deaths of perhaps a million Cambodians.


Arbitrator Is Selected In Ranger-Flyer Dispute
The dispute between the Rangers and the Philadelphia Flyers over a deal with the Quebec Nordiques for Eric Lindros is scheduled to go before an arbitrator late Monday afternoon, a National Hockey League official said today.
A decision could be reached quickly, but it could also be several days before the arbitrator has a ruling, according to Gil Stein, the N.H.L.'s vice president and general counsel.


Big Depositors Face Changes
The conversion of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company into a division of Chemical Bank may cause some adjustments among customers with large deposits at both banks.
As separate banks, the $100,000 limit for Federal deposit insurance was calculated independently at each bank.
But after Dec. 19, the end of a six-month grace period granted by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, deposit insurance coverage will be based on combined deposits at both banks.


Meredith Berlin, L. F. Bencivengo
Meredith Joy Berlin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Berlin of Truro, Mass., was married yesterday to Lawrence Frank Bencivengo Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bencivengo of Wallingford, Conn.
Judge Stella Schindler of the New York State Family Court performed the civil ceremony on Ballston Beach in Truro.
The bride, 26 years old, is an actress and freelance drama teacher in Seattle.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
Her father, a former diplomatic correspondent for the New York Post, is an associate professor of journalism at Boston University.
Her mother, Nancy Berlin, is an artist.


Chinese Might Simplify Adoptions by Foreigners
China is considering a plan to simplify adoption procedures and make it easier for thousands of eager foreign couples to come to China to adopt Chinese babies.
While Chinese orphanages have many unwanted babies, mostly girls who have been abandoned by parents who wanted boys, the authorities have been ambivalent about adoptions.
While the number of adoptions by foreigners has been growing, most have been arranged directly with the orphanages and there has been no national policy on adoptions by foreigners.


Latshaw Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Quotation of the Day
"I can no longer explain to our people why we continue to talk to a government which is murdering our people." -- NELSON MANDELA.  [ A1:5. ]


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Looking Back; Where Perot Isn't Quite Trumanesque
So great is the love for President Truman here, so fresh the memories, it is as if he is still alive on this summer evening, standing in his straw hat and white spectator shoes on the porch on Delaware Avenue.
"Happy 108th Birthday Harry S. Truman," reads a note in the window of Clinton's Drug Store, its message among half a dozen scrawled in crayon by grade-schoolers.
Another, more a campaign poster than a birthday card, proclaims, "Harry S. Truman is No. 1."


Sister Margaret Carthy, 80, Dean Who Led College of New Rochelle
Sister Margaret Carthy, former president of the College of New Rochelle and dean of its graduate school, died on Sunday at the Marian Residence in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She was 80 years old.
She was known as Mother Mary Peter during her long career as a Roman Catholic college administrator.


Tutu Urging Olympics Ban on Pretoria
As President F. W. de Klerk cut short a foreign visit to deal with one of the worst political crises of his tenure, a leading human rights advocate questioned today whether South Africa should be allowed to compete in the Olympic Games after the Boipatong massacre last week.
Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu, the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize laureate, said his country's invitation to the Olympics -- the first after 32 years of banishment over the policy of apartheid -- should be revoked unless the Government moves quickly to catch and prosecute the Boipatong killers or accepts new controls on the police.


CHRONICLE
Her name and the distinctive trill of her voice have become inextricably linked with the subject of sex, so it seems strange to envision Dr.
RUTH WESTHEIMER as the head of a neighborhood Y. But that is exactly the new job she undertook with her inauguration last week as president of the Y.W./Y.M.H.A. of Washington Heights and Inwood.
"Who would have thought that at age 64 I would be called Madame President and that they would make a gavel my size," Dr.
Ruth said yesterday.
At her installation, RUTH MESSINGER, the Manhattan Borough President, gave her a three-foot-long gavel.
Dr.
Ruth is 4 feet 7 inches tall.


Newark Police Start Plan With Safe Streets the Goal
Struggling to take back the streets from unruly young people, the Newark Police Department has announced a summer program to put more officers on neighborhood foot patrol and break up clusters of idle teen-agers, many of whom are arrested repeatedly in stolen cars.
The start of the program today comes two days after the latest cops-and-robbers auto-theft showdown in Essex County, where Newark and other communities are experiencing an epidemic of car theft.


Political Eavesdropping Made Easier
When the Democratic Party gathers in Madison Square Garden to nominate its Presidential candidate next month, delegates, party officials and members of the press are expected to bring in 1,000 or more cellular telephones, making it the first political convention of the cellular age.
That means people with small inexpensive radio scanners both inside and near the Garden could lock into these phone signals as easily as a motorist tunes into a station on a car radio.


Yankees Come Back Only to Come Apart
The infield played in, the outfield played in and the home crowd came to its feet.
The game was tied, the Orioles had the bases loaded with one out and the situation looked bleak for the Yankees in the bottom of the ninth.
It turned even bleaker just two pitches later when Mike Devereaux lined a soft single to right-center field off Tim Burke to score Leo Gomez and lift the Orioles to a dramatic 5-4 victory tonight at Oriole Park at Camden Yards.
The Yankees had erased an early 4-0 deficit and tied the game in the top of the ninth when Roberto Kelly smashed a two-run homer off the nearly invincible Gregg Olson.


Short-Term Notes Are Sold by AMR
The AMR Corporation, the parent company of American Airlines, sold $200 million of short-term securities yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The 6 1/4 percent notes, which mature on July 1, 1995, were priced at 99.839 to yield 6.31 percent, or about 83-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury securities with a like maturity.


A Homemade Boy of Summer
A Brooklyn Dodgers game was incomplete for Meyer Robinson without his 16-millimeter movie camera.
In the 1940's and 1950's, the camera was his constant companion when he brought family and friends or stole away at lunchtime from his Bush Terminal winery, where Manischewitz sweet kosher wines were made.
"He loved making home movies," said his daughter, Gale Goldberg.
"On one reel, there'd be Pee Wee Reese and my fifth birthday party."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.66
5.83
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.67
3.64
5.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.77
3.75
5.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.81
6.83
8.18
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.83
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.76
8.75
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.54
6.54
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


While Broadway Is Feasting, Small Troupes Are Starving
It may be boom time on Broadway, but this has not been a good season for a number of New York City's small nonprofit theater companies.
The 13-year-old Manhattan Punch Line will close its doors by the end of June; the 24-year-old AMAS Musical Theater has indefinitely suspended operations, and managers of the 25-year-old Negro Ensemble Company say they will have to shut down by the end of the year if they cannot raise $250,000 to keep going.
The Double Image Company, an ensemble of actors, directors and writers that ran the Samuel French One-Act Play Festival, has halted production.
And a dozen other theater companies are in serious financial trouble but will not say so publicly.


Your Unconscious Mind May Be Smarter Than You
PSYCHOLOGISTS are using ingenious new methods to plumb the unconscious.
Their vigorous, systematic exploration is laying bare the basic but ordinarily invisible building blocks of irrational opinion, prejudice and neurosis.
Yet they also reveal an unconscious far smarter in some ways than the conscious mind.
The current scientific look into the mind's shadow regions has allowed researchers to move beyond decades of dogged preoccupation with seeking conclusive empirical evidence that the unconscious mind truly exists.
These researchers take its existence for granted; their question is, just how sophisticated are unconscious mental processes?


Sears Auto Centers Halt Commissions After Flap
In the wake of charges that Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company defrauded customers in California and New Jersey, the retailer said today that it would eliminate its commission-based pay structure for its employees who propose auto repairs.
In the last two weeks, state officials have charged Sears's auto-service centers with defrauding customers by systematically recommending unnecessary repairs.
While Sears continued to deny all allegations of wrongdoing by its auto- repair shops, Edward A. Brennan, the chairman, conceded today that the incentive compensation program and sales goals created an environment where mistakes occurred.


HIGH COURT VOIDS LAW SINGLING OUT CRIMES OF HATRED
Declaring that the First Amendment prohibits the Government from "silencing speech on the basis of its content," a five-member majority of the Supreme Court ruled today that legislatures may not single out racial, religious or sexual insults or threats for prosecution as "hate speech" or "bias crimes."
Although sharply divided in approach, the other four Justices agreed with the Court in declaring unconstitutional a St.
Paul ordinance making it a crime to engage in speech or behavior likely to arouse "anger or alarm" on the basis of "race, color, creed, religion or gender."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll; Bush and Clinton Sag in Survey; Perot's Negative Rating Doubles
The two major party candidates show remarkable weakness in the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
President Bush's handling of the economy is now as unpopular as President Jimmy Carter's ever was, while only a third of American voters see strong leadership qualities in Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Ross Perot, the all-but-declared independent candidate, is faring better with this disgruntled electorate, but even his apolitical allure is showing its limits.
Mr.
Perot is now essentially tied with Mr.
Bush in first place when voters are offered a choice among the three.
But the percentage of voters who view the Dallas billionaire negatively has more than doubled in six weeks.


N.H.L. Guard Changes Amid Lindros Uproar
John Ziegler's 15-year reign as president of the National Hockey League effectively ended today as new leaders declared intentions to repair their league's shabby image and put it on a progressive path.
The league's board of governors meetings concluded here with the announcement that Ziegler was being replaced on an interim basis by Gil Stein, who had been the league's vice president and legal counsel.
Stein will operate under the title of president-elect until Ziegler's resignation is official on Sept. 30.


Observer; Back From the Dead
Now that Governor Clinton has dumped Jesse Jackson, President Bush may have to dump Dan Quayle.
This has nothing to do with the Vice President's inability to spell "potato." George Washington was a terrible speller too, but a pretty good President nevertheless.
On the other hand, President Bush needs a gesture that will make millions see him as decisive and politically courageous.
Mr.
Clinton showed the way by dumping Mr.
Jackson in the now famous dust-up about Sister Souljah.


Winning the Game of 'Global Smokestack Chasing'
In choosing to build its first United States production plant in South Carolina, the German auto maker BMW is following a path taken by a number of prominent European manufacturers.
The state has courted international companies since the 1960's, when officials lured the German chemical and fiber company Hoechst A.G. to Spartanburg.
The list of other foreign companies subsequently drawn to the area includes the Michelin tire group, which moved here in the early 1970's; the Robert Bosch Corporation, in 1985; Bertelesmann A.G.
Distribution, in 1986; Adidas U.S.A., in 1988, and Hitachi Electronics Devices in 1989.


Groupe Bull Chairman Reportedly Forced Out
Francis Lorentz, the chairman of the troubled state-owned computer maker Groupe Bull, has been ousted after repeated clashes with the French Government, company officials said today.
Mr.
Lorentz's departure, to be formally announced by the Government this week, comes in the midst of an extensive reorganization of Bull after the wide-ranging alliance it arranged earlier this year with the International Business Machines Corporation.
Mr.
Lorentz, a technocrat who has worked at Bull since 1982, has been its chairman since 1989.


Q&amp;A
Birds of America
Q.  Are any official state birds endangered?
A.
Of the officially designated state birds, only two, the Hawaiian goose, state bird of Hawaii, and the eastern brown pelican, state bird of Louisiana, are listed as endangered species by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.


There's No Subsidy in Coastal Flood Insurance; Planning for Erosion
To the Editor:
I commend you for "Beachfront Owners Face Possible Insurance Cuts" (front page, May 27), your excellent summary of the history and status of the proposed amendments to Federal flood insurance to address the threat of coastal erosion.
The amendments would remedy the anomaly that the program insures oceanfront homes against flood or erosion damage, but places no limits on how close to the water's edge new or rebuilt structures may be.


M. F. K. Fisher, Writer on the Art of Food, Dies at 83
M.
F.
K.
Fisher, the writer whose artful personal essays about food created a genre, died yesterday afternoon at her home on the Bouverie Ranch in Glen Ellen, Calif.
She was 83 years old.
She died after a lengthy battle with Parkinson's disease, her daughter Kennedy Wright said.
"I think it was probably the effects of the disease coupled with the fact that she was 83 years old," Ms.
Wright said.


Lawyers Seek A New Trial In Gotti Case
Convicted but unbowed, John Gotti took a new tack yesterday in an unusual attempt to gain his freedom.
Noting that two jurors had come forward to complain that his racketeering-murder conviction was unfair, his lawyers sought a new trial one day before Mr.
Gotti was to be sentenced.


Police Arrest Co-Worker In Slaying Of Woman
A former maintenance worker at a Gap store in mid-Manhattan has been charged in the murder of a 22-year-old assistant manager at the store in January, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said yesterday.
The defendant, 20-year-old Anwar Abdul, was arrested three days after the slaying on Jan. 25, but he was released a day later for lack of evidence.
Mr.
Abdul, who surrendered to the police in Texas on Friday, is expected to arrive in New York on Wednesday.


No Damaging Evidence Revealed, Vincent Says
Commissioner Fay Vincent emerged from a meeting with Yankees General Manager Gene Michael yesterday and said he had no evidence that would be detrimental to George Steinbrenner's pending return to active duty with the Yankees.
"We have more work to do, but so far I don't see anything here that's very serious," Vincent said.
"I haven't found anything troublesome."


4 Named to Executive Posts at CUNY
JOYCE F. BROWN  Vice chancellor for student affairs and urban programs
Currently the City University of New York's vice chancellor for urban affairs, Dr.
Brown will also assume the position of vice chancellor for student affairs and urban programs.
As such she will oversee areas like financial aid, admissions and student activities for the 200,000-student CUNY system.


CHRONICLE
Her name and the distinctive trill of her voice have become inextricably linked with the subject of sex, so it seems strange to envision Dr.
RUTH WESTHEIMER as the head of a neighborhood Y. But that is exactly the new job she undertook with her inauguration last week as president of the Y.W./Y.M.H.A. of Washington Heights and Inwood.
"Who would have thought that at age 64 I would be called Madame President and that they would make a gavel my size," Dr.
Ruth said yesterday.
At her installation, RUTH MESSINGER, the Manhattan Borough President, gave her a three-foot-long gavel.
Dr.
Ruth is 4 feet 7 inches tall.


Nuclear Agency's Chief Praises Watchdog Groups
Seeking to defuse years of distrust and conflict among the nuclear industry, the regulators and the public, the chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today that twice in the last year his agency had been pushed in the right direction on safety issues because of the pleas and protests of nuclear watchdog groups.
He even suggested that the groups that picket nuclear plants and petition his commission to shut them were worthy of the public's financial support.


Thoughts in the Face of Corruption; Police Officers Discuss Dealing, or Not Dealing, With Suspicions
The realization that some of his fellow officers in the 34th Precinct might have "business arrangements" with drug dealers came with a sudden unmistakable jolt.
"When you see it, when you're told about it, when you know in your gut, it's like a punch," the officer said.
But he did nothing about it.
He did not report his suspicions, not to his immediate supervisors, not to his commanding officer, not to the precinct's integrity control officer and not to the Internal Affairs Division's 24-hour phone line.
It was part fear, part distrust of the system and part what he now believes, he said, was a misplaced loyalty.


Strip Show Flops at Fox; Murdoch Ousts Official
The town eagerly welcomes a good high-stakes drama with an unpredictable cast of characters.
Take a conference involving Rupert Murdoch, chairman of the News Corporation as well as Fox Inc.; Defense Secretary Dick Cheney; some conservative intellectuals like Irving Kristol, and a high-flying executive, Stephen Chao, president of Fox Television Stations and Fox News.
Then add, of all things, a male stripper who performed his act right beside Lynne V. Cheney, chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities and wife of the Defense Secretary.


Russians in Antarctica Stage Protest Over Pay
SCIENTISTS at Russia's five stations in Antarctica say they have stopped sending data home to protest the difficulties their families face in Russia.
In a statement signed by Dr.
Vladimir Nazarov, leader of the Vostok station, the Russians cited their nation's severe inflation and said: "The miserable salary of Russian polar explorers, working in the rigorous climate of Antarctica, is hardly enough for our families even to buy food. We cannot help them. We can only send moral support by telephone."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PRESIDENT LEAVING CITY COLLEGE
Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston has resigned as president of the City College of New York after 11 years of leading the school.
His tenure began amid a fiscal crisis and ended in acrimony over the racially charged remarks of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, the chairman of the black studies department, and the trampling deaths of nine people at a campus event last December.
A1.
RULING ON COLUMBUS CIRCLE SKYSCRAPER
A Federal appeals judge yesterday lifted the last legal obstacle to a huge skyscraper project at Columbus Circle that opponents had argued would make Manhattan's air pollution problem worse.
Overturning a decision by a Federal District Court judge in Manhattan, the appeals court ruled that the two proposed towers would not violate the Federal Clean Air Act.
B3.
SUSPECT SURRENDERS IN GAP STORE KILLING


After Painful Task, Connors Bows Out At Wimbledon
He might as well have used his racquet for a cane for all the good it did him against underdog Luis Herrera on this sunstruck opening day at Wimbledon.
With his perennial pyrotechnics eclipsed by the need for some personalized geriatrics, Jimmy Connors stumbled away from his 20th Wimbledon vowing not to return for further pain.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Mayors Applaud Clinton's Promise to Remake American Economy
Gov.
Bill Clinton took his new economic line of taxes for the rich and development schemes for the poor before the 60th annual gathering here of the United States Conference of Mayors today and won several rounds of vigorous applause when he declared it would remake America economically.
In a major revision of his earlier economic blueprint, Mr.
Clinton promised to cut the budget deficit in half by 1996 by taxing the rich and foreign corporations, and by slashing military spending, the Federal bureaucracy and a sweeping collection of Federal programs he deems wasteful or unnecessary.


Germs and Astronauts
During five flights of the space shuttle in the last year, researchers took advantage of its closed environment to determine how far and how fast various microbes were spread from one crew member to another.
The researchers, from the Johnson Space Center, Krug Life Sciences in Houston and the University of Texas Medical School, presented their findings at a recent meeting of the American Society for Microbiology.


Scientists Put a Ruler on Northeasters
SCIENTISTS at the University of Virginia have devised a system for measuring the relative power of northeasters, the devastating winter storms that cause much of the beach erosion along the Atlantic Coast.
Meteorologists have long analyzed hurricanes using a measurement system, the Saffir-Simpson Scale.
But although northeasters occur far more often, and consequently do far more damage, there has been no comparable analytical framework for them.
The researchers who devised the new scale, Prof.
Robert Dolan, a marine geologist, and Prof.
Robert E. Davis, a climatologist, say they hope their system will enable scientists to estimate the strength of storms from physical properties.
Storms are currently rated by estimating how soon a comparable storm is likely to occur again or by comparing property damage, a somewhat arbitrary standard that can be skewed by local property values, development density and other factors unrelated to the weather.


Tallinn Journal; Leaky Borders Fill Baltics Brimful With Intrigue
Ten minutes out and Finland is fading fast astern; Jimi Hendrix appears on the video and beer sells for $1.70 at the bar.
This is the 5 P.M. hydrofoil, Helsinki to Tallinn, and not an empty seat can be found.
These days, it seems, everybody's doing the Baltic commute.
Flowing into Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia by ferry and high-speed launch, prop plane and jetliner, the commuters are a rambunctious assortment of corporate executives and salesmen, con men and smugglers, arms peddlers and tourists -- all travelers to the strange new world along the brittle edge of what used to the old Soviet empire.


Student Who Stabbed Teacher Has a Warning
Jason Haffizulla, who graduated at the top of his private school class earlier this month, spoke in his valedictory address about the need for slow and careful preparation in the search for excellence.
It was an allusion to his past obsession with academic excellence.
Nearly two years ago, on Oct. 23, 1990, Mr.
Haffizulla took a butcher knife into the Coral Springs public high school he was attending and, in a struggle with his physics teacher, stabbed him.
The teacher, David Pologruto, had given Mr.
Haffizulla his first B.


YELTSIN ADDRESSES RIFT WITH UKRAINE
President Boris N. Yeltsin flew to the Black Sea today to dampen tensions with Ukraine and Georgia.
But he had only new threats for Moldovans locked in fresh violence with their secessionist Russian and Ukrainian minority.
Arriving in the Russian resort city of Sochi on the northeastern Black Sea coast for talks with President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine, Mr.
Yeltsin said the discussions would cover the gamut of disputes between their countries, from economic issues to control of the Crimean Peninsula and the Black Sea Fleet, as well as the region's ethnic conflicts.


Classical Music in Review
Riverside Opera Ensemble  Marymount Manhattan Theater
There is something endearing about the valiant efforts of New York's shoestring opera companies, even though the artistic results are often mixed.
With microscopic budgets these groups assemble casts from a large pool of students, young operatic hopefuls and enthusiastic amateurs, and they forge their way through repertory thickets left unexplored by better-endowed institutions.
The Riverside Opera Ensemble, founded in 1984, presented a work from the twilight region between standard repertory and obscure novelty, Tchaikovsky's "Iolanta."


Hartford Legislators Legalize Radar Detectors
The General Assembly today legalized the use of radar detectors, ending Connecticut's status as one of only two states where motorists could be fined for using the dashboard devices to evade police speed traps.
Earlier this month, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. vetoed a bill legalizing the detectors, saying that lifting the ban would "put a weapon in the hands of drunk drivers, drugged drivers and all those who would imperil the lives of others." But both the House and Senate voted to override the veto.


G.O.P. Legislators Pressing To Jettison a TV Network
In their drive to cut the budget and spin off some of the functions of state government, Republican legislative leaders have put the state-owned television system, New Jersey Network, at the top of their list of fire-sale items.
While other elements of government -- motor vehicle inspections, New Jersey Transit and possibly some of the corrections system -- are merely being studied as potential candidates for transfer to the public sector, the network, NJN, is already being dressed for the block.


Sir Charles Groves, 77, a Leader Who Championed New Music
Sir Charles Groves, an English conductor who in a career that spanned more than 50 years, directed orchestras in Liverpool, Manchester and Bournemouth, died on Saturday at St.
Pancras Hospital in London.
He was 77 years old and lived in London.
He had been hospitalized since February, when he had a stroke from which he never fully recovered, said his son, Jonathan Groves.


THE SUPREME COURT: Supreme Court Roundup; Defendants Must Prove Incompetency
The Supreme Court ruled today that states may presume that criminal defendants are mentally competent to stand trial and may require a defendant to prove his incompetence.
By a 7-to-2 vote, the Court rejected a constitutional challenge to a California law that has the effect of placing the burden of proof on the competency question on the defendant.


Sports of The Times; Can't Get Away From Politics
JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH would like the 1992 Games to be the most spectacular homecoming in modern Olympic history.
The president of the International Olympic Committee has predicted that his country would be the site of a grand reunion of the family of nations.
Samaranch's idyllic Spain would be the meadow in which lost and fallen members would rejoin the fold.
In Barcelona, all nations would unite, dance arm and arm, leaving the misery of conflict behind.


There's No Subsidy in Coastal Flood Insurance; Human Side of Story
To the Editor:
Your May 27 front page report on possible cutbacks to the Federal flood insurance program is written with a subtle slant: the phrase "property owners" appears four times on the front page, and the words "property," "building" and "structure" appear repeatedly.
But the word "home" does not appear at all.
And the word "homeowners" appears once, on the continuation page.
Hundreds of thousands of families have their homes in areas of the United States benefiting from the Federal flood insurance program.
The loss of the right to have property insurance on their homes would be a great human tragedy for them.
Denials of mortgage extensions, defaults and foreclosures on people's homes are likely results of such a change.


Officer Is Under Murder Inquiry
A Brooklyn police officer is under investigation as a suspect in a murder in a stickup of a bodega, law-enforcement officials said last night.
The officer, Robert Cabeza, was placed on desk duty on Friday because of the investigation, which is being conducted by the Police Department's Internal Affairs Division.
Suzanne Trazoff, the Deputy Police Commissioner for Public Information, refused to discuss the case but said Officer Cabeza was "under investigation for a number of things."


Cuba Joins Tourism Group
The Caribbean Tourism Organization said yesterday that it had approved membership for Cuba, which the country had been seeking for several years.
The organization, at its board meeting on Friday, also approved membership for Mexico, whose Yucatan Peninsula is an important Caribbean destination.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances this week (all times Eastern daylight):  President Bush
"20/20." ABC, Friday, 10-11 P.M.
(Channel 7 in New York.)  Gov. Bill Clinton
"Good Morning America," ABC, today, 7-8 A.M.
(Channel 7 in New York.)
Panel discussion on education and other issues.  Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.


Kite's Victory Proves Fall Was Exaggerated
Tom Kite's emotional victory at the United States Open reestablished this point: No active player who has been a champion can ever be written off.
From Jack Nicklaus to Tom Watson to Hale Irwin to Ray Floyd to Seve Ballesteros, the best in golf -- a sport in which marginal physical erosion isn't an overriding factor -- usually come back from what those on the sidelines often mistake for oblivion.


On My Mind; Jesse Jackson's Enemy
Once again, and before the whole country, Jesse Jackson is exposing and pointing straight at the one man who damages him most -- Jesse Jackson.
And once again he is making many people happy.
They are Americans who either despise him, fear him or think that all these years he has been passionate about and true to only one cause -- Jesse Jackson.


Cuomo Proposes a Crackdown To Stem Flood of Illegal Guns
Releasing new statistics showing the steep rise in illegal gun use in New York State, particularly among children and teen-agers, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed a multipronged assault on the sale and distribution of illegal weapons.
The proposal calls for stiffer penalties for the illegal sale or possession of guns; greater cooperation with states where most illegal guns are sold, in an effort to stop the flow of guns into New York, and new enforcement strategies by the state police and local police departments to detect and disarm people carrying illegal weapons.


Spy Data Now Open For Studies Of Climate
SCIENTISTS in search of clues to environmental change are beginning to examine the reconnaissance treasures of the cold war, gathered by spy satellites, jets, ships and submarines at a cost of hundreds of billions of dollars.
The main focus is archives of secret reconnaissance data compiled during the cold war that promise to shed light on such environmental trends as global warming.
But the way has also been cleared, at least in principle, for scientists to redirect some of the nation's reconnaissance gear to collect new data of purely ecological interest.


There's No Subsidy in Coastal Flood Insurance; 'User Fee' on Boats
To the Editor:
The point that Anthony Lewis makes in his May 31 column is that the American people do not want to pay for the Government services they use.
Fair enough.
However, he is incorrect on the recreational boat fee.
That "user fee" on boats goes entirely into the general fund; not $1 goes to providing Coast Guard services.
The basis for objections to the fee is that Coast Guard availability is decreasing at the same time that boaters are paying this added fee.


INSIDE
Scientists Using Spy Data
For the first time, reconnaissance data collected at great expense and in great secrecy are being made available to researchers on the environment.
Science Times, page C1.
Rail-Strike Deadline Tonight
As a strike deadline neared, Amtrak agents warned passengers they could be left stranded.
But a strike, experts said, would be brief.
Page A12.
Sears Revamps Auto Pay
Sears, Roebuck ended its commission-based pay structure for auto mechanics in the wake of charges it had defrauded customers.
Page D1.
A German Transplant
A BMW plant is expected to be built near Spartanburg, S.C.
It would be the first German auto plant in the United States since VW left.
Page D1.
Ex-Chinese President Dies
Li Xiannian, a former Chinese President and a hard-liner who marched with Mao, died at 82.
Page B7.


A Familiar Smile Is Back on the Court
His was always the smile that lit up a basketball court.
It was part of the Magic Johnson persona, the thing he shared with his teammates, with his fans, with a public that embraced him without really knowing him.
And then it was gone.


Li Xiannian, China Ex-President And Rural Economist, Dies at 82
Li Xiannian, a politician and military commander who rose to become President of China and a leading hard-liner, died on Sunday night, the official New China News Agency announced today.
He would have been 83 years old on Tuesday.
The agency said that Mr.
Li, who was president from 1983 to 1988, died in Beijing of an illness it did not specify.


Review/Jazz Festival; A Day In the Park, Festive And Free
Last year's all-day outdoor concert in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center was one of the JVC Jazz Festival's better moments, and a good idea.
It was festive, free and well thought out, with all sorts of variety.
This year's didn't work as well, even though it was festive and free.
For one, three groups -- the George Coleman and Benny Golson quartets and Phil Woods's quintet -- featured mainstream improvisers working with a rhythm section and little or no arrangements.
For another, the sound system treated the performers as if they were rock bands, keeping all the instruments at roughly the same level and making it difficult to distinguish what was going on under the onslaught of basses feeding back and drums burying everything.


Those With Things to Sell Love Word-of-Mouth Ads
MARK E. GREEN, co-owner of the Connecticut Charcoal Company, was having lunch in a Washington hotel recently with a potential sales representative for his Old Time Charcoal.
A bag of his wares was on the table.
Suddenly, the conversation was interrupted by a woman from a nearby table who had heard a friend from Connecticut praise the product but had not known where to buy it.
"I told her where to find it and she went back to her table, where I'm sure we picked up five or six customers," Mr.
Green said.
"The sales rep at first accused me of setting him up. But needless to say, he signed on."


Review/Theater; Nearby Science Fiction In a Musical of 2 Parts
With "Her Pilgrim Soul," the rewarding half of an evening of two short musicals grouped under the title "Weird Romance," the composer Alan Menken and his collaborators look back from the near future to the recent past.
This reflective view solves a problem inherent in any attempt to musicalize science fiction.
There is no need to invent an artificially futuristic sound for the score.
The result is a melodious musical play about buried memory and reincarnation.
Although Mr.
Menken has written the show with new creative partners, David Spencer and Alan Brennert, it reminds one of his work with Howard Ashman.
The score is closer in romantic spirit to their movie "Beauty and the Beast" than to "Little Shop of Horrors."


COMPANY NEWS
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Fairfield, Conn., and Hitachi Ltd., Tokyo, extended for 10 years their joint venture to market high-voltage breakers in the United States, develop G.E. exports to Japan and share technology.
IONICS INC., Watertown, Mass., received a $2.2 million order for two of its Cloromat systems for the manufacture of bleach used to disinfect water from the Mexico City Water Authority.


Trenton Republicans Say Washington Will Provide $84 Million More for Medicaid
Leaders of the Republican legislative majority said today that Federal officials had promised to give New Jersey an additional $84 million in Medicaid reimbursements.
They said the money would cover $32.6 million in raises negotiated with unionized state workers, provide $20 million to purchase materials and supplies and put about $30 million in a surplus account.
Extra Money
The Republicans also amended their $14.6 billion budget proposal today to protect the jobs of administrative law judges, county education employees, state troopers and corrections officers and to insure that state parks and public beaches remain open.


Europe Plans Deregulation Of Airlines
The European Community, taking a decisive step toward the deregulation of air travel similar to that experienced by the United States in the last decade, agreed today to remove government restrictions on air fares and open up routes throughout the Continent to competition among national airlines.
The decision, which is likely to lead to sharply lower air fares and consolidation in which several European carriers may not survive, was made after a bitter clash between countries like Britain, which favored liberalization, and others, including France and Italy, which resisted change.


Sarajevo Tries A Normal Life; Bombs Forbid It
Shortly before 11 A.M. today, the rocket-blasted stretch of Marshal Tito Street in the center of what was once Sarajevo's main shopping district returned briefly to something like its old self.
No shells from Serbian gun positions on the surrounding hillsides had fallen in the area since dawn, and the street was thronged.
Some people lined up for pension checks; others headed for the central market in the hope of finding some of the spring onions and nettles that are almost the only fare there.
Still others visited an exhibition of war drawings by Midhat Ajanovic, a locally renowned illustrator. 'Defend Us, Please!'
The mortar blasts that followed, part of a wider Serbian attack that killed 19 civilians and wounded 87 others, was a symptom of the city's deepening miseries, further evidence to many of the 400,000 residents that their ordeal will not end until the Serbian forces starve and bombard the city into submission, or until foreign forces intervene.


Review/Dance; At Jacob's Pillow, Past as Prelude
The Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival deserves to be jubilant.
This year is the 60th anniversary of its founding and the 50th anniversary of the opening of its Ted Shawn Theater.
These artistic birthdays were celebrated Sunday afternoon at a gala that included performances in various locations on the grounds.
Occasionally, events overlapped during the four-hour festivity.
Audiences could pick and choose among attractions that ranged from a premiere by a young Spanish choreographer to an outdoor piece that made the landscape its scenery.
Everyone eventually gathered together for a program in the Ted Shawn Theater that honored two distinguished dancers.


Summer Feels as If It's Over Even Though It's Just Begun


Classic Hearts and Imperishable Beans
Like her jewelry, Elsa Peretti is classic.
Just as her heart- and bean-shaped designs have endured for 20 years, so has her personal style remained essentially the same.
The dark hair is brushed with gray now, but it is still worn cropped severely short.
Her eyes are still framed with big square glasses.
She still speaks with a heavy Italian accent in a voice made gravelly by the cigarettes she says she cannot give up.
And she dresses the way she always has: a simple shirt tucked into black pants, her waist wrapped by a black leather belt with her signature silver horseshoe buckle.


Guys, Dolls and Fellas Sing Out for Clinton
Some of Broadway's current biggest names held a party for Gov.
Bill Clinton at the St.
James Theater last night, raising money for his Presidential campaign and using the occasion to press an agenda of their concerns, including AIDS research and unfettered Government financing for the arts.
Such themes were woven into an evening in which Clinton supporters paid $250 to $1,000 each to see snippets of performances from Broadway shows like "Guys and Dolls," "The Will Rogers Follies," "Crazy for You" and "Jelly's Last Jam."


Charge Dropped Against D'Amato Friend
One of four charges against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's chief fund-raiser in Puerto Rico was dropped today, and the trial judge said the case brought by Federal prosecutors was less than overwhelming.
"I don't think that the Government's case is overwhelming, but it is enough to let it pass to the jury," Judge Gilberto Gierbolini of Federal District Court declared as testimony in the five-day-old trial involving the legality of campaign contributions came to an end.


Francis L. Broderick, 69, Lawyer And Ex-Chancellor of University
Francis L. Broderick, a lawyer and a former chancellor of the University of Massachusetts at Boston, died yesterday at his home.
He was 69 years old and lived in Stratham, N.H.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Barbara.


A Different Kind of War in Kosovo: Serbian Repression vs. Quiet Resistance
"This is where it all started and I guess this is where it will have to end," said Veton Surroi, one of many politicians here who are seeking to wrest this overwhelmingly Albanian-populated region called Kosovo from Serbian domination and control.
How it ends is a matter of anxious doubt; whether in peaceful negotiations and international conferences as the local Albanians are hoping, or with the kind of violent ethnic warfare that has dismembered Yugoslavia and engulfs much of its territory.


Classical Music in Review
New York City Gay Men's Chorus  Carnegie Hall
The concerts by the New York City Gay Men's Chorus often bring together conflicting currents of nostalgic wistfulness and high-spirited humor, the second generally serving as an antidote to the first.
Both elements were present on Sunday evening, when the choir offered a program entitled "Proud!," its annual contribution to Gay Pride Week.
The program's centerpiece was the New York premiere of John Corigliano's "Of Rage and Remembrance," the choral version of the third movement from Mr.
Corigliano's First Symphony.
The movement commemorates several of the composer's friends and musical colleagues who died of AIDS, among them Paul Jacobs, the pianist, and Robert Jacobson, the editor of Opera News.


Corrections
A report yesterday in the Sidelines column of SportsMonday about the United States Open golf tournament misstated the year it was won by Tom Watson at Pebble Beach, Calif.
It was 1982, not 1972.


Welles Film Is Held Up in Dispute
The Joseph Papp Public Theater has halted a scheduled two-week showing of Orson Welles's "Chimes at Midnight" after discovering that rights to distribute the film are in dispute.
The program director of the theater, Fabiano Canosa, said that on the advice of the theater's lawyers, he decided on Friday to close the theater until the question could be sorted out.
No substitute film has been scheduled.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  THE BALKANS ACCORDING TO DANTE
The mortar blasts that broke a semblance of commercial life on Marshal Tito Street were part of a Serbian attack that killed 19 and wounded 87.
The event was another of Sarajevo's deepening miseries, evidence that the ordeal would not end until Serbian forces bombarded or starved the city into submission, or until foreign troops intervened.
A1
Rebellion burns fiercely among ethnic Albanians in Kosovo.
A10  SOLDIERS WITHOUT A CAUSE
With the cold war over and the Soviet Union gone, many Germans seem unsure whether their country even needs an army.
The political consensus that made Germany a bulwark against the fear of Moscow's armed might has been fraying since that threat evaporated.
So German military leaders are trying to define new missions.
A1  YELTSIN WOOS AND WARNS
President Yeltsin flew to the Black Sea to try to ease tensions with Ukraine and Georgia.
But he had only new threats for Moldovans locked in fresh violence with their secessionist Russian and Ukrainian ethnic minorities.
A3
Remains are those of czar.  A9  JOINT EFFORT ON SOVIET P.O.W.'S
The U.S. is helping Russia and other former republics identify prisoners of war held in Afghanistan by rebels who fought the Soviet Army, American officials said.
A3  ISRAELIS VOTE TODAY
With a last flurry of political attacks and promises, Israel's election campaign ended.
A new batch of polls showed the opposition Labor Party leading the governing Likud Party by 2 to 12 seats.
A9  IT'S RAMOS
The Philippine Congress proclaimed Fidel V. Ramos as the next President after nearly a month of debate over the honesty of the country's freest presidential election in more than two decades.
A6  DE KLERK AND TUTU
President de Klerk of South Africa cut short a foreign visit to deal with an intense political crisis, as Archbishop Tutu questioned whether Pretoria should be allowed to compete in the Olympic Games in the aftermath of the Boipatong killings.
A8  Tallinn Journal: The Baltics, a post-Soviet Casablanca.
A4  National A12-19  HATE-CRIME LAW STRUCK DOWN
The Supreme Court struck down a St.
Paul hate crime law, ruling that legislatures may not single out racial, religious or sexual threats for prosecution as "hate speech." Though the result was unanimous, the Justices were sharply divided in approach.
A1
Excerpts of the opinions.  A16  DOUBTS ABOUT 3 CANDIDATES
The Presidential candidates of the two major parties showed remarkable weakness in a New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Their all-but-declared independent challenger, Ross Perot, fared better, but the percentage of voters who view him negatively has more than doubled in six weeks.
A1  CLINTON REVISES ECONOMIC PLAN
Governor Clinton took a major revision of his economic blueprint to a national conference of mayors, earning some vigorous applause.
He promised to cut the deficit in half by 1996 by taxing the rich and slashing military spending, while also creating a tax break for the middle class and a major highway program.
A19  RETREAT FROM A TAX CUT
News analysis: In his new economic plan, Mr.
Clinton withdrew his call for both a children's tax credit and a lower income tax rate for the middle class, a move that could help him solidify support from Paul Tsongas, his early rival.
A1  BUSH TRIES THE SCARE TACTIC
The Bush campaign is seeking to quell the challenge of Ross Perot by portraying him as an "unAmerican" authoritarian who might threaten their liberties if elected.
A18
The insiders predict the Presidential race will go to the House.
A18  RAILROADS BRACE FOR STRIKE
Amtrak agents warned passengers that they could be left short of their destination if train workers go on strike at 12:01 A.M.
Wednesday.
Still, many transportation experts said Congress would end a strike soon after it started.
A12
New York transit officials made plans to deal with a rail strike.
A12  Metropolitan Digest, B1 REALIGNMENT AT CUNY
Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston has resigned as president of the City College of New York after 11 often tumultuous years.
The resignation was announced last night by Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, the chancellor of the City University of New York, as part of a major executive realignment that will put her personal stamp on the university's leadership two years after taking office.
A1  BAIL DENIED IN KIDNAPPING
The husband and wife charged with the kidnapping of a top Exxon executive had amassed information on hiding money in overseas banks before they set out on their unsuccessful attempt to collect millions of dollars in ransom, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Based on that information, Federal Magistrate G. Donald Haneke denied a bail application by the suspects.
A1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-12  Spy satellite data now open to weather researchers.
C1  A plant's best defense may be its chemical arsenal.
C1  The unconscious may be smarter than you think.
C1  Sports B9-15  Baseball: Mets overwhelm Cubs.
B11  Orioles beat Yanks.
B11  The Sandpaper Case goes to league office.
B11  Colleges: At Brooklyn College, survival at stake.
B15 Column: Rhoden on the Olympics B9  Hockey: N.H.L. chooses interim president.
B14  Olympics: Barnes makes bid to enter trials.
B9  Tennis: Quick exit for Connors at Wimbledon.
B9  Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Small theatrical troupes are dwindling.
C13  Word and Image: "Frontline" looks at redlining.
C18  More about Heathcliff.
C17  Obituaries B6-7  M.F.K.
Fisher, the food and travel writer.
B6  Li Xiannian, former hardline President of China.
B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Now, where's their beef?
Plenty of smoke about Iraq.
Killing South Africa's dream.
Mr. Rudman to the rescue.
Letters A20  Russell Baker: Back from the dead.
A21  A. M. Rosenthal: Jesse Jackson's enemy.
A21  Benny Morris: Nuclear peril, Israel's non-issue.
A21  Laurence Goldstein: I'm a minor league father.
A21  Peter Schweizer: Our thieving allies.
A21  Fashion Page B8


A Correction: Uncovered Big Board Short Sales for June
The short-interest table for the New York Stock Exchange printed on Saturday included May's data, rather than June's.
Corrected figures appear in the following table.


Powder Purges Toxic Waste
RESEARCHERS at Pennsylvania State University say they have developed a fine-grained clay powder that traps strontium-90 and has the potential to purge contaminated waste water of the lethal radioactive element.
Their findings were reported in the current issue of Nature, the British science journal.


Excerpts From Clinton's Speech on His Economic Proposals
Following are excerpts from the text of a speech by Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas today to the United States Conference of Mayors here.
INFRASTRUCTURE
My plan is a bold plan.
It offers $50 billion in new investments over the next four years in each of the next four years.
New incentives for the private sector, an investment tax credit, urban enterprise zones, new business tax incentives, research and development incentives and others.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment -- Clinton's Retreat; Change on a Tax Cut for the Middle Class Could Forestall Accusations of Pandering
In putting forward a major new economic blueprint to help pull his campaign out of third place, Gov.
Bill Clinton has retreated from one of his most controversial proposals: calling for an income tax cut for the middle class.
His new economic program, announced Sunday, focuses on ways to rebuild America's economy, but its most significant change from previous plans was Mr.
Clinton's scaling back on his call for a middle-class tax cut, which he had long insisted was needed as a matter of fairness.


Push in Albany To Influence Police Hiring
A week after the Legislature forced the New York City Police Department to extend its use of semiautomatic weapons, state lawmakers are now pushing for legislation that would give them greater control over a record expansion of the city's patrol ranks.
City officials portrayed the bill today as the latest episode in a legislative campaign to micromanage the city police force.


Senate Rightly Looked Into Thomas-Hill Case
To the Editor:
When the Senate's rules are observed, they protect an accused person from trial by news media that lacks such elements of due process as rules of evidence and procedure, the ability to gather relevant information and choice of counsel.
These rules also protect a complainant who requests confidentiality.
Peter Fleming's investigation of the leaking of Anita Hill's statement was necessary and worthwhile to uphold fairness.
I was astonished that Anthony Lewis (column, May 14) believes Mr.
Fleming shouldn't have interviewed individuals who might have knowledge about the leak, because this could chill debate on nominations.
Asking third parties for information is necessary in most investigations.


Books of The Times; Tracing a Lost Heathcliff And Finding a Natty Cad
H.
The Story of Heathcliff's Journey Back to Wuthering Heights  By Lin Haire-Sargeant  292 pages.
Pocket Books. $20.


Nurses Strike at Interfaith
About 500 registered nurses went on strike at the 620-bed Interfaith Medical Center in Brooklyn yesterday.
The center, which serves Bedford-Stuyvesant and Crown Heights, curtailed elective admissions, said a spokesman.
He said negotiations with the nurses would resume today.
A spokeswoman for the nurses' union, the New York State Nurses Association, said pension-fund contributions and work rules are the main issues.


Prostate Drug's Side Effects Cited
PROSCAR is an important new drug to treat symptoms of enlarged prostate glands, but as with any new drug the full range of its adverse effects remains to be assessed.
The drug, approved for marketing on Friday by the Food and Drug Administration, is safe and offers many older men the prospect of avoiding surgery, experts and company officials said at a news conference here yesterday.


Record $3.7 Billion Loss For Lloyd's of London
The Lloyd's of London insurance market disclosed yesterday that losses for 1989 would reach a record $3.7 billion and that Lloyd's will hold a meeting next month called by members who wish to replace the market's governing council.
Lloyd's takes three years to close the books and issue final reports on its losses or profits.


DEAN WITTER LOSES BID TO ISSUE MASTERCARDS
Mastercard has rejected a request by the Dean Witter Financial Services Group to become an issuer of Mastercards.
Dean Witter, a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, already issues the Discover credit card, and Mastercard said Discover, which is also owned by Sears, was a direct competitor.
"Discover wants to both compete with and participate in the Mastercard franchise," said Peter S. P. Dimsey, head of Mastercard's American business.
"They can't have it both ways."


So, Torborg, Spill the Beans
Details of the meeting the Mets had with Manager Jeff Torborg last Friday have begun to emerge, and the topics evidently included everything from the manager's daily schedule of strategy meetings to his rule prohibiting alcohol on team airline flights.
Torborg said emphatically yesterday that no club rules had been changed as a result of the meeting, but conceded that the schedule of meetings had been modified recently.
The manager of the Mets claimed, however, that the revised plan for meetings had been instituted Thursday.


Patterns
Have Trunk, Will Travel


Plenty of Smoke About Iraq
As even Administration officials now concede, President Bush's attempt to domesticate Saddam Hussein by giving him arms was bad policy.
But was it a crime?
Congressional hearings today may shed more light on this question.
Internal Government memos suggest that U.S. firms shipped technology to Iraq that could have been used to manufacture missiles and biological, chemical and nuclear arms.
These shipments may have skirted the law, and the license records may have been criminally doctored.
And Iraq may have diverted U.S. aid intended for other purposes to buy arms.


Avis Backs Compromise On Liability
Avis Inc. said yesterday that it would back a proposed New York State law that would protect car rental companies against huge lawsuits brought by people hurt by rental cars, yet still allow innocent victims of such accidents to collect damages.
But the measure was rejected by the Hertz Corporation, which has effectively taken itself out of part of the New York City market in an effort to avoid such suits.


Chef Will Leave Le Cirque
Like a casting call for a Broadway extravaganza, chefs may soon be lining up on East 65th Street, resumes and recipes in hand, for the chance to take over the kitchen of one of New York's most illustrious restaurants.
Sirio Maccioni, the owner of Le Cirque, said over the weekend that Daniel Boulud, who has been the executive chef of the restaurant since 1986, would be leaving in the fall.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Media Business page yesterday with an article about The Ladies' Home Journal reversed the identities of two women.
Donna Galotti, the magazine's publisher, was on the right, and Myrna Blyth, editor in chief, on the left.


10-Victory Club Gets New Member
Pirates 5, Cardinals 2  PITTSBURGH, June 22 (AP) -- Randy Tomlin survived Tom Pagnozzi's two-run homer to join Atlanta's Tom Glavine as the National League's only 10-game winners, winning his sixth straight game tonight as Pittsburgh beat St.
Louis, 5-2.
Tomlin (10-3) was 0-4 in six previous starts against St.
Louis but limited the Cardinals to four singles before Pagnozzi's two-run shot in the eighth.
The Pirates increased their lead over St.
Louis, and Chicago, to six and a half games in the National League East.


Ramos Is Declared New President 6 Weeks After Philippine Election
A joint session of Congress proclaimed Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines today after nearly a month of debate over the honesty of the country's freest presidential elections in more than 20 years.
Congress set aside allegations of large-scale fraud made by Mr.
Ramos's opponents and approved a report saying that although there was some evidence of cheating, it was not on a scale that would change the outcome of the voting, which took place six weeks ago.


Movement Builds to Fight Harmful Projects in Poor Nations
IN a broadening movement that could change the way poor nations develop, environmentalists and human rights groups are joining forces to give the people in those countries the same power to scrutinize and oppose damaging projects that citizens of richer nations enjoy.
In an era when environmental debate has often pitted the developing nations against the industrialized countries, this new trend is marked by cooperation across borders and income levels.


U.S. Helps Russians Search For Missing in Afghanistan
The United States is helping Russia and other former Soviet republics track and identify prisoners of war held in Afghanistan by Afghan guerrillas who fought the Soviet Army from 1979 to 1989, officials said today.
American officials visiting Kabul recently stopped in Moscow and Kiev on the way home to deliver photographs of prisoners obtained from the Afghans, along with other information on P.O.W. cases.
These officials say they believe that Afghan militias hold 30 to 50 former Soviet soldiers, most of the from Russia or Ukraine.


Mr. Rudman to the Rescue
The man who introduced the 1992 legal services bill in the Senate last week was Warren Rudman, who's retiring this year.
The New Hampshire Republican chooses to devote what's left of his tenure to things that matter.
"The time has come," he said, "to reach a bipartisan agreement on the reauthorization of this important program."
Was anyone from the White House listening?
Presidents Reagan and Bush both tried to kill the agency that finances hundreds of law offices serving poor people across the country.
Failing that, they've tried to wound it.
Dangerous social engineers, they have called those poverty lawyers.
Fortunately, Mr.
Rudman and other responsible lawmakers from both parties disagree.


Rights Advocates Uncertain About Ruling's Impact
In the two years since a group of whites burned a cross on their lawn in St.
Paul and thrust Russ and Laura Jones into the middle of a legal battle that ended today at the Supreme Court, the black couple has watched their children's innocence about race go up in smoke.
"It makes me angry that they have to be aware of racism around them, that they notice it more and more," Mrs.
Jones, the mother of five, said today.
"They're too young for that. They're just children. The oldest is 11. That's one reason why I'm so disappointed about the decision."


Brutality Escalates in Haiti Since Coup
To the Editor:
"Meetings With Aristide Emphasize Human Rights" (news article, June 7) might lead the reader to believe that human rights organizations are principally concerned with violations committed by the government of Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the deposed Haitian President, and in seeking immunity for those responsible for current abuses.
Let us say clearly that our organizations see as the pressing issues in Haiti the escalation of brutality by the present regime and the unconscionable, and illegal, policy of the Bush Administration of forcing Haitians found on the high seas to return to Haiti without determining if they will face persecution.


Transactions
Baseball
USA BASEBALL -- Released Brooks Kieschnick, pitcher-outfielder, from Team USA.
American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Chris Hoiles, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Rick Dempsey, catcher.


Child, 2, Dies, Sister Is Injured In Blaze on S.I.
A 2-year-old boy was killed and his 3-year-old sister was critically injured yesterday afternoon in a fire that gutted the family's apartment in a Staten Island housing project, the authorities said last night.
The children had been left unattended at the time of the blaze, the police said.
The cause of the 5:18 P.M. fire at 4 Wayne Court in the Markham Gardens housing project in West New Brighton was unknown, said Matt DeMartinis, a department spokesman.
The fire, which started on the second floor of the two-story apartment building, was under control in 12 minutes, the authorities said.


Brooklyn College at Crossroads
Pam White had been expecting 1992-93, her senior year at Brooklyn College, to be a special one.
Next fall, she was to be the only fourth-year player on a basketball team that had gone through one of the most dramatic reversals in the country.
This past season, three years after losing a national-record 58 consecutive games, the Lady Knights had a 17-10 record.
Even as the Brooklyn College athletic department failed to provide equitable treatment of women in 10 areas covered by Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, enacted 20 years ago today, the team flourished.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Close 3-Way Race Holds Opportunities for Clinton
The word among Washington insiders these days is short and sweet: We're heading for the House of Representatives.
With most national opinion polls showing President Bush, Ross Perot and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas closely bunched, a panel of 50 Republican and Democratic campaign consultants, assembled by the Hotline political news service, predicted late last week that no candidate would be able to muster a majority in the Electoral College and the House would have to decide.


New Jersey Symphony Names Artistic Adviser
The New Jersey Symphony Orchestra announced yesterday that Zdenek Macal would become its artistic adviser for two seasons, beginning in September.


Testimony by Milken Unhelpful, S.E.C. Says
The Securities and Exchange Commission split with the United States Attorney in Manhattan yesterday on whether Michael R. Milken has helped punish Wall Street securities violators and thus ought to have his 10-year prison sentenced reduced.
The sharply contrasting assessments were seen by lawyers and other court watchers as hurting Mr.
Milken's chances of gaining an early release.


Cold War Past, Germans Ask Why Army Is Still Necessary
With the cold war over and the Soviet Union gone, Germany sometimes seems unsure whether it needs an army at all any more.
The political consensus that made Germany, as a member of NATO, a bulwark against the Soviet threat for more than 35 years has been fraying at the edges since the threat disappeared.
For some of those in uniform, many of them draftees, the question is why they have to serve at all.


Jimmy Carter Revisits the South Bronx


Classical Music in Review
Simply Brahms  Alice Tully Hall
The two concerts of Brahms's four symphonies, presented last week by the American Symphony Orchestra with little ballyhoo under the rubric Simply Brahms, cried out for more explanation.
Performances of Brahms symphonies are not so rare that a complete cycle automatically recommends itself, particularly in a hall that does not allow even a medium-size orchestra of 69 players room to breathe expansively.
Most likely, the project was conceived as a showcase for Yondani Butt, who was advertised as a special guest conductor.
Mr.
Butt, a youngish musician who was born to Chinese parents in Macao, has also studied chemistry.
Though he received his musical education largely in the United States, he is scarcely known here except to record collectors familiar with his outings in obscure repertory.


Extra Buses and Subways Readied in Case of Strike
Trying to head off a traffic nightmare, transit officials in the New York metropolitan area are bringing old buses out of retirement and creating a new subway line for the quarter of a million commuters who will suffer service disruptions if railway employees at Amtrak and Conrail strike tomorrow.
But officials said a strike, which would halt Long Island Rail Road and Amtrak service into Pennsylvania Station and shut down long stretches of track used by N.J.
Transit, would cause long delays in subway and commuter bus service and huge tie-ups at the bridges and tunnels leading into Manhattan.
The Metro-North Commuter Railroad, whose trains go into Grand Central Terminal, would not be directly affected.


'Transplant' Car Makers Redefine the Industry
If it opens a factory in South Carolina, BMW will join 10 other foreign auto makers that have begun assembling vehicles at "transplants" in the United States and Canada since the early 1980's.
Establishing assembly plants in the United States is attractive because of the considerable size of the North American vehicle market, growing protectionist sentiment and the dollar's weakness, compared with the Japanese and German currencies.
Indeed, transplant production has grown into a significant portion of overall North American automotive production, accounting for more than 50,000 jobs in assembly and parts-making operations and about 16 percent of the capacity of 14.8 million vehicles annually, according to Autofacts Inc., a consulting firm in West Chester, Pa.


When It Pays to Complain: Detroit's 'Secret Warranties'
When an auto maker decides to repair defects no longer covered by warranty -- without directly notifying owners -- does this demonstrate good will or a cynical policy of trying to save money by compensating only those who complain?
The Ford Motor Company, like other auto makers, has faced this issue before.
Now a consumer advocacy group is accusing Ford of maintaining a "secret warranty" to cover what it says are a large number of defectively painted Ford full-size pickup trucks, the auto maker's best-selling model and one of the most popular vehicles of any kind sold in the United States.


When Patient's Life Is Price of Learning New Kind of Surgery
"SEE one, do one, teach one."
That is the classic doctors' description of the way new procedures and operations are taught.
But the credo seems destined for deserved oblivion.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
BMW is expected to announce Spartanburg, S.C., will be the site of its new assembly plant.
It would put the German maker of motorcycles, sports cars and sedans in a league with the big Japanese auto makers that have set up assembly operations in the United States and led in low-cost mass production.  [ Page D1. ]
Leaders in South Carolina cited the state's location and harbors, its quality of life and its pro-business climate as lures.  [ D6. ]  Establishing American plants is attractive because of the size of the vehicle market, growing protectionist sentiment and the weakening dollar.  [ D7. ]


CITY COLLEGE CHIEF RESIGNS AMID WAVE OF STAFF CHANGES
Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston has resigned as president of the City College of New York after 11 often tumultuous years of leading a school that has served generations of New York's poor and aspiring students.
His tenure began amid a fiscal crisis and ended in anguishing controversies over a professor's racially charged remarks and the trampling deaths of nine young people at a campus event.


Quotation of the Day
"Tell Bush, come quickly! Tell Bush I spend every day and every night here! Me, an old grandmother! Tell him to come and defend us, please!." -- DZEMILA MERDAN, hiding from mortar and artillery shells in Sarajevo.  [ A1:5. ]


Nibbled Plants Don't Just Sit There; They Launch Active Attacks
FOR more than 100 million years the battle has endured, and it rages still in every pine grove, meadow and planted field.
It is the truceless war between plants and the predators that feed on them.
Besieged by armies of voracious creatures but unable to run away, plants over the eons have evolved cunning defenses that include deadly poisons, oozings of toxic glue and hidden drugs that give leaf-eaters serious indigestion.


There's No Subsidy in Coastal Flood Insurance
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis, in " . . . But in Ourselves," his May 31 column on the budget deficit, characterizes the national flood insurance program as "grotesque in its greed and folly." A strange way to refer to a Government program that hasn't cost taxpayers a nickel since 1985.
How many other programs can make that claim?
Flood insurance was set up when Congress recognized that people will live near the coast and close to inland waterways whether the Government wants them to or not.
Because the structures they build aren't always suitable, when flood disasters occur, relief assistance and income tax casualty-loss deductions cost the Government money.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arkla Inc., Shreveport, La., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $400 million of debt securities. *
Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport Facility Improvement Corp. is offering $27 million in 6.55 percent revenue bonds due in 2032 for United Parcel Service Inc., through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.
The triple-A-rated bonds are priced at 99 to yield 6.621 percent.
For some investors, the bonds may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.


Barnes Obtains Ruling to Enter The Olympic Trials
Barely one day after track and field officials found a way to allow Butch Reynolds, the suspended 400-meter runner, into the United States Olympic trials without risking the eligibility of other athletes, they were suddenly confronted with the same challenge from Randy Barnes.
Barnes is the world-record holder in the shot-put, and, like Reynolds, is serving a two-year suspension for failing a drug test.
He propelled himself into the trials today when a state circuit court judge in his hometown of Charleston, W. Va., ordered that he be allowed to compete.


Corrections
A map yesterday depicting H.I.V. infection in Africa was incorrectly labeled.
It depicted the percentage of the population infected in each country, not infection rates per 100,000 people.


Wishing A Merry Unbirthday To All of Us
PEOPLE with an insatiable appetite for sending greeting cards can send one every day of the year, without repeating themselves, by firing up Studio of Greetings, a program from Epyx of Redwood City, Calif.
Here are some 400 full-sized graphics, and about the same number of what the publisher calls accents, little doodads to brighten things up, as well as ideas for greeting cards for every conceivable and even inconceivable occasion: not just Father's Day, Mother's Day, Christmas and Hanukkah, but Super Bowl Sunday and the beginning and end of daylight time.


Bridge
After eight months of struggle, the Grand National Team Championship for players in New York City and Long Island ended on Sunday at the League Club at 4 East 80th Street in Manhattan.
The winners of the final, now advancing to national playoffs in Toronto next month, were John Roberts, George Tornay, August Boehm, John Solodar and Alan Miller, all of Manhattan, and Tom Smith of Greenwich, Conn.
They began the final with a carry-over of 7 imps from earlier Swiss play, and in a well-played match added 10 to win by 17.
The losers were Bob and Jill Blanchard of Manhattan, David and Lisa Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens.


Houston Prices $448 Million Issue
A $448.4 million bond issue by the City of Houston was tentatively priced yesterday through a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The maximum yield at the initial pricing was 6.45 percent for a 6.4 percent bond due in 2012, which was offered to investors at a price of about 99.439.
For the short-maturity serial bonds, yields range from 5.1 percent in 1997 to 5.85 percent in 2002 and 6.15 percent in 2005.
For a longer maturity, investors were offered a 7 percent bond due in 2008 priced at a premium of about 106.882 to yield 6.3 percent.


Review/Television; Why Banks Don't Lend To the Truly Needy
"Frontline" ends its season tonight with a report on redlining, the apparently endemic reluctance of banks to make loans in minority neighborhoods.
Bill Schechner, the producer of the hourlong documentary, at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, builds a case that discrimination, not financial prudence, accounts for findings that middle-income black and Hispanic families are turned down by banks at a higher rate than low-income whites.
The subject is not an easy one for television, involving as it does bookkeeping calculations of what makes one applicant a better risk than another, and this hour is more earnest than enthralling.
But it does make its point.


Edward P. Callahan; Executive, 52
Edward P. Callahan, personnel director of the Estee Lauder Companies in New York for the last six years, died on Thursday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 52 years old and a resident of New Canaan.
His family said he died of cancer.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the kidnapping of an Exxon executive rendered his name incorrectly.
It is Sidney J. Reso.


Court Lifts Barrier to Skyscraper Project
A Federal appeals judge lifted the last legal obstacle to a huge skyscraper project at Columbus Circle yesterday that opponents had argued would make Manhattan's air pollution problem worse.
Overturning a decision by Judge Shirley Wohl Kram of Federal District Court in Manhattan, the appeals court ruled that the two proposed towers would not violate the Federal Clean Air Act and that the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman would not be liable for a $15 million fine that Judge Kram had threatened to impose.


BAIL IS DENIED FOR 2 HELD IN KIDNAPPING OF EXXON OFFICIAL
The husband and wife charged with the kidnapping of a top Exxon executive had amassed information on hiding money in overseas banks before they set out on their unsuccessful attempt to collect millions of dollars in ransom, law-enforcement officials said today.
Based on that disclosure, Federal Magistrate G. Donald Haneke denied a bail application by the accused kidnappers, Arthur D. Seale and his wife, Irene J. Seale, because of the violent nature of the crime they are charged with and the risk that they would try to flee the country.
"It's not even a close question," Judge Haneke said in ordering the couple held for trial.


Before Crash, USAir Pilot Spoke Uneasily of Removing Ice From Wings
Before taking off in a blinding snow storm and crashing into Flushing Bay, the two pilots of USAir Flight 405 spent most of a half hour talking uneasily about the inadequacies of procedures for removing ice from airplanes' wings at La Guardia Airport, especially during extended delays, according to a newly released transcript of conversations recorded in the plane's cockpit.
The transcript of the flight, which ended in a ball of fire and the deaths of 27 people, also appeared to support the co-pilot's earlier statements that, as required, the pilots had visually checked the wings for ice before takeoff and did not realize that anything was wrong until the plane, barely off the ground, crashed into the runway.


A Plan for More Affordable Housing in Harrison
Municipal workers and other middle- income residents of this affluent community will share homes with low-income residents of the town under a plan announced today.
The concept could become a model for development throughout the state, according to state and local leaders who gathered here to endorse the plan developed by Andrew M. Cuomo, son of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The lack of affordable housing has become an acute problem in Westchester County, where the median price of a single-family home is $270,000.


CHRONICLE
It was one of those oddly wonderful society benefit auctions, with everything from a fishing cruise with BILLY JOEL and CHRISTIE BRINKLEY to a truckload of manure on the block. (Guess which got the higher bid.)
The party at the Bridgehampton, L.I., home of DAVID and HILLIE MAHONEY on Saturday raised money for the Group for the South Fork, not a table-setting organization but a 20-year-old environmental group that works to preserve open spaces.
06-23-92


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGES  Probation Imposed
The Pacific-10 Conference has placed Washington State University's athletic program on two years' probation and sanctioned the men's track and field and baseball programs because of National Collegiate Athletic Association scholarship violations.
The Pac-10 barred Washington State's men's track and field and baseball teams from post-season competition next season and stripped the school of the conference track and field titles it won in 1985 and 1991.
Washington State's athletic director, Jim Livengood, said the sanctions would not be appealed.
"Quite candidly, we were guilty," Livengood said at a news conference yesterday. (AP) BASEBALL  Title to Fordham Prep
John Marciano hit a three-run double in the second inning to lift Fordham Prep to its first Catholic High Schools Athletic Association baseball title since 1935 with a 5-3 victory over McClancy yesterday at Yankee Stadium.
Marciano's double capped a five-run inning that erased a 3-0 lead for McClancy (20-5), which won the title last year.
Garrett Petraia, who started for Fordham (25-5) surrendered a three-run homer to Tom Barbato in the second but settled down to complete the game.
Petraia struck out Dan Nunez with the bases loaded to end the fourth inning and closed the sixth by forcing Mike Soto to pop up with two runners on.
SOCCER  Denmark Scores Upset


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Aides Try to Paint Perot as a Threat to Liberties
Seeking to weaken a Presidential rival who has sometimes seemed immune to criticism, the Bush campaign is starting to emphasize what it sees as a trait in Ross Perot that most concerns voters: an authoritarian streak that threatens their liberties.
In comments this weekend and again today, White House and campaign aides trained streams of adjectives at Mr.
Perot to assail his well-documented practice of investigating the private and business lives of people with whom he disagrees.


Slaney, Slowed by Injury, Fails to Gain 3,000 Berth
For 20 years, Mary Decker Slaney has been a dynamic middle-distance runner and orthopedic patient.
For every world or American record, and there have been dozens, she seems to have been done in by an injured ankle or calf or leg or something else.
Tonight, in the United States Olympic track and field trials, it was something else.
She finished sixth in the women's 3,000-meter final, largely because a foot injury in December had wiped out three months of heavy training and left her short of conditioning.
Only the first three finishers made the Olympic team.
Slaney, almost 34 years old, will have another chance later in the week in the 1,500 meters.


Long-Distance Train Travel Is Cut In Anticipation of Railroad Strike
With a possible strike in the offing, many of the long-distance passenger trains that left their stations yesterday may never make it to the end of the line.
At train stations from coast to coast, Amtrak agents were warning passengers that they would only be taken as far as a train could go by the tentative strike deadline, 12:01 A.M.
Wednesday.


Brutality Escalates in Haiti Since Coup; St. Louis Survivors
To the Editor:
I can well understand why Leon Wildes (letter, June 9), writing of Haitian refugees, brings up the ill-fated trip of the liner St.
Louis in 1939, and the failure of the United States to take in any or all of its 907 refugees from Germany.
But he states that these refugees were annihilated after their return to Germany.


Ay, There's the Rub, Orioles Tell the League
The Tim Leary saga continued today as the Baltimore Orioles filed an official protest with the American League over their 8-2 loss to the Yankees Sunday night, claiming that the pitcher scuffed several baseballs with sandpaper.
Though Leary was observed on television replays reaching into his glove in the fifth inning Sunday, apparently putting an object into his mouth and later apparently removing something from his mouth, it appears unlikely that he will be penalized.
The league president, Dr.
Bobby Brown, will review the evidence the Orioles sent him and may render a decision by the end of the week.


John R. Platt, 74, Scientific Scholar In Many Disciplines
John R. Platt, a physicist and biophysicist, died Wednesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 74 years old and had homes in Cambridge and Woods Hole, Mass.
He died of complications from a brain tumor, said a son, Dr. Terry Platt.





Killing South Africa's Dream
Two utterances measure the racial chasm that sunders South Africa.
"I can no longer explain to our people why we continue to talk to a government which is murdering our people," said Nelson Mandela after last week's bloodletting in Boipatong, a black township near Johannesburg.
"This Government does not kill people," asserted Hernus Kriel, Minister of Law and Order, who vowed a full inquiry into the seemingly wanton massacre of blacks by police.
Unless justice is done, and is seen to be done, the hopes for democratic change inspired by President F. W. de Klerk could vanish.
It beggars belief that Mr. de Klerk was personally responsible.
Yet he seems to have failed woefully to control security police who play on rivalries that divide a frustrated and impoverished black majority.


COMPANY NEWS: Profits of Peace; Venture Hopes to Cash In On Military Cutbacks
As the cold war fades, many companies are rushing to capitalize on the fallout.
They include Hercules Inc. and the Fluor Corporation, which said yesterday that they planned a joint venture to help dispose of nonnuclear explosives, chemical and conventional munitions as well as rocket motors, many of which Hercules helped to build.


Corrections
A listing in Business Day on Saturday with a monthly report about uncovered short sales on the New York Stock Exchange carried outdated figures, from May.
A corrected listing, with June figures, appears today on page D17.


Bonilla Gets Bounced, but the Mets Start to Roll
The Mets were on the field in anger.
Bobby Bonilla, hit by a pitch an instant before, was stalking Shea Stadium, flinging umpires and Cubs aside.
The Mets were pouring out toward the plate, eyes wide.
Enough, apparently, was enough.
The abuse, absorbed on the scoreboard all season by the Mets, had become too much to take when Bonilla was nailed in the elbow by Shawn Boskie in the fourth inning.


Even a Photo Finish May Not Show a Winner in Israel's Vote
With a final flurry of political attacks and promises, Israel's election campaign ended tonight, a drawn-out affair that neither stirred grand passions nor offered clear insights into what the next government will look like.
A new batch of opinion polls published today showed the opposition Labor Party leading the governing Likud Party by anywhere from 2 to 12 seats in Tuesday's election for the 120-member Parliament.
Some Likud members acknowledged that Labor would probably end up in first place.


Fees to Put Olympia Bankruptcy Among Costliest
Allowing Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. to restructure its debts in Canada so that it can avoid liquidation could consume as much as $29 million in legal and other administrative fees by October, recent estimates prepared by its lawyers and accountants suggest.
The figure, which corresponds to $35 million in Canadian money at current exchange rates, was first presented to an Ontario court on Thursday and was confirmed yesterday by Steven Sharpe, a partner in the law firm of Davies, Ward &amp; Beck in Toronto, who represents the ailing developer.


Recalling Three Days That Shook Glassboro
EXACTLY 25 years ago this morning in that predawn darkness when minds drift in deep, time-suspending slumber, Joe Grachowski's bedside phone rang.
Someone at Glassboro State College here was saying the president wanted him to install 18 new air-conditioners immediately in the school's guest house.
According to legend, Mr.
Grachowski peered at his alarm clock and suggested, perhaps not this politely, that President Robinson call back during normal business hours to order 18 new air-conditioners.


Now, Where's Their Beef?
So far, Bill Clinton is the only Presidential candidate to offer an economic plan.
He has just issued a revised version, and it gives a sound answer to every important question:
How much must the deficit be cut?
In half, Governor Clinton says, which avoids dogmatic calls to eliminate it no matter what the consequences.Should taxes be raised?
Yes, he answers, with some political courage, by $150 billion.
Can spending also be cut?
Yes, by an equal amount -- and he would plow the savings into a $200 billion program of public investment.


Corrections
A Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday showing the shipping balance of trade for New York and New Jersey ports was labeled incorrectly.
The figures were in thousands of long tons.


Accounts
*
The National Enquirer, Lantana, Fla., to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, for its advertising account with billings estimated at $3 million.
D'Arcy had been the incumbent since 1987, but the account has been inactive since 1990.


Treasury Issues Little Changed
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in slow trading yesterday, as dealers prepared for coming auctions of new two-year and five-year Treasury notes.
The steep slide in the Tokyo stock market helped to push prices of short-term bills and notes higher in overnight trading.
And weakness in equities traded on the New York Stock Exchange meant that demand for short-term issues remained firm after trading shifted to the United States.


Seles Still Causing Commotion
When Monica Seles didn't compete at Wimbledon last year, she was chastised for silently skipping the most prestigious tournament in tennis.
This year she is back and she is being chastised for making too much noise.
Seles was halfway to a Grand Slam in 1991 when she reneged on that golden opportunity by not attending Wimbledon.
An injury she described today as "a shin splinter" prevented her attendance last year, but she was chastised nonetheless for her 11th-hour no-show.


Chess
The Sixth Verenigde Spaarbank Tournament in Amsterdam in late May was as short as they come.
Four grandmasters played two games with each other, alternating colors.
But they put several twists into the course before Nigel Short of England and Viswanathan Anand of India took a shared first place with 3 1/2-2 1/2 each.
In the first four rounds, no one but Yasser Seirawan of Seattle won a game, against Short.
But after the ultimate winners both defeated the American he dropped to last place with 2 1/2-3 1/2, tied with Jan Timman of the Netherlands.


Market Place; A Battered Stock Follows the Fads
WHEN an initial public offering goes wrong, a company can find itself left with few friends.
Such is the case with Salton-Maxim Housewares Inc., a maker of assorted housewares as diverse as shower radios and yogurt makers.
It sold stock to the public at $12 a share in October.


Review/Jazz Festival; Trumpets for Gillespie, Without Gillespie
Fifteen -- count 'em, 15 -- trumpeters filled the Town Hall stage on Sunday night in "Trumpets for Dizzy." In the JVC Jazz Festival's second tribute to Dizzy Gillespie, who was absent, the trumpeters shared a rhythm section for an evening-length jam session on tunes from Mr.
Gillespie's repertory.
Jon Faddis assembled a lineup of musicians whose ages ran from 87 years old (Doc Cheatham) down to the 20's.
They played forthright jazz with a competitive edge.
The jam-session format is basic and ruthless.
As musicians run through chord changes, it's clear who is merely adequate and who is inspired.
The players also traded four-bar phrases in face-offs that were no less serious delivered with a smile.


Business and Health; States Seek Aid For the Uninsured
A DELEGATION of 14 governors went to the White House last week seeking help for efforts by states to bring health care to millions of uninsured Americans.
Despairing of obtaining national solutions on health care in the election year political gridlock, the governors -- 9 Republicans and 5 Democrats -- are trying to push ahead on their own.
The states need Bush Administration support to get Congress to waive provisions of the Federal law that exempts two-thirds of all businesses from state taxes linked to health insurance.
Self-insured companies invoke the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, called Erisa, to escape taxes on insurance premiums.
They can also refuse to contribute to state pools to insure people viewed as poor risks.


By Design; Animal Magnetism
Last spring, owning something in an animal pattern was a novelty.
By fall, it will be unavoidable.
Designers of everything from coats to lingerie in every price range have leapt on animal markings for fall.
Last week, accessories began to hit the stores.
The response, as one purveyor put it, has been unbelievable.
Bloomingdale's is barely able to keep one leap ahead of the demand for its leopard-printed chiffon scarfs, selling at $42.
Meanwhile, belts, handbags, hats and hair accessories are selling at a fast clip.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Northwestern University's commencement omitted one honorary degree recipient and affixed his titles to another's name.
The omitted recipient was James Levine, artistic director and conductor of the Metropolitan Opera.
Nick Holonyak Jr. is a professor of electrical engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana.


Young Mothers Try to Avoid a Lifetime on Welfare
"Being on welfare is kind of like thinking you can't do anything," she was saying.
"You see women who've been on it for years. It makes them lazy. All they do is stay home watching the soaps."
The harsh judgment came not from a conservative politician but from a 16-year-old unmarried mother of a 2-year-old girl, a school dropout, welfare recipient and prime candidate for years if not decades on the dole.


Again, Maddox Gets Himself in Position
Bill White, the National League president who will leave office March 31, has never been at ease with his crown.
Maybe that's because White is in a job he thought he had to take, for the cause, if you will, on behalf of all the minorities he figured would be shut out if he, the first black to be offered so lofty a position, had said no.


We Have the Technology to Identify Deafness in Newborns
To the Editor:
"Ear's Own Sounds May Underlie Its Precision" (Science Times, June 9) provides a review of the basic concepts of otoacoustic emissions, a concept dating back to 1946 that seeks to determine how humans perceive sound.
The spurt in research in this area is aimed at achieving a clinical application for the theory.
But I am concerned that parents will be misled by the statements that deafness is difficult to identify in newborn infants and that it is unlikely hearing loss will be noted before the age of 12 months.
We are quite able to identify hearing loss in neonates.


Of Even Lower Prices and Smarter Software
PC EXPO, the largest computer trade show on the East Coast, begins today in New York City.
Although it has traditionally been a forum for new business computers and software, the main topic of discussion among more than 75,000 corporate computer buyers and dealers will almost certainly be the latest rounds of price-cutting by computer makers.
Almost every major computer maker has, in the last few months, either cut prices sharply or announced plans to do so.
The latest, discussed here last week, was the Compaq Computer Corporation's introduction of a new family of computers with prices beginning well below $1,000.
In response, the Dell Computer Corporation told financial analysts last week that it, too, would introduce a new line of low-cost computers by the end of this week.
Even the International Business Machines Corporation has been hinting that cheaper I.B.M. computers are on the close horizon.
When such PC powerhouses cut prices, everyone else will have to follow or risk losing sales.


Indy Gets Look at Stock Cars
Stock-car racing's leading drivers started a two-day test at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway yesterday, and if the results are promising, and if other details can then be worked out, the Speedway could become a stop on Nascar's Winston Cup stock-car tour as early as 1994.
That would represent the first time since 1910 the two-and-a-half-mile oval has held a race other than the annual Indianapolis 500.
The the average lap speeds yesterday were about 162 miles per hour, roughly 65 m.p.h. below Indy-car speeds.
"The cars are working real well," MARK MARTIN said after turning about 12 laps at speed.
"It hasn't seemed as difficult as I expected."


M. F. K. Fisher Dies


Executive Changes
CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC., the Los Angeles-based retailer, named Lynn Sperling senior vice president and general merchandise manager of sportswear and special sizes.
DONALDSON, LUFKIN &amp; JENRETTE, New York, appointed John J. Veatch managing director in the investment banking division.


Excerpts From the Supreme Court's Decision on Speech and Crimes of Bias
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today declaring unconstitutional the "hate crime" ordinance adopted by St.
Paul.
All nine Justices agreed that the law violated the First Amendment, but they took different approaches.
Justice Antonin Scalia's majority opinion was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Anthony M. Kennedy, David H. Souter and Clarence Thomas.


New Executive At Macy's East
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company appointed Rhonda Brown yesterday as a president of merchandising for Macy's East, its largest division.
The company also announced several promotions in its product development and specialty stores divisions.
Ms.
Brown will be one of six presidents of merchandising for Macy's East.
She will be responsible for accessories, shoes and dresses.


Suspensions for Brawl
First baseman FRED McGRIFF of the San Diego Padres and pitcher TREVOR WILSONof the San Francisco Giants were suspended for four days yesterday and fined an undisclosed amount by the National League president, BILL WHITE, for their roles in a bench-clearing incident Thursday in San Francisco.
McGriff charged the mound when Wilson hit him with a pitch after a grand slam by GARY SHEFFIELD.


A's Enjoy a Romp With 10-Run 3d
Athletics 12, Mariners 7
OAKLAND, Calif., June 23 (AP) -- Harold Baines's three-run homer and two-run double highlighted a 10-run third inning as the Oakland Athletics overpowered the Seattle Mariners, 12-7, tonight.
Baines drove in seven runs, which tied his career r.b.i. record set May 7, 1991, against Baltimore.


CONGRESS IS TOLD OF IRAQ COVER-UP
At a politically charged hearing, the House Judiciary Committee heard accusations today of an Administration cover-up of its aid to Iraq before the Persian Gulf war, including a strategy not to implicate top Government officials.
A committee member charged that the White House, State Department and the office of the Secretary of Commerce were consulted before the Bureau of Export Administration altered documents that Congress had requested about prewar sales to Iraq.


A Domed Stadium on L.I.?
The Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, announced today the formation of an advisory commission to study the feasibility of building a domed stadium on Long Island.
Mr.
Marino, an Oyster Bay Republican, said his primary goal was to attract one of the three professional sports teams that play at the Meadowlands in New Jersey to return to New York.
The teams are the New Jersey Nets of the National Basketball Association and the Giants and the Jets of the National Football League.


A Salad That Serves as a Meal
WITH a little forethought, simple recipes and fresh foods can be used to produce meals in 20 to 30 minutes.
The meals in this column are intended to show that good health and good taste are not mutually exclusive.
A willingness to substitute ingredients judiciously makes it easy to get this one-dish meal to the table almost effortlessly.
If you cannot find thumb-size new potatoes, use the next size.
You can always find them small enough to cook in 20 minutes.


S.E.C. Acts On Behalf Of Holders
In a far-reaching effort to make the nation's companies more accountable to shareholders, the Securities and Exchange Commission today proposed major changes in corporate rules, including a requirement that companies for the first time justify executive pay levels.
The executive compensation proposal consists essentially of requiring companies to convert what are now often large masses of text into a series of tables, graphs and notes providing greater detail.


Bridge; A French pair wins the Epson Worldwide Contest with a 77 percent score.
The Paris organizers of the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, played Friday and Saturday, have announced the world winners.
According to Jose Damiani, the best score was on his doorstep: Patrice Baverel, a computer salesman, and Francois Hazard, a bank executive, scored 77 percent sitting North-South on Friday, playing in a club in Paris.
Other world winners were: Friday East-West, P. and B. Hicks of Shaftesbury, England, 74 percent; Saturday North-South, Jun Gang and Jan Wzibai of China, 75 percent; Saturday East-West, Kumar Sen and Nikhil Nandy of India, 76 percent.


Firm May Admit Illegal Gifts
The former law firm of Arnold I. Biegen, the finance chairman of David N. Dinkins's 1989 mayoral campaign, has tentatively agreed to admit having made illegal contributions to the Dinkins campaign, a top law-enforcement official said yesterday.
The agreement is part of a settlement in a civil case brought by the New York City Campaign Finance Board and Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney.Mr.
Biegen's partners at the firm, Parker Chapin Flattau &amp; Klimpf, were accused in the suit of donating more than $34,000 to the Dinkins campaign in violation of state and city election laws, which limit contributions from law firms to $3,000.


Topics of The Times; Food for the Soul
M.
F.
K.
Fisher, who died Monday at the age of 83, had a novel suggestion for dealing with wolves at the door: Invite them in and cook them for dinner.
Mrs.
Fisher wrote with humor and insight about food and hunger.
But she also thought about spiritual hunger as well.
In a career covering more than half a century, she published scores of essays and 15 books, including the famous collection, "How to Cook a Wolf."


S.E.C. in Move to Extend Inside-Trading Law to Bonds
In what may be an effort to expand the reach of insider-trading laws, the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday filed its first case ever charging illegal insider trading in municipal bonds.
There have been conflicting beliefs among lawyers about whether it is possible to violate insider trading laws if the trading is done in bonds, rather than in stocks.


Vincent Downplays Advance
There was nothing unusual about the $5 million advance the Detroit Tigers used earlier this month to meet their payroll, Commissioner FAY VINCENT said yesterday.
Vincent said many teams routinely draw against future television revenue when they need cash. (AP)


McNeil Says Freedom, Not Money, Is the Real Issue on Trial
Freeman McNeil said today that regardless of how much money he has earned as a Jets running back in the National Football League, no amount of earnings for him, or any other N.F.L. player, equals the freedom to pursue their careers in a free market.
McNeil offered his testimony in the second day in the McNeil v. the N.F.L. antitrust suit being conducted in United States District Court.


Robert Sanford Boas, 69, Head of Carl Marks Brokerage, Is Dead
Robert Sanford Boas, head of an international securities concern, died on Monday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
Mr.
Boas was 69 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I., and Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Boas died of multiple myeloma, or cancer of the bone marrow and blood, said his son Dr.
Richard S. Boas of Westport, Conn.


California Lottery Selects Thompson
The California State Lottery named J. Walter Thompson, San Francisco, as its advertising agency for a three-year contract with billings estimated at $25 million.
The account was previously handled by Dailey &amp; Associates in Los Angeles.
In a telephone interview yesterday, a lottery spokeswoman in Sacramento confirmed a report in this week's Advertising Age that listed the other finalists as Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, and Grey Advertising and McCann-Erickson, both of Los Angeles.
She said that the review had been prompted by the lottery's plans to offer new games and change its marketing strategy.


Gotti Sentenced to Life in Prison Without the Possibility of Parole
Still defiant, John Gotti stood up and smiled, saying nothing, as he was sentenced yesterday to spend the rest of his life in prison.
As hundreds of chanting, flag-waving Gotti supporters protested in front of the Federal courthouse in Brooklyn, Judge I. Leo Glasser sentenced the convicted boss of the Gambino crime family in a courtroom so packed that James M. Fox, the head of the New York office of the F.B.I., was wedged next to Joseph DeCicco, a reputed Gambino associate.


CROATIAN TROOPS HIT SERBIAN AREA
An assault launched by Croatian troops to regain control of a strategic slice of territory now settled by Serbs was described by Western diplomats today as the most serious challenge to a truce that has kept Serbian and Croatian forces apart for nearly six months.
Gen.
Satish Nambiar, the commander of the United Nations forces assigned to monitor the cease-fire in Croatia, flew from Belgrade to Zagreb today to try to persuade Gen.
Anton Tus, the commander of the Croatian Army, to withdraw the force.


Eating Well
ON July 1, fruits and vegetables will have a news conference of their own, probably featuring such important Government officials as Dr.
Louis Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and Dr.
Antonia Novello, the Surgeon General.
At the conference the National Cancer Institute will initiate its Five a Day Program, created to promote increased consumption of fruits and vegetables.
The institute will suggest that people eat at least five, and as many as nine, half-cup servings of fruit and vegetables a day because that may reduce the risk of chronic diseases like cancer and atherosclerosis and may slow the aging process.


Bush Vetoes Bill to Lift Ban On Money for Fetal Research
President Bush today vetoed legislation that would have lifted the Administration's ban on Federal financing of research using tissue from aborted fetuses.
Mr.
Bush said he vetoed the bill "to prevent tax money from being used for research that many Americans find morally repugnant and because of its potential for promoting and legitimizing abortion."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; For First Time, Perot Finds Himself on Defensive
The budding Presidential campaign of Ross Perot today found itself for the first time struggling to defend the past behavior of the Dallas billionaire in the face of a growing attack from President Bush and his supporters.
Indicative of the concern in Mr.
Perot's camp, the Dallas billionaire today scheduled an interview for Wednesday morning on the NBC News program "Today." The appearance will come 24 hours after his top lieutenant appeared on the same show to respond to news reports about Mr.
Perot's use of private investigators to dig up damaging information on his enemies, including Mr.
Bush.


In Paris, an Uneasy 'Oui' to One Europe
In a display of France's conflicting feelings toward Europe, French legislators today approved constitutional changes needed to put the Maastricht Treaty on European union into effect, while angry farmers blocked highways around Paris to protest a reduction of European Community subsidies.
Endorsement of the constitutional changes by a rare joint session of Congress in the Palace of Versailles set the stage for a referendum late this summer on the treaty, which commits the community to create a single currency and to adopt common foreign and security policies.


Review/Theater; Using a Sense of Humor, Even on Large Issues
As a playwright, Keith Reddin is fearless about undertaking challenging subjects -- hot and cold wars, big-business corruption -- always treating them in a comic fashion.
Even when his plays spin off on a tangent, he retains his idiosyncratic sense of humor, a humor that is also very much in evidence when he puts on his other creative hat as an actor.
In his new play, "The Innocents' Crusade" (at Manhattan Theater Club's Stage 2), Mr.
Reddin is writing in a characteristic vein, spoofing large issues, in this case youthful idealism in a time of cynicism.
But this is a rambling road comedy that never reaches its intended destination.
One is left with a feeling of talent expended but not fulfilled.


The Pop Life
A Trumpeter's Tradition
Jazz has a long tradition of the young man with a horn, blowing in from out of town.
This year's version is Nicholas Payton, an 18-year-old trumpeter from New Orleans, surprise, surprise.
Mr.
Payton will be part of a band of young musicians called Jazz Futures II -- Herb Harris on tenor saxophone, Ronald Westray on trombone, Peter Martin on piano, Chris Thomas on bass and Brian Blade on drums -- put together by the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis and the JVC Jazz Festival's impresario George Wein; the group will be performing all week at Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street.
It's a good chance to hear what the jazz underground has been talking about for the last several years, when Mr.
Payton first started being heard from.
Mr.
Payton, who has been working regularly with the drummer Elvin Jones, plays with a New Orleans sound, crackling like fat thrown into a fire.
And he swings.
His solos with Mr.
Jones are stripped of runs and ornamentation, relying instead on long notes and melodies.


Philanthropic Giving Rose 6.2% in '91, Study Says
Philanthropic giving across the nation increased last year to $124.7 billion, a 6.2 percent rise over 1990, a new study says.
Americans continued to demonstrate generosity to religious and educational institutions but slighted nonprofit hospitals and human service organizations, the study found.
Major art museums did well, receiving important works, but dance groups suffered.


Review/Jazz Festival; A Night Made to Order For Age and Heroism
Most of the Buck Clayton Swing Band had walked offstage at Town Hall on Monday night, leaving the trumpeter Harry (Sweets) Edison, the trombonist Urbie Green and the saxophonists Scott Hamilton and Buddy Tate on the stage.
Counting off a fast "Jumping at the Woodside," the four, along with a rhythm section from the Clayton band, started to swing.
Mr.
Edison squeezed out taut, piercing notes, using rhythms to bang home his idea.
Then came Mr.
Tate.
Once a star saxophonist in the Count Basie Orchestra, he now moves with great difficulty since an automobile accident a few years ago.
He appeared very frail as he was helped to a stool next to the others.
Then he put his horn to his lips and produced a huge, raw sound.
Though he didn't have that much facility, everything about his improvisation was heroic, not just because he was there at age 77, but because the sweeps and rhythms of the solo were so unwilling to be denied their eloquence.
The excitement in the hall was palpable.


STRIKE AT AMTRAK POSTPONED 2 DAYS
Rail maintenance workers last night postponed for two days their threatened strike against Amtrak after failing to reach agreement on a new contract by a midnight deadline.
After a day of intense negotiations during which Amtrak reached agreement with several of its smaller unions, the reprieve by the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees relieved mounting tension over the possibility of a nationwide strike against commuter, intercity passenger and freight lines.


Campus Journal; The Task: Grow Grass Under a Dome
The fate of the 1994 World Cup soccer match, and the prestige of metropolitan Detroit, rest on a few blades of grass and on the ability of two Michigan State University professors to grow those blades indoors for at least six weeks.
Some $120 million is at stake, too -- revenue from the premiere outdoor international soccer tournament, which will be held in nine stadiums around the United States, among them the Pontiac Silverdome outside Detroit.


10 Million Air Travelers May Share in Settlement
Lawyers estimated yesterday that up to 10 million airline ticket buyers could be eligible to share in a settlement by American, Delta, United and USAir, the carriers that on Monday announced an agreement to pay more than $400 million to settle a suit charging them with conspiring to fix prices.
Almost anyone who bought a ticket on the four airlines for domestic travel since Jan. 1, 1988, and who passed through any of the carriers' two dozen hubs is expected to be eligible.


Ranger Players Add New Twists to Potential Lindros Trade
If the Rangers' proposed trade for Eric Lindros is approved and if John Vanbiesbrouck is part of the deal with the Quebec Nordiques, Vanbiesbrouck's contract status could add yet another dimension of rancor to what has already become a complicated fiasco.
The question is whether Vanbiesbrouck is a restricted or unrestricted free agent, and no matter what the answer, it could cause problems for the Nordiques.
If that were not enough, Tony Amonte, another of six Rangers rumored to be part of the pending deal, is upset, his agent says, and not sure he would be willing to report to Quebec.


In Trial, M.I.T. to Defend Trading Student-Aid Data
It was the first week of April 1988, and officials from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the eight institutions of the Ivy League had gathered in Wellesley, Mass., for their annual rite of spring.
They were deciding how much financial aid to offer about 3,000 students who had been accepted by more than one of their institutions.
A student accepted by both Cornell University and M.I.T. posed a fairly typical problem.
Based on financial aid forms, Cornell figured that the student's family could afford to pay $12,249 of the roughly $20,000 annual tuition, room and board.
M.I.T., where a year cost about the same, estimated the same student's family contribution at $13,550.


Allergic and Abandoned
To the Editor:
Allergy to a food or food additive, while uncommon, can be severe, even life threatening.
Thus, when the Food and Drug Administration decides that genetically engineered food can arrive on our tables without the safety testing ordinarily required of additives or the labeling regulations that allow us to know what we're consuming, it is taking a real risk with our health.
For the allergic, avoiding allergens in foods is complicated enough.
CLAUDE A. FRAZIER, M.D.
Asheville, N.C., June 10, 1992 The writer is author of "Coping With Food Allergy" (New York, 1974).


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
President Bush urged the Fed to lower interest rates further to stimulate economic growth, saying the central bank was wrong to worry that the move would fuel inflation.
The remarks came in an interview with The New York Times.  [ Page A1. ]
The S.E.C. proposed that companies justify executive pay levels in published graphs, charts and notes.
It was part of a far-reaching effort for greater accountability to shareholders.  [ D1. ]


The Court's 2 Visions of Free Speech
Two competing visions of the First Amendment, of the role of speech in a democratic society, were on display Monday as the Justices of the Supreme Court wrestled with the question of whether the Constitution permits government to declare that some speech is so hateful that it may be punished as a crime.
In four separate opinions filling 61 pages, these two visions clashed, in emotional and even vitriolic terms.
When the smoke cleared, one was the winner, although by the narrowest of margins.
The result was a Supreme Court decision of landmark dimension, a declaration in favor of more speech rather than less, even if the speech sometimes carries a painfully high price.


Authorities Are Pressing Search for More Suspects in Kidnapping of an Exxon Official
Law-enforcement officials are examining the past associations of the couple accused as kidnappers of Sidney J. Reso in the hope of finding someone who may have cooperated in the abduction and who may still be holding the 57-year-old president of Exxon International.
Unless they find another suspect, the officials say, the prospects of finding Mr.
Reso alive are remote.
"With the suspects in custody, we now have 200 agents working on finding Mr. Reso," said Gary L. Penrith, special agent in charge of the Newark office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Pass the Spelt. A Little Ketchup With Your Algae?
PEOPLE who eat strange foods like blue-green algae and spelt bread may seem like eccentrics who have nothing to do with ordinary Americans who toss burgers on the grill at night.
But avant-garde eaters often serve as a testing ground for innovative foods, and what they like to eat now may be the trendy new food on the kitchen tables of mainstream eaters tomorrow.
After all, foods that now appeal to millions of people, like yogurt, granola bars and rice cakes, were once favored by fringe eaters and available only in natural-foods stores.


Review/Television; Chased or Chaste Around the Copying Machine?
"Sex," says Linda Ellerbee, doing her duty as co-host of "Dangerous Propositions," tonight at 9 on the Lifetime channel, "is all mixed up with power." That is a theme of this fairly standard treatment of sexual harassment, apparently intended for viewers who have missed all the other programs on what has been a popular television subject for several seasons.
Groups of women and men of various ages are brought together to try to define sexual harassment and tell of their experiences with it and their attitudes toward it, however defined.
One definition offered here by a psychotherapist is "provocative sexual behavior that is not wanted," which reasonably enough leaves the call to the person on the receiving end.


Boitano Can Return to Games
The International Skating Union yesterday cleared the way for BRIAN BOITANO, the 1988 Olympic men's champion, to return to the Olympics.
In a rule change proposed by the United States Figure Skating Association and adopted at the union's annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland, delegates passed a measure that removes any restrictions against skaters who have performed or competed professionally in events approved by the union.
Just about the only events that are not are the world professional figure-skating championships, produced by the former Olympic champion DICK BUTTON.


Mideast Broadcaster Acquires U.P.I. in Bankruptcy Court
Middle East Broadcasting Center Ltd., a London-based television news and entertainment company that broadcasts in Arabic throughout Europe and the Middle East, acquired United Press International yesterday in bankruptcy court for $3.95 million in cash.
Steve Geimann, a spokesman for U.P.I., said yesterday that he did not know what specific plans the new owners had for the cash-short 84-year-old news service.
He noted that Middle East Broadcasting's representatives at the bankruptcy hearing in New York had said they wished to continue U.P.I. as a worldwide news-gathering operation.


For Gotti's Supporters, Disbelief and Anger
"The trial was a travesty -- they could have convicted the Pope," Michael Strippoli, a 49-year-old retired jewelry salesman from Queens, said angrily outside Federal District Court in Brooklyn, where John Gotti had just been sentenced to spend the rest of life in jail.
"There is something dangerous going on in America," he said.
"Look at what they got away with in the Rodney King thing. We Italians are a minority too, and we have to stand up and say this is wrong."


Chargers Safety Arrested
DELTON HALL of the San Diego Chargers has been arrested in Wexford, Pa., on a burglary charge.
The police in Ross Township charged Hall, formerly of the Pittsburgh Steelers, with breaking into the apartment of his former girlfriend, QUINTANA PATTERSON, and stealing a television and stereo. (AP)


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Endorsements; Clinton and Jackson Edge Toward Reconciliation
Gov.
Bill Clinton and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson today took tentative steps toward reconciling their bitter disagreement over Mr.
Clinton's criticism of a rap performer.
But the two men did not speak directly to each other, and both sides took care to leave room for retreat.
For Mr.
Clinton, the efforts at peacemaking took place at an afternoon news conference here during which Representative John Conyers Jr., a Michigan Democrat who is a self-described "big Jackson supporter," endorsed both Mr.
Clinton and the economic program the Arkansas Governor announced over the weekend.


No Pain for Saberhagen
Bret Saberhagen, the Mets pitcher who has been out since May 15 with tendinitis in his right index finger, threw yesterday for the first time without discomfort.
Saberhagen's workout lasted seven pain-free minutes and amounted to the first positive step the right-hander had taken in weeks.
"He'll throw for the next two or three days if there is no problem," said Jeff Torborg, the Mets' manager.
"Then, we'll work toward a program for him to come back, for him to get his arm strength."


Bates, Ranked 113th, Stuns Chang in 3 Sets
Jeremy Bates has spent a decade as Britain's foremost hope and, not so coincidentally, as Britain's resident tennis whipping boy.
He has been required to do perpetual public penance for having never won a major singles title, not to mention stalling out before Wimbledon's third round on all but one of his previous 10 visits here.
Last week, annoyed by the officiating at Manchester, he threatened to hang up his sneakers altogether, an outburst that fell somewhat flat when nobody seemed inclined to dissuade him.


CREDIT MARKETS;
A $153 million tax-exempt revenue bond issue by the Port of Oakland, Calif., was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The maximum yield is about 6.576 percent for a 6 1/2 percent bond due in 2022 priced at 99.
For shorter maturities, yields range from 5 percent in 1996 to 6.05 percent in 2002 and 6.5 percent in 2007.


Knicks Seem Close To Deal for Blackman
The Knicks' front office spent yesterday trying to work out a trade for Dallas Mavericks guard Rolando Blackman.
According to several National Basketball Association sources, the Knicks and the Mavericks were getting close to a deal.
One trade proposed by Dallas would send Blackman to New York in exchange for the Knicks' first-round pick in today's draft (No. 20 over all) and New York's first-round pick in 1993.


That's Entertainment?
The telephone call found me in a small, neat hotel room in a small, neat Swiss town.
Had I seen Vice President Dan Quayle's latest speech on values?
Fax me a copy, I said, and walked to the lake, where swans and ducks paddled peacefully and bourgeois families strolled, to smoke a cigar and drink a beer.
Switzerland is as smooth and creamy as its chocolate.
There is little unemployment, and the land lives mostly in homogeneous middle class harmony.
Clocks, trains and civic virtues run on time.
The people are friendly, hard-working and God-fearing.
But these attractions soon pale, for the Swiss lack the intellectual and cultural debates and the class, racial and religious diversities that make a country absorbing.
An American wit described Switzerland as "Scarsdale with mountains."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Asks Foes for Economic Plans
Gov.
Bill Clinton boasted yesterday that he had come up with the most sweeping economic blueprint for the country ever offered by a Presidential candidate and challenged President Bush and Ross Perot to match it.
At the same time, he promised that if elected President, his first 100 days in office would be governmentally "explosive," with Congress and Federal agencies under intense pressure to get the country's economic and social programs moving again.


Old-Timers Day for U.S. Won't Be in Barcelona
Halfway through the United States Olympic track and field trials, some of the golden oldies are hurting.
This has not been the best of times for 30-year-old Jackie Joyner-Kersee, almost-31-year-old Carl Lewis, almost-34-year-old Mary Slaney and a young oldie, 27-year-old Kenny Harrison.
All are past or present world and Olympic champions or world-record holders.
Joyner-Kersee has made the Olympic team in the women's heptathlon and will most likely do it in the long jump, but she seems tentative and not sharp, almost protective of a 10-month-old ligament injury in the right leg.


Mandela, Stunned by Massacre, Pulls Out of Talks on Black Rule
The African National Congress announced tonight that it was withdrawing from talks on the political future of South Africa until the white-controlled Government took steps to restore the trust shattered by a massacre last week in the black township of Boipatong.
The 90-member executive committee of the congress led by Nelson Mandela said it was halting the peace process, which seemed just a month ago to have brought South Africa to the brink of majority rule, because of what it called a systematic Government campaign to subvert democracy through violence.


Controversial Statue Is Unveiled After a Long Battle


U.S. Aides Say Real Winners Are Peace-Talk Negotiators
Bush Administration officials said tonight that the stunning victory of the Labor Party in Israel sharply increased the prospects for progress in the stalled Arab-Israeli peace talks.
United States officials would not comment on the election for the record, pending a final count.
But speaking to reporters, the officials could hardly disguise their pleasure.


Universities Reconsidering Bans on Hate Speech
College and university codes of behavior have been weakened and in some cases would be invalid under the United States Supreme Court's decision overturning a municipal ordinance that banned "hate speech" and "bias crimes," university officials and legal experts say.
But universities cannot agree on precisely which codes are likely to be found invalid and what standards of behavior can legally replace them.


Reviews/Television; A Faithful (and Grown-Up) 'Language of Cranes'
Although its Manhattan setting has been transposed to London, David Leavitt's 1986 novel, "The Lost Language of Cranes," has been given a BBC production that otherwise remains remarkably faithful to the original.
Like the book, Sean Mathias's television adaptation, a "Great Performances" presentation on PBS tonight, sensitively tells how a son's announcement of his homosexuality prompts his father to come out of the closet also.
As stories go, this one, while not unheard of, is hardly commonplace.
Philip (Angus MacFadyen) and his mother, Rose (Eileen Atkins), work in book publishing as copy editors.
Owen (Brian Cox), Philip's father, is an academic.
Living on his own, Philip is having an affair with Elliot (Corey Parker), who encourages a dependency that he then rejects.
Tired of tiptoeing around secrets, Philip tells his parents that he's gay, pointing out that "everybody knows except you." Rose isn't thrilled: "We all have secrets. I'm not sure they ought to be revealed." Philip: "It's better." Rose: "Better for whom." Owen, saying nothing, begins to weep bitterly, really for himself.


Businesses Take Steps To Prevent Kidnappings
It seemed a harmless enough adornment: a personalized license plate with three letters to identify the woman's computer company, followed by three more that proudly announced her position there: "C.E.O."
Now, following a pair of well-publicized kidnappings of business executives in the last two months, corporations large and small are calling on security consultants and taking steps to prevent the abduction of their senior staff.
So the California-based chief executive, wanting to take no chances, exchanged her vanity plate for an ordinary, anonymous one this month.
And she would rather not be named in the newspaper, thank you.


Recycling Makes More Sense for New York Than Incineration
To the Editor:
"New York, Amid Doubts, Broadens Recycling Plan" (news article, May 27) fails to mention the high cost and risks of incineration and misleads the reader about the Mayor's plan to construct as many as seven giant incinerators.
For fiscal years 1993-96, the plan envisions at least $520 million for expanding three barely operational Queens and Brooklyn incinerators and constructing the Staten Island ashport and ashfill, to hold the toxic residue of the incinerators.
Compare the $24 million budgeted citywide in fiscal year 1992 for waste prevention, reduction, composting and recycling.


Five Finalists For Jaguar Cars
Jaguar Cars Inc. has narrowed its review to five finalists vying for the account's estimated billings of $15 million to $20 million, according to reports in this week's trade publications Adweek and Advertising Age.


Fernandez Revises His AIDS Curriculum Proposal
On the eve of a special Board of Education meeting on the divisive issue of how to teach New York City's elementary school children about AIDS, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday issued revisions to his contested AIDS curriculum in hopes of turning chaos into compromise.
Released four days after the board's last meeting collapsed in shouting and finger-pointing, the Chancellor's revisions stress sexual abstinence.
They delete from fourth- and fifth-grade lessons references to contraceptive creams and anal intercourse as well omit information on cleaning needles and syringes.


Illinois Power Sells Mortgage Bonds
The Illinois Power Company entered the corporate debt market yesterday to sell $197 million of first-mortgage bonds in two parts, through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch.
One part consists of $72 million of noncallable bonds due in 2004, carrying an interest rate of 7.95 percent.
They are priced at 99.724 to yield 7.986 percent, or about 73-hundredths of a percentage point more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Quotation of the Day
"We will change the order of national priorities." -- YITZHAK RABIN, leader of Israel's Labor Party.  [ A1:6 ] .


Hundley's Fly Ball Lands in Victory Territory
The average is flashed up on the scoreboard: .181.
Almost instantly, the scoreboard registers the count: 0-2.
With men on first and third and one out in the fourth, Todd Hundley, embarrassed by the average and furious with himself for the count, makes all sorts of calculations in his mind, the most important of which is to shrink his ambition: a fly ball is all that's needed.
In baseball, modesty can be the best policy, and occasionally it can produce the most outrageous result.


Market Place; Chicago Futures Going Worldwide
AFTER more than four years of debate, delays and technical setbacks, the nation's largest futures exchanges will introduce the world's first 24-hour electronic trading system tomorrow .
The future profitability and direction of many world exchanges could well ride on the outcome.
The new system, known as Globex, could mark a new era in financial markets as technology melts away borders and time differences, giving trading firms a way of buying and selling futures contracts almost continually.


Apple to Work With Toshiba On 'Multimedia' Products
Apple Computer Inc., continuing its thrust into the consumer electronics business, said today that it would work with the Toshiba Corporation of Japan on joint development of products that combine sound and video with computers.
At a news conference here, Apple and Toshiba said they would develop consumer-electronics devices that play CD-ROM's, which are compact disks that can store data, text and images as well as sound.
The first product, which Toshiba will manufacture and both companies will sell, is expected to reach the market by the middle of 1993.


Operation Desert Sham
Those who watched the gulf war on CNN will recall the general jubilation and relief when, shortly after 10 P.M. on Jan. 16, 1991, all that good news came pouring in: Iraq's airfields wrecked, the Republican Guard decimated, no coalition casualties -- and the Scud missile sites "destroyed," Wolf Blitzer told us, "by the U.S. fighter aircraft that went into Iraq in the initial assault."
Viewers who thrilled to those reports may recall their shock and disappointment a day later when it turned out that the Scuds had not been disabled after all -- seven of them having just smashed into Tel Aviv, Haifa and other sites in Israel.


Main Russia-Ukraine Disputes Settled
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine reached broad agreement today on the major disputes that have poisoned relations between their countries since the breakup of the Soviet Union, from ownership of the Black Sea Fleet to settling their bills.
Those and most other sections of the 18-point accord they signed in Dagomys, a district of the Black Sea resort of Sochi, were agreements in principle, with details remaining to be worked out.
Even so, they included several major political breakthroughs.


Public &amp; Private; With Extreme Prejudice
The story of Col.
Margarethe Cammermeyer had a certain deja-vu-all-over-again quality.
It might as easily have been the story of Sgt.
Leonard Matlovich or Sgt.
Miriam Ben Shalom or one of several other soldiers whose job histories included decorations, promotions, excellent evaluations.
For Colonel Cammermeyer, the honors included a Bronze Star for her work as a nurse in Vietnam and recognition as the Veterans Administration Nurse of the Year.
None of it made any difference when she was dismissed from the Washington State National Guard, one of thousands of Americans whose exemplary service has paled beside the military's determination to boot gay soldiers.


A Coaching Career Rises From the Ashes
Theresa Grentz was the last one out of the house the day it burned down.
March 15, 1970.
Almost everything was lost, but, in retrospect, this was the day she found her way to become the head coach of Rutgers University and, now, the 1992 United States women's basketball team she will take to Barcelona, Spain, late next month.


Treasury Prices Narrowly Mixed
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were narrowly mixed and interest rates little changed yesterday as dealers placed bids at a record $15 billion auction of new two-year notes.
Prices of securities outstanding fell slightly in trading before the 1 P.M. auction, and the dip proved sufficient to stimulate good demand for the new notes.
The securities were sold at an average yield of 5.11 percent, down a touch from the 5.13 percent average yield at the last two-year note auction on May 20.


Surgery for Padres' Harris
San Diego Padres right-hander GREG HARRIS had two stainless steel screws inserted into his fractured right middle finger.
The team doctors, JAN FRONEK and MERLIN HAMER, who performed the surgery Monday, said Harris will be out of action for six weeks. (AP)


Royals' Rookie Pitcher Toys With Yankee Batters
If the Yankees were unsure who Hipolito Pichardo was, he introduced himself tonight.
From his stringy arms and legs that created a contorted motion to several pitches that jumped and jived, the rookie proved to be a pitcher who could baffle hitters.
The 22-year old Pichardo halted the Yankees on no runs into the seventh inning to outduel Melido Perez and lift Kansas City to a 2-1 victory at Royals Stadium.


Where Girls Learn the Arts of Justice
THE time has come for "solo self-defense sparring using the No. 2 and No. 3 techniques." No. 2's, an instructor explained, are "the ones to hurt somebody." No. 3's are the ones "to hurt somebody and cause damage."
"It's important to pay attention because we're using dangerous techniques," the instructor says.


Letters
Fine Dining in Budapest  To The Living Section:
Regarding Marian Burros's Eating Well column "In Budapest, Quest for Low-Fat Food Is an Endless One"  [ May 27 ] , obviously she was not well directed.
Meals are not all lard and bread.


Sports of The Times; American Teen-Agers In London
SHE could have responded, yes, indeed, she had a cold.
Or she could have been inventive and blamed the notorious grass courts for affecting her sinuses and causing the sniffles.
Instead, Chanda Rubin told the truth.
"Just bawling," she said.
She was only a few minutes off the court after her first match at Wimbledon, the center of the universe, and now her 16-year-old emotions were kicking in.


U.N. Opposing Iraqi Threat to Expel Aid Officials
A new confrontation appears to be looming between President Saddam Hussein and the Security Council as a result of a threat by Iraq to expel about 1,000 United Nations officials working there at the end of this month.
The United Nations humanitarian relief coordinator, Jan Eliasson of Sweden, had planned to leave for Baghdad tonight in an 11-hour effort to persuade the authorities there to extend the agreement, expiring next Tuesday, under which some 500 United Nations aid workers are delivering humanitarian assistance to needy Iraqis protected by a similar number of United Nations guards.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances this week (all times Eastern daylight):  President Bush
"20/20," ABC, Friday, 10-11 P.M. (Channel 7 in New York.)  Gov. Bill Clinton
No appearances scheduled.  Ross Perot
"Today," NBC, today, 7-7:30 A.M. (Channel 4 in New York.)


Tormented by Nightmares? Rehearse a Different Ending
THE final end looms for Freddy Kruger, the razor-fingered terror of the "Nightmare on Elm Street" series.
Researchers report a new, often highly effective and remarkably simple treatment for nightmares.
The method, a rehearsal of an alternative scenario for the bad dream, has been able to help people who suffered from dozens of nightmares a month, for longer than 30 years in some cases, with a single session of treatment.
In that session, nightmare sufferers are taught to rewrite their most terrifying dreams with soothing scripts of their choosing.
They then mentally rehearse those new scripts each day on their own.


Books of The Times; In Gulf War, Managing News and the News Media
Second Front  Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War  By John R. MacArthur  260 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $20.
Hotel Warriors  Covering the Gulf War  By John J. Fialka  78 pages.
Woodrow Wilson Center Press/John Hopkins University Press. $9.75, paperback.


Florida Education Refunding Bonds
The Florida State Board of Education is offering $304.9 million in tax-exempt general-obligation refunding bonds through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers in competitive bidding.
Yields on the short maturities of the serial bonds range from 3 percent for an issue due in 1993 to 4.95 percent in 1997, 5.65 percent in 2002, 6.15 percent in 2007 and 6.25 percent in 2010.


Errors Cited For Budget In New Jersey
In the latest volley in the fiscal battle between the Florio administration and the Republican-controlled Legislature, the State Treasurer, Samuel F. Crane, said today that Republican budget planners had counted $70 million twice and made other actuarial missteps that have thrown the new budget $226 million out of kilter just two days before it goes to the floor for a vote.
His announcement appeared for a time to derail Republican plans to bring their budget, which cuts $1.1 billion out of Gov.
Jim Florio's proposal, to a vote on Thursday.
But the Republicans now plan to go ahead with the vote, and in a statement they threw the problem back into the lap of the Democratic Governor.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the implications of the Supreme Court decision on "hate crimes" identified a spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union in New York incorrectly in some copies.
He is Loren Siegel.


Rick Sklar, 62, A Dominant Force Behind Rock Radio
Rick Sklar, whose programming made WABC in New York the most popular radio station in North America, died at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan on Monday.
He was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Sklar died from complications after minor surgery but the exact cause of death is not known, a spokesman from his company said.


Personal Health
THROUGHOUT my childhood and young adult years, I was oblivious to poison ivy, bragging that I did not seem to get it even after traipsing through patches of it that caused my kid brother perennial agony.
I had no reason, I thought, even to bother to learn what it looked like.
Then in my early 30's I had my comeuppance.
Two days after a camping trip, I began to itch, then to burn and itch.
I could not even sit.
Unable to work, I raced to the dermatologist.


Witt Allegations Denied
A lawyer for the ice skater KATARINA WITT yesterday denied stories that the two-time Olympic gold medalist was once an informant for the Stasi, the East German secret police.
HEINZ DUEX, the lawyer, also threatened to sue news outlets that make such claims.
Duex said Witt had not received any money from the Stasi but rather from East Germany's sports federation, the DTSB. (AP)


Laying Down the Burden of City College
Under a pristine blue sky, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston strolled around his City College campus for a few minutes yesterday with the carefree bearing of someone who had put down a heavy load.
Along Convent Avenue, the college's main thoroughfare, students, professors and workers stopped the president and embraced him or shook his hand, telling him how much they will miss him when he moves in September to the Harvard Graduate School of Education as a visiting scholar.


Recycling Makes More Sense for New York Than Incineration; Try a Mix
To the Editor:
Nearly all New Yorkers support recycling, but with the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island nearing capacity under the daily onslaught of 26,000 tons of trash, and legislation pending to ban or curb out-of-state trash shipments, recycling alone is not enough.
A May 27 news article points out that advocates and skeptics question the city's ability to get a full recycling plan to work.
The city is running out of options.
Eventually, recycling must account for more than 40 percent of our daily waste.
But converting trash to energy (as the Sanitation Department has proposed with construction of a waste-to-energy plant in the Brooklyn Navy Yard) and continuing to landfill remain essential elements in solving the waste-management crisis.


Timothy Hawkins; Fashion Journalist, 44
Timothy Hawkins, a fashion journalist, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44 years old.
Mr. Hawkins died of AIDS, his sister, Heather Hawkins, said.


READY TO FORM A COALITION
Israel's opposition Labor Party won a resounding victory over the right-wing Likud Party in Tuesday's national election, nearly complete results showed today.
The vote creates the possibility of a center-left coalition committed to greater flexibility in Middle East peace talks.
For the first time since its tumble from political dominance in the 1970's, Labor was in a clear position to form a Government, although it fell short of a parliamentary majority of its own.


Fanfare and Catcalls for Voucher Plan
When President Bush unveils his long-awaited school voucher plan this week, he will do so with all the fanfare that accompanied his package of education proposals last year.
It is evidence of the importance of education initiatives in an election year.
Mr.
Bush has been trumpeting the value of education at every opportunity as part of his theme of family values.
And some of his supporters suggest that the voucher plan, which would help low- and middle-income parents send their children to the public, private or parochial school of their choice, could be the centerpiece of his urban strategy during the Presidential campaign.


Part of Rwanda's Problem Begins in U.S.
To the Editor:
"In Rwanda, Births Increase and Problems Do, Too" (front page, May 31) relies on the flawed logic of population-control ideology and fails to examine the real problems facing Rwandans and others in the developing world.
The high birth rate in Rwanda is not the cause but rather a symptom of poor living conditions.
Although you quote a World Bank report stating that "educated women have smaller families, and their children tend to be healthier and better educated," you present a decreased birth rate as a solution in itself to Rwanda's problems.
Decades of coercive family planning programs, which offer women birth control and sterilization, but do not provide comprehensive health care or address their wider needs, have shown this strategy is doomed to failure.
We should address the real issues.
It is estimated that 200,000 women worldwide die of illegal or unsafe abortions each year, yet our Government refuses aid to facilities in the developing world that offer abortions or abortion counseling.
Birth control methods considered unsafe in this country, such as Depo-Provera injections, given at clinics in Rwanda, are widely used on third world women (and low-income women at home) without their knowing the risks.
The unequal distribution of wealth between industrialized and developing nations, and within developing nations themselves, perpetuates the poverty, illiteracy and powerlessness that lead women to have more children than they are able to feed.
The United States, with 5 percent of the world's people, accounts for one-third of the world's use of nonrenewable resources, making our per capita consumption of energy several hundred times that of the average Rwandan.
Is it not hypocritical and racist to complain about the effects of "overpopulation" on the environment and do nothing to curb our overconsumption?
RACHEL ROSENBLOOM  New York, June 10, 1992 The writer is a member of Women's Health Action and Mobilization.


Incentives to Graduate: Money and New Paths
Chester Mirador grins when he recalls failing eighth grade.
His mother would drop him at the front door of the Westport Middle School and he would slip out the back to join friends.
But four years ago his life changed when Ewing Kauffman promised him and his fellow students at Westport High School financial support -- regardless of whether they planned to enter college, a trade school or a job-training program -- if they graduated with their classmates and avoided drugs and teen-age parenthood.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GOTTI SENTENCED TO LIFE IN PRISON
Still defiant, John Gotti said nothing as he was sentenced to spend the rest of his life in prison.
As hundreds of chanting Gotti supporters protested in front of the Federal courthouse in Brooklyn, Judge I. Leo Glasser imposed life sentences with no possibility of parole on Mr.
Gotti and his co-defendant, Frank Locascio, for their racketeering-murder convictions.
A1.
Gotti supporters scuffle with police.
B2.
MORE SUSPECTS SOUGHT IN KIDNAPPING
Law-enforcement officials are examining the past associations of the couple accused as kidnappers of Sidney J. Reso in the hope of finding someone who may have cooperated in the abduction and who may still be holding the president of Exxon International.
Unless they find another suspect, the officials say, the prospects of finding Mr.
Reso alive are remote.
B5.
A WALK WITH AN OUTGOING COLLEGE LEADER
A day after the announcement of his resignation as president, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston strolled around the City College campus for a few minutes yesterday with the carefree bearing of someone who had put down a heavy load.
B3.
CO-PILOT TESTIFIES HE CHECKED FOR ICE
The co-pilot of a USAir jet that crashed at La Guardia Airport last March testified yesterday that he and the pilot, while looking through the cockpit window on a snowy night, repeatedly checked the wings for ice before a liftoff that swiftly ended in a fiery plunge that killed 27.
B3.
Chancellor revises AIDS curriculum.
B3.
REGION
AMTRAK STRIKE IS POSTPONED
After failing to reach agreement on a new contract by a midnight deadline, rail maintenance workers last night postponed for two days their threatened strike against Amtrak.
The reprieve by the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees relieved mounting tension over the possibility of a nationwide strike against commuter, inter-city passenger and freight lines.
A1.
For commuters, a day of uncertainty.
B4.
DISCUSSING DESEGRATION IN YONKERS
Proposals submitted to a Federal judge yesterday made clear that Yonkers and the plaintiffs in a 12-year-old desegregation suit are still at odds over how fast and how far the city should move to desegregate housing.
B5.
L.I.
CONGRESSMAN TO RETIRE
Representative Norman F. Lent, the 11-term dean of Long Island's Congressional delegation, announced yesterday that he was retiring because he was weary of his job and daunted by the prospect of a potentially exhausting re-election campaign in a newly drawn district.
B5.
SENATOR FROM PUERTO RICO?
Senator D'Amato of New York has been depicted as the "senator from Puerto Rico" by a defense lawyer for his chief fund-raising aide in San Juan.
The aide is on trial in a case focusing on illegal contributions that were funneled to Mr.
D'Amato's campaign committee.
Jurors in the case ended their first day of deliberations without reaching a verdict.
B7.
About New York by Douglas Martin B2
Chronicle B4


A Call to Withdraw South African Athletes
Despite the massacres 35 miles south of Johannesburg last week and calls by Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu, the head of the Anglican Church in Southern Africa, to withdraw South Africa's invitation to the Barcelona Olympics, the International Olympic Committee has no plans to deny South Africa participation in the Games, which start next month.
Francois Carrard, the I.O.C director general, said today from Lausanne, Switzerland, that the I.O.C is monitoring events in South Africa.
But so far, he said, no major political figure or organization has demanded the I.O.C. to act, even with the breakdown in talks between the government and the African National Congress to create a nonracial democracy.


Al Pacino Cancels Matinees of 2 Shows
Al Pacino has canceled future matinee performances of "Salome" and "Chinese Coffee" at Circle in the Square Theater, 254 West 50th Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Pacino has strained vocal cords, said Maria Somma, a spokeswoman for the theater, where both shows are in previews until their opening date on Sunday.
Saturday matinees will be canceled, and Mr.
Pacino's schedule of seven performances a week is to be reduced to six; "Chinese Coffee" is to run through July 15 and "Salome" through July 23.


Housing Suit Reveals Split In Yonkers
Proposals submitted to a Federal judge today make clear that Yonkers and the plaintiffs in a 12-year-old desegregation suit remain at odds over how fast and how far the city should move to integrate housing.
Separate recommendations filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the Justice Department show that groups in the suit had split over a compromise reached in April.
That accord was worked out after the judge, Leonard B. Sand, had urged the city to submit an alternative to a languishing blueprint for desegregation that he ordered in 1988.


Rockefellers Move to Preserve 2,972 Acres of Hudson Farms
In an effort to preserve farm land, Margaret and David Rockefeller announced an agreement today putting almost all the 2,972 acres where they raise cattle here in a trust that bars commercial and housing development.
"If we don't protect our farms, we won't have anything to eat," Mrs.
Rockefeller said.
"I think that when you look down at the future of farming, and even right now, you have to take steps to protect it."


Lots of Oat Bran Found to Cut Cholesterol
ADULTS who eat a large bowl of oat bran cereal every day can reduce their blood cholesterol levels by a moderate amount, an analysis of 10 studies has found.
Cholesterol levels fell an average of 2 to 3 percent in the 1,278 adults studied.
There were larger drops in people with higher blood cholesterol levels.


Review/Film; Amoral, Unfeeling And Adrift


Goal of N.B.A. Draft Is Parity in the League
The National Basketball Association makes no promises; it merely offers weighted opportunity.
From their respective cities tonight, 27 teams will relay their selections to representatives in Portland, Ore., and after 54 players have been taken in the 1992 draft's two rounds, the likely result will be another few steps in the league's realizing its ultimate goal: parity.
For years, the N.B.A. has been plagued by as much as a third of its teams being barely competitive, drawing mostly yawns on their trips round the league.
In the past few seasons, as the league expanded from 23 to 27 teams, teams with names like the Magic and the Heat have easily been tricked and routinely burned.
But this past season, longtime doormats like the Los Angeles Clippers and the Nets made the playoffs, along with the expansionist Miami Heat, suggesting that the weaker teams are catching up.


Laettner Is Now Learning Who Big Guys Really Are
There have been a few well-intentioned jokes, a friendly remark or two, but nothing to make Christian Laettner feel like an outsider here, like a rookie who doesn't belong.
They like him.
Karl Malone, Charles Barkley, all the players on the United States men's basketball team.


Apple-I.B.M. Venture Chief Is Named
Apple Computer Inc. and I.B.M. confirmed today that they had appointed A. Nathaniel Goldhaber, a venture capitalist and computer entreprenuer, as president and chief executive of their joint venture, Kaleida.
Kaleida will begin business at Apple's headquarters in Cupertino, Calif., until a permanent location is found in the San Francisco area.
The venture will develop multimedia computer systems, which can combine audio, video and data displays on one machine.


PENTAGON CLAIMS ON SCUDS DISPUTED
Contradicting assertions made by United States military commanders during the Persian Gulf war, a missile expert working for the United Nations says American aircraft failed to destroy any of Iraq's Scud mobile missile launchers.
In an article being published Wednesday on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times, the specialist, Scott Ritter, a former Marine Corps captain who is a ballistic-missile analyst with the United Nations commission charged with supervising the destruction of Iraq's weaponry, is quoted as saying, "No mobile Scud launchers were destroyed during the war."


Corrections
An art review on Monday about the "Documenta 9" exhibition in Kassel, Germany, misidentified the owner of "The Death of Marat," a painting by Jacques-Louis David.
It is owned by the Royal Museums of Fine Arts in Brussels, not the Louvre.


BUSH CALLS ON FED FOR ANOTHER DROP IN INTEREST
Showing election-year eagerness to speed up economic growth, President Bush urged the Federal Reserve today to lower interest rates further, saying the central bank was wrong to worry that such a reduction would fuel inflation.
"I'd like to see another lowering of interest rates," the President said in an interview with The New York Times.
"I think there's room to do that. I can understand people worrying about inflation. But I don't think that's the big problem now."


French Coal Executive To Head Groupe Bull
Bernard Pache, an engineer with no experience in the computer industry, was named today to head the troubled state-owned computer maker Groupe Bull after the dismissal of Francis Lorentz.
A statement from Bull, which has piled up losses of almost $2 billion in the last two years and recently allied with I.B.M., did not elaborate on Mr.
Pache's surprise appointment, which is to be confirmed formally at a Cabinet meeting tomorrow.


Libyans' Patience With Qaddafi Ebbs
The large yellow ship that makes the overnight trip to Malta leaves Tripoli harbor crammed full of passengers, watched by couples and groups of young men strolling along the wide corniche that hugs the city's Mediterranean coastline.
Behind them, strings of green and white carnival lights blink in the gathering dusk, casting a soft glow over the white fronts of the city's buildings.
The scene is tranquil, but the daily departure is a reminder that the ferry is one of the few links this country has with the outside world, foreign flights having been suspended under United Nations sanctions imposed in April.
Not only has Libya become an international outcast, its economy is in shambles, its Government is in disarray, and many of its people are seething with resentment at the erratic 23-year rule of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.


Nascar Duel at Indy Speedway
Top Winston Cup drivers gave Indy race fans a taste of fender-to-fender stock-car racing with DALE EARNHARDT tangling with ERNIE IRVAN in the first turn yesterday at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
An estimated 30,000 fans at the track chanted "We want a race" as the cars roared from the pit.
Nine Nascar drivers packed together and ran a dozen laps at a track that has seen only Indy 500 racing since 1911.
The exhibition closed two days of tire testing that moved the speedway closer to becoming the host to a Winston Cup race. (AP)


Beirut Journal; Bread Rioters, Followed by the Ice-Cream Man
Now that the hot and humid weather has descended on the Lebanese capital, the pink and white ice-cream van arrives every afternoon, playing either the "Pink Panther" theme or, oddly, "Jingle Bells.
Ahmed the ice-cream man parks his American-made van at the corner of Rue Verdun and Bashir Al Kassar Street, in one of Beirut's more exclusive residential quarters, where elegant apartment buildings that survived the civil war stand as a reminder of how affluent this city once was.


Wine Talk
They reopened a chateau here Saturday and closed down an epoch.
The chateau was Pichon-Longueville; the epoch was the 1980's, a contemporary golden age in the long and tumultuous history of the Bordeaux wine trade.
The occasion was the Fete de la Fleur, an annual event that celebrates the flowering of the vine.
Each year a different chateau plays host to the celebration under the auspices of the Commanderie du Bontemps de Medoc et des Graves, the region's fun-loving promotional group.
This year it was Pichon-Longueville, a commanding, almost overwhelming new presence after five years of planning and construction.
Where once this chateau was set back from the road in a threadbare park and surrounded by indifferent winery buildings, it is now the centerpiece of a group of structures designed for tourists as much as for wine making.


CHRONICLE
MARY McFADDEN, the fashion designer, and her fourth husband, KOHLE YOHANNAN, were granted a divorce on Monday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan "at exactly 1:15 P.M.," the 54-year-old Ms.
McFadden said yesterday.
The couple were married in 1989 -- Mr.
Yohannan, 24, was a student at Columbia University at the time -- and the marriage was said to be stormy almost from the start.
"We are not making any comment," Ms.
McFadden said when asked to confirm that she had made a generous settlement.
"There is financial consideration, but it won't be in the form of support."


Around Penn Station, Uncertain Travelers
Michelle Marriott, an elementary-school teacher from Australia, wanted to go to Niagara Falls.
She stood patiently in line at a ticket window in Pennsylvania Station for 45 minutes, only to be told that Amtrak could not take her there, that the trains last night were sold out and that Amtrak was taking no reservations for today.
Though an Amtrak strike was averted late last night, that did not help commuters caught off guard all day yesterday.


Audits of Federal Contracts Indicate Major Failures by Perot Companies
Over the last 20 years, Federal auditors have found pervasive, widespread problems in work done by Ross Perot's companies for Government programs under more than two dozen contracts worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
The findings stand in contrast to Mr.
Perot's reputation as a can-do entrepreneur who would bring the efficiency of private industry to the work of Government.


Yoshiko Uchida, 70, A Children's Author
Yoshiko Uchida, a writer of children's books about the Japanese-American experience, died on Sunday at the Alta Bates Medical Center in Berkeley, Calif.
She was 70 years old and lived in Berkeley.
She died after a stroke, said her literary agent, Barbara Kouts.


Symantec and Apple in Accord
Apple Computer Inc. and the Symantec Corporation said today that they had agreed to develop and market technology enabling software developers to create programs that will run on either the Apple Macintosh or on personal computers using Microsoft's Windows software.
The technology would ultimately support other software operating systems as well.


Zuckerman Meets With Daily News Unions
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, a real-estate developer and the owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, was said to have told newspaper union leaders yesterday the concessions he would require before acquiring the bankrupt Daily News and building a new printing plant.
Details of Mr.
Zuckerman's proposal were not available, and Mr.
Zuckerman did not respond to repeated requests for comment.


Trial of D'Amato Fund-Raiser Goes to Jury in Puerto Rico
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York has been depicted as the "senator from Puerto Rico" by a defense lawyer for his chief fund-raising aide here.
The aide is on trial in a case, which went to the jury today, focusing on illegal contributions that were funneled to Mr.
D'Amato's campaign committee.
"Senator D'Amato is called the "senator from Puerto Rico," said the lawyer, Joachim Monserrate-Matienzo, in explaining why the aide, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, had turned to Mr. D'Amato for help in obtaining Federal housing subsidies for an apartment project here.


Chamber Society Seeks Lost Listeners
There is one point on which everyone connected with the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center agrees: the 23-year-old organization, once one of the New York music world's biggest success stories, is in the market for a miracle.
In the three years since the retirement of the society's charismatic founding director, Charles Wadsworth, ticket sales have dropped by at least 30 percent.
The drop has been ascribed variously to changes in the society's roster made by Fred Sherry, Mr.
Wadsworth's successor, and to Mr.
Sherry's aggressive programming of contemporary music.
Although the performances earned generally enthusiastic reviews, the audience did not return, and after Mr.
Sherry's first season, the society cut back on the number of concerts it gave.
Last year, Mr.
Sherry announced that he would stay on as a cellist with the society but that he would not continue as director when his three-year term ended.


Rep. Lent, a Senior Congressman, Is Retiring
Representative Norman F. Lent, the 11-term dean of Long Island's Congressional delegation, announced today that he was retiring because he was weary of his job and daunted by the prospect of a re-election campaign in a newly drawn district.
As the senior Republican on the Energy and Commerce Committee, Mr.
Lent has worked with the Democratic majority as an author of the Clean Air Act of 1990 and the broad energy bill that is close to passage..


S.E.C. Case Against Adviser
The Securities and Exchange Commission brought civil charges yesterday against a Swiss lawyer who assisted a client in trading on inside information for profits of about $2.6 million.
The suit marks the first time the S.E.C. has pursued charges against an adviser to someone who engaged in insider trading.
The lawyer, Kurt Naegeli of Zurich, was accused of aiding the insider trading by Christian Norgren in shares of Combustion Engineering Inc. in November 1989.


Book Notes; They Wrote a Book With His Words
To Dean R. Koontz, imitation is nothing more than the sincerest form of rip-off.
Mr.
Koontz, the author of such best-selling novels as "Midnight," "Cold Fire" and "Hideaway," was stunned when he discovered recently that the plot, characters and even some long passages from his 1983 novel "Phantoms" were copied in "The Crawling Dark" (Zebra Books, 1991), by Dawn Pauline Dunn and Susan Hartzell, sisters writing under the pen name Pauline Dunn.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BUSH MEETS THE INVENTOR OF THE BAR CODE
President Bush still bristles about newspaper articles that reported his close encounter with a supermarket scanner in February.
But that does not stop him from using the episode as a joke when it suits his purposes.
Mr.
Bush did that today at a Rose Garden ceremony to award the 1992 National Medal of Technology on -- that's right -- the inventor of the bar code, Norman Joseph Woodland of the International Business Machines Corporation, who conceived the idea in 1948.


The Breakfasts of Asia: The Food of Long Ago Is This Morning's Feast
WHEN an Asian wakes up in the morning and wants to eat the breakfast of his dreams (and of his ancestors), it's usually not bacon and eggs.
A Chinese reaches for a bowl of porridge of soybeans or rice, a Japanese sips miso-thickened broth and a Korean might eat beef dumplings in broth.
On the side are little dishes of pickled cabbage, lettuce and radish.
Breakfast, washed down by tea, is savory, not sweet; seldom greasy, and to an Asian palate tasty.
It is a meal thousands of years old.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ultimately, Nissan Calls Car 'Altima'
WITHIN months, the Nissan Motor Company will roll out a replacement for its slow-selling Stanza compact with the ambitious goal of winning over car shoppers inclined toward the Honda Motor Company's popular Accord and the Toyota Motor Corporation's Camry.
Nissan faced an equally daunting challenge in 1987 when its executives sat down to name the car.
The Stanza moniker was often criticized for being too much like Nissan's subcompact Sentra, which shares four of six letters with Stanza.
"For some reason, the Stanza never stuck in anyone's mind," said Earl Hesterberg, vice president and general manager of the Nissan division of the parent's American arm.
Many industry watchers considered Stanza the second misnomer from Nissan, which confused consumers in the early 1980's by switching its nameplate from Datsun to Nissan.


Miscellany
*
Marty Lipsitt opened a design and marketing service under the Ross Roy umbrella called Lipsitt Design, New York.  *
Maureen Kelly opened a casting service company for radio, television and industrial films, with an emphasis on advertising, called Just Voices, New York.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Finances; Trailing in Polls, Clinton Campaign Falls Deeper in Debt
Trailing both Ross Perot and President Bush in public opinion polls, Gov.
Bill Clinton reported today that his campaign fell deeper into debt last month and that it now owed an Arkansas bank almost $4 million.
The disclosure was another sign of how deeply Mr.
Perot's independent candidacy has cut into Mr.
Clinton's quest for the Presidency.


Presidential Campaigns Aren't Getting Worse
To the Editor:
It is tempting to search for the first mass media political campaign, but the 1934 campaign in California against Upton Sinclair's gubernatorial crusade did not give birth to modern politics, as Greg Mitchell would have us believe in "Media Politics -- How it Began" (Op-Ed, May 30).
Mr.
Mitchell's implication that "this new type" of negative advertising campaign inspired the Republican Party to hire "an ad agency to help run" its 1936 Presidential campaign is misleading.
Mr.
Mitchell is but the latest to discover the first mass media campaign.
In "The Selling of the President, 1968," Joe McGinniss blamed Richard M. Nixon's aides for applying Marshall McLuhan's media theories to Presidential campaigning and ruining American politics.
In 1952, Adlai E. Stevenson was outraged that his Republican opponent, Dwight D. Eisenhower, broadcast advertising spots on the new medium of television.
"This isn't Ivory Soap versus Palmolive," Stevenson complained.
"This is a choice for the most important office on earth."


Finally, for 400 Meters, Troubles Are Put Aside
Butch Reynolds finally gained the spoils of his legal victories today, running in the 400-meter event of the United States Olympic trials.
By winning his heats, in 44.58 seconds this afternoon and 44.68 tonight, he advanced to the semifinals Wednesday night.
His times were the fastest in each round and the seventh and eighth fastest in the world this year.


Manhattan Is in a Battle To Keep Unicef's Offices
An intense behind-the-scenes struggle that pits New York City against New Rochelle, Queens against Brooklyn, and private developers against public officials is being waged over who will house Unicef by 1995.
At the moment, the leading choices for the United Nations Children's Fund seem to have narrowed to the International Design Center New York, in Long Island City, Queens; the Renaissance Plaza office and hotel project in downtown Brooklyn; and two new proposals, one in Long Island City and one in downtown New Rochelle.


Playing, and Winning, by the Rules; Office by Office, Lobbyists for Gay Civil-Rights Bill Gain Support in Albany
Cathryn James of Oneonta was sorely disappointed when she came to Albany four years ago, hoping to persuade her Assemblyman to support a gay civil-rights bill that had languished here for 17 years and still languishes to this day.
The Assemblyman, who has since died, had said flatly that he didn't care much about the issue and didn't think any gay people lived in his rural district.
"He told me that I should be speaking to the legislators from Greenwich Village, because that's where 'they' all live," Ms.
James said.


Loosing Hateful Speech
The teen-age vandals who burned a cross in a St.
Paul backyard in 1990 may have had a message, but not one ordinarily respected by the Constitution.
The hate they were expressing for the new black homeowners in a mostly white neighborhood probably constituted provocative "fighting words," not entitled to protection as free speech under the First Amendment.
But now the Supreme Court, while calling the cross-burning "reprehensible," unanimously reverses one vandal's conviction.
And five justices declare that governments may not condemn speech merely for its hateful content.


Now, Be the Board of Education
New York City's Board of Education is not the Board of AIDS Education.
But you'd never know it.
For weeks its members have been obsessed with AIDS, neglecting virtually every other problem confronting the city's beleaguered schools.
Now there's a chance to put the AIDS issue behind them -- and turn to pressing business.
The board will vote today on an AIDS curriculum for lower grades.
The curriculum deserves prompt approval.


Yields Lower On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
Yields on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit moved lower for the week that ended today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor.
Analysts at the interest rate publication note that the steady erosion of bank yields indicate that there has been no substantial start to economic recovery.


Tarkanian Will Appeal Ruling
Lawyers for JERRY TARKANIAN, the former Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach, have filed notice to appeal a Federal judge's ruling that tossed out a Nevada law requiring the National Collegiate Athletic Association to follow due process. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.85
5.90
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.67
5.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.77
5.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.82
6.81
8.18
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.84
7.83
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.76
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.54
6.54
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; RESIDENTS OF HOUSING PROJECT CONFRONT QUAYLE
Vice President Dan Quayle was confronted today by two housing project residents who angrily accused him of visiting the project for publicity.
"If you don't live here you don't know nothing," said Diane Freeman, 37 years old, who lives with her four children in a four-bedroom apartment at the 660-unit Pueblo del Rio project.
As television crews and reporters jostled with Secret Service agents to hear the argument, Mr.
Quayle told Mrs.
Freeman and a man who identified himself only as Joe that he had come to the complex to listen to people's concerns.


Peter Joseph, 54, Dies; A Housing Executive
Peter D. Joseph, executive vice president of the Related Companies, a real-estate and development business in New York City, died on Sunday at his home in Queens.
He was 54 years old.
Mr. Joseph died of cancer, the president of the company, Stephen M. Ross, said.


Baker Hints at the Use of American Forces to Supply Sarajevo
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d signaled today that the Bush Administration had become more willing to consider committing American forces to a United Nations effort to get relief supplies into Sarajevo, the besieged capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Speaking before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr.
Baker said that American military planners were holding "intensive consultations" with other members of the Security Council at the United Nations over how to get food and medicine into Sarajevo, which is ringed by Serbian forces.


Charge Against Peeler Dropped
Prosecutors in Kansas City, Mo., yesterday dropped an assault charge against ANTHONY PEELER, the former Missouri basketball guard, clearing the way for the Big Eight player of the year to be taken in the National Basketball Association draft today.
"We just got a call, the prosecutor has dismissed the charge," said PAT ENG, Peeler's lawyer.
"Needless to say, we are very relieved."


Nordstrom in No-Frills Arena
In the department store world, the Nordstrom name is synonymous with service.
During a rainstorm, a shopper may duck into a store in search of waterproof boots only to leave with new heel taps on the shoes on her feet, too, at no charge.
Now, Nordstrom Inc. is about to try its hand at a completely different retail game -- what the industry calls the off-price business.
Off-price stores sell brand-name merchandise at discounts of as much as 75 percent, as opposed to discount stores like Wal-Mart that for the most part sell high volumes of less expensive merchandise.


Quotes on the Go for Dozens of Markets
Metriplex, a Cambridge, Mass., start-up company, has introduced what it says is the world's first pocket-sized wireless data system designed to permit currency, bond and futures traders to get instantaneous updates on more than 50 markets at once.
The system, which is called Datapulse and was introduced yesterday, integrates Hewlett-Packard's HP-95LX palmtop computer, a Motorola Newstream wireless receiver and Metriplex's software and digital information into a single package that permits traders to receive information 24 hours a day in many urban areas.


German Wines That Beat The Odds
A PREVIEW of 1991 German wines indicates that some top estates have extended their run of good vintages to four in a row.
Germany, Europe's northernmost wine country, usually has only three top vintages in a decade.
While 1988, 1989 and 1990 were excellent, mercurial weather beset the Continent in 1991, leading wine makers to pronounce the streak at an end.


CHRONICLE
Want something to remember Marlene Dietrich by?
Her favorite piece of jewelry, described by Sotheby's as "a dazzling Important Ruby and Diamond Bracelet" and estimated to be worth $300,000 to $400,000, is to be sold by the auction house in the fall.
"It was the only piece of jewelry that she kept," her grandson PETER RIVA said yesterday from Paris, where he is in the throes of sorting through papers and possessions of the actress, who died there on May 6 at the age of 90.
"She also loved her emeralds, but she lost them, probably to the I.R.S. for back taxes. She hung on to the ruby bracelet through good and bad times.


Ruling Restricts Software Copyright Protection
A small Texas software publisher has won a significant court victory sharply limiting large companies' ability to use copyrights to restrict competition in the computer industry.
The ruling came late Monday in an appeal of a lawsuit brought by Computer Associates International Inc., the nation's second-largest software company, against Altai Inc., the publisher of a program for mainframe computers.
The suit was filed over Altai's use of a portion of a program for which Computer Associates holds the copyright.


Rent Increases Approved as 2 Resign From Board
Amid the usual boisterousness of its annual public meeting, the New York City Rent Guidelines Board passed rent increases Monday night, including a continuation of a 5 percent vacancy allowance that spurred the board's two tenant representatives to resign.
The board approved rent increases of 3 percent on one-year leases, 5 percent for two-year leases and a 5 percent vacancy allowance, the amount a landlord may raise the rent when a tenant moves out.
Throughout the meeting at Police Plaza, the board's actions were greeted by jeers as landlords and tenants played out their customary clash at the annual meeting.


New York City Police to Expand Internal Scrutiny
Responding to charges of corruption and criticism that the New York City Police Department's internal controls are too lax, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday that he would increase the number of investigators in the Internal Affairs Division by almost 20 percent and focus the division's efforts on only the most serious cases of misconduct.
His move came after six weeks of denials by top police officials that there were any substantial problems in the department's integrity-monitoring program, which came under fire after five officers and one former officer were charged last month with drug trafficking.
They were tracked down not by Internal Affairs but by the Suffolk County police.


Heir to Throne Plans Return to Yugoslavia
The heir to the toppled Yugoslav throne said today that he was returning to Belgrade over the weekend to join efforts to establish democracy in his country and ultimately, he hopes, to be crowned King.
Crown Prince Alexander, who has lived all his 46 years in exile, said that he planned to take part in rallies held by a coalition of groups called the Serbian Democratic Movement, which opposes the authoritarian Government of President Slobodan Milosevic.
The next major opposition rally in Belgrade is scheduled for Sunday.


James McDermott, 65, Pennsylvania Justice
James T. McDermott, a Justice of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, died on Sunday at his home.
He was 65 years old and lived in Chestnut Hill, Pa.
He died of a heart attack, said Pierre Pie, a family spokesman.


Review/Ballet; From the Kirov, a Flashy New 'Swan Lake'
Artistic freedom in post-Soviet Russia now obviously includes freedom to mangle the 19th-century ballet classics, Western style.
In 1986 when the Kirov Ballet from Leningrad, now St.
Petersburg, toured North America for the first time since 1964, it brought along a splendid production of "Swan Lake." That tour, however, bypassed New York City, and when the Russian company did appear at the Metropolitan Opera House in 1989, this surprisingly eloquent and Soviet-style "Swan Lake" by Konstantin Sergeyev was not among the ballets presented.


Presidential Campaigns Aren't Getting Worse; Before TV
To the Editor:
It seems from Vice President Dan Quayle's "Murphy Brown" speech that unadulterated nostalgia will be the Republican Party's 1992 centerpiece. (Just when was this rosy period of familial bliss that we have fallen away from?)
In coming down hard against television, Bill McKibben engages in some nostalgia of his own in "TV or Not TV" (Op-Ed, May 27).
Surely, he's right about the high-junk content of television, but he goes overboard when he laments that "television encourages us to think of itself as the same thing as living," as if the boob tube were some satanic fruit suddenly being thrust upon us in our Eden of clear thinking.


Olympia Makes Only Partial Payment
Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. yesterday paid a troublesome Canadian lender only two-thirds of a $15 million interest payment that came due on a Manhattan building, even though it had just raised $32 million in a separate transaction.
The move reflects the broader plan of the developer to persuade its banks to delay principal repayments on all of its American properties and accept partial interest payments for buildings with thin rental income.


Perot Companies Faulted
Federal auditors have long found problems in work performed under Government contract by Ross Perot's companies.
Page A14.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on June 10 with an article about Steven A. Greenberg, an executive charged with insider stock trading, misidentified the site of the gala where he was photographed holding a Fame magazine poster.
It was the National Academy of Art, not the National Gallery of Art.


A First for Russian Fighter
Russian YURI ARVACHAKOV made boxing history yesterday when he became the first fighter from the former Soviet Union to win a world professional title.
He knocked out the Thai champion, MUANGCHAI KITTIKASEM, in the eighth round of their World Boxing Council flyweight title bout in Tokyo. (Reuters)


M.F.K. Fisher, Writer on the Art of Food and the Taste of Living, Is Dead at 83
M.
F.
K.
Fisher, the writer whose artful personal essays about food created a genre, died on Monday at her home on the Bouverie Ranch in Glen Ellen, Calif.
She was 83 years old.
She died after a long battle with Parkinson's disease, her daughter Kennedy Wright said.


AT LUNCH WITH: Christopher Walken; A New York Actor Takes Stardom With a Grain of Salt
Max Shreck, the villainous tycoon in "Batman Returns," would cut sleazy deals in a restaurant like Lucy's El Adobe.
Dark.
Anonymous.
Nondescript.
A Barry Manilow song crooning on the radio.
Nestled on the unfancy eastern side of Melrose Avenue.
Christopher Walken enters to an enthusiastic welcome by the two waitresses.
The actor, who portrays Shreck and is in Los Angeles to promote the movie, grins broadly as he strolls into the back room of his favorite L.A. restaurant.
The food is zesty, the prices cheap and the cheerfully no-nonsense style reminds him of Queens, the borough whose accent lingers heavily in his voice.


Metropolitan Diary
THE place is the Civilized Traveler, a bookstore on the Upper West Side.
Dramatis personae: Saleswoman, customer and Amy F. Solas, who overhears their brief conversation.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN NATIONAL CAN CO., Chicago, named Jack H. Turner president.
BARCLAYS BANK P.L.C., New York, named Richard Webb to the new position of deputy chief executive of North America.


Co-Pilot in USAir Crash Tells of Ice Checks
The co-pilot of a USAir jet that crashed at La Guardia Airport on a snowy night in March testified yesterday that he and the pilot repeatedly checked the wings for ice through the cockpit windows before a liftoff that swiftly ended in a fiery plunge that killed 27.
"We were checking the wings every one minute, three minutes, five minutes," the co-pilot, John J. Rachuba, said at a hearing on the crash held by the National Transportation Safety Board at the airport.


Study Says Soviets Held 125 Lost by U.S. in Korea
A Russian document given to a Senate committee discloses that 125 servicemen previously listed as dead or missing in the Korean War actually survived and were turned over to Soviet interrogators in North Korea, leaders of the Senate Select Committtee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs said today.
An unknown number of those servicemen were later transferred to Chinese custody and may have been sent to China, the Senators said.
North Korea, China and the former Soviet Union consistently denied that any captured Americans were turned over to Soviet or Chinese officials.


Patterson Continues Tradition
Like father, like son.
Tracy Harris Patterson, the 27-year-old adopted son of the former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson, is a world titleholder, too.
Tracy did it tonight by demolishing Thierry Jacob, the World Boxing Council superbantamweight champion, in 50 seconds of the second round of a scheduled 12-round bout at the Knickerbocker Arena.


Food Notes
A New Bakery in Town
If the turquoise trim on the brick storefront at 672 Ninth Avenue (46th Street) that houses Amy's Bread is not arresting enough, the sumptuous display of breads in the window should do the trick.
This new wholesale-and-retail bakery specializes in unusual, attractively shaped breads, many seasoned with olive oil, herbs, raisins, bits of olive, copious sprinklings of nuts and rich whole grains.
The owner, Amy Scherber, who is 32 years old and largely self taught, baked bread at Mondrian Restaurant until recently.
Most of the breads, a well-crafted assortment of around two dozen, are sourdough, and many are made with a starter that Ms.
Scherber said has been kept going by various bakers for around 100 years.


Watts Organizer Feels Weight of Riots, and History
Terry Watkins was recently driving through Watts, past the low-income housing with the gardens, the senior center, the homeless shelter, all of them built by the community organization her father, Ted Watkins, founded 27 years ago.
Here were glimpses of hope in a place that has never recovered from the first riot in 1965.
Then, as she turned onto Central Avenue, the skyline of downtown Los Angeles emerged through the smog.
All those glass and steel skyscrapers full of bankers, lawyers and foreign investors were just eight miles north, while here, outside Ms.
Watkins's car window, groups of young men were standing around on another weekday afternoon.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED-SIGNAL INC., Morris Township, N.J., was awarded separate contracts totaling more than $25 million by the Army and the Navy for service of auxiliary power systems for two military aircraft.
BIOPHARMACEUTICS INC., Bellport, L.I., and Amswiss Scientific Inc., Vancouver, British Columbia, restructured their acquisition deal so that Biopharmaceutics will issue Amswiss four million common shares plus warrants to purchase an additional two million shares at $2 a share.
The issue will be in exchange for the rights to certain drugs under license to Amswiss.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 19
June 12
June 21
1992
1992
1991
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.3
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
221.8
220.4
218.0
Distillate stocks
100.1
98.7
113.1
Crude imports, daily
5.7
6.4
6.1
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.5
1.9
Crude stocks
341.1
347.2
354.0
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
91.4
91.2
90.8
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


McKinney Joins Pistons
BILLY McKINNEY, who helped shape the Chicago Bulls and later the Minnesota Timberwolves, was named director of player personnel by the Detroit Pistons yesterday.
He essentially replaces JACK McCLOSKEY, who resigned as general manager after 13 years with the Pistons to take the same job with Minnesota. (AP)


Real Estate; Los Angeles Inundated by Sublet Space
AN unaccustomed abundance of space available for subleasing in the downtown office market here has led to vigorous activity, particularly among tenants seeking bargains in rent.
Yet nobody seems to be making money except office brokers.
Of the eight million square feet of office space available for lease in downtown Los Angeles, 1.7 million square feet is sublease space, according to the Cushman Realty Corporation, a local real estate brokerage.
In 1988, only about 680,000 square feet of sublease space was available in the same market.


Coming Together, Piece by Piece


Ralph Erickson, 88, Retired Loomis Coach
Ralph Winthrop Erickson, the former athletic director of the Loomis Chaffee School in Windsor, Conn., died on Saturday at the Avery Heights nursing home in Hartford.
A longtime resident of Windsor, he was 88 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.
Mr.
Erickson got his start in sports as captain of the basketball team at Springfield College in Massachusetts, where he earned a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in physical education.
His hope to pitch for the Boston Braves was dashed by an injury, and he spent 10 years coaching boys' and girls' sports in Windsor, Vt., instead.


Topics of The Times; Win This Battle in the Drug War
The House has a chance this week to show skeptical voters that it knows how to fight drug abuse and the spread of AIDS.
A Senate-passed conference report includes a section that requires states to give pregnant women and mothers priority for federally funded drug treatment.
It also authorizes $100 million for residential treatment.
The measure makes strong fiscal sense.
Providing drug treatment for mothers costs only a fraction of what it costs to provide services for children born damaged by drugs or at risk of AIDS.


Vittorio Cassoni, 49, An Expert Strategist In Sale of Computers
Vittorio Cassoni, a senior executive of the Xerox Corporation, died on Sunday in the Capitanio Hospital in Milan, Italy.
He was 49 years old and lived in New Canaan, Conn.
Mr.
Cassoni died of a brain tumor six weeks after the tumor was discovered, said Judd Everhart, a Xerox spokesman.
It was at that time, shortly after being named executive vice president of operations for Xerox, that Mr.
Cassoni returned to his native Italy for treatment.


Rabin Incentives: Spurred Talks, U.S. Guarantees
If the Israeli Labor Party leader, Yitzhak Rabin, keeps his campaign pledges, a government under his stewardship would step up the pace of Arab-Israeli peace talks, curb settlement activity in the occupied territories and push for agreement on Palestinian autonomy in the disputed areas within several months.
Such policies would be a pronounced departure from the path taken by the departing Likud Government and could significantly improve Israel's soured relations with the United States.
Relations With U.S.
Specifically, they could help Israel obtain $10 billion in badly needed American loan guarantees to resettle a flood of immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
The loan guarantees have been denied because of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's refusal to freeze settlement activity.


Maxwell's Mirror Group Has $727.5 Million Loss
Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C., one of Britain's leading newspaper companies, reported a 1991 loss of $727.5 million on revenues of $861.9 million today, disclosing just how badly it had been damaged by the late Robert Maxwell, its previous controlling shareholder.
The deficit resulted from a pretax charge of $:491.7 million, or $921.4 million, for extraordinary items.
Most were for assets taken in what a report to shareholders issued today euphemistically termed "unusual transactions and relationships involving Maxwell-controlled companies."


The World Watches Murder
Incredulous over a cease-fire, shellshocked residents of Sarajevo ventured out of their shelters Monday to cash pension checks and shop for spring onions -- the errands of ordinary life that have been suppressed in Bosnia's capital for weeks by Serbian gunners.
Suddenly Serbian mortars opened up from the surrounding hills.
Before the guns again ceased firing, 19 more civilians lay dead.
A one-sided war is shattering this once-lovely city in the heart of Europe . . .
Suburbanites are slowly starved out of their basements . . .
A community where Muslim Slavs, Croats and Serbs once lived side by side is subjected to "ethnic cleansing" reminiscent of the Nazis . . .
Many thousands of civilians die.
Where, as the Serbian gunmen step up the slaughter, is the rest of the world?
Still wringing its hands on the sidelines.


Civilian Mission Is Proposed For Military After Cold War
The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee today proposed using military engineers, medics and other specialists to help civilian agencies and private groups address problems of inner cities.
The chairman, Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, cited the Los Angeles riots when arguing that the routine training of specialized military units should be coordinated with specific needs of American cities.
Combat engineers, for example, might rebuild bridges or schools as part of their instruction.
Army National Guard instructors might assist job-training programs for inner-city youths.


Nursing Home Plan Won't Do for Many
To the Editor:
In response to "Simulated Poverty, Honest Need," your June 10 editorial on Medicaid, I don't know many senior citizens who would be able to pay $3,000 a year for a nursing home insurance policy.
Most are struggling to pay for the supplemental medical insurance needed to survive on Medicare.
How would they bear the burden of this additional insurance?
What would then happen to the spouses of those who need nursing home care but do not have this additional insurance?
How are their assets protected?
Would the spend-down requirement still prevail?
Would a spouse have to be reduced to abject poverty before applying for Medicaid?
What, then, would be the alternative to juggling assets in order to preserve some dignity and life style for the remaining spouse?


Review/Film; A Rogue and the Fate He Earned
"L'Elegant Criminel," opening today at the Cinema Village 12th Street, recalls the career of a colorful 19th-century French scoundrel apparently better known in France than in this country.
According to some sources, Pierre Lacenaire, who was guillotined on Jan. 9, 1836, was one of Dostoyevsky's inspirations for the character of Raskolnikov in "Crime and Punishment."
Yet the film's Lacenaire, played with a good deal of nasty humor and dash by Daniel Auteuil, seems rather lighter of weight, more conscious of his brief celebrity, than Raskolnikov would ever have been.
He seems more like a very rough sketch for Charlie Chaplin's Monsieur Verdoux.
As thinking murderers go, Lacenaire is a dilettante, though an entertaining one.


O Lowly (Liveli)Hood
To The Living Section:
Not for one moment would I deliberately dampen the enthusiasm felt by Betsy Wade upon experiencing the subtle joys of academic garb  [ "Lots of Pomp, and a Little Happenstance," May 27 ] .
However, in the interests of sartorial correctness, I must note that Ms.
Wade's appraisal of her "masterhood for journalism, a lowish discipline so strongly associated with yellow that the velvet hood band is that very color," constitutes both an error in protocol and an unwarranted tweak at her livelihood.


Land Plan Is Unveiled in Albany
State environmental officials today formally unveiled an ambitious land-preservation plan that would protect open space in every corner of New York State over the coming decades, from the Pine Barrens on Long Island to the Lake Erie waterfront in Buffalo.
But the plan's fate is in the hands of a Legislature mired in a nearly two-year-old deadlock over how to pay for the land protection, which could cost several hundred million dollars, and a range of other environmental programs.


CHRONICLE
At first, JOSEPH T. DEMBO, a former radio and television executive and broadcaster, could not understand why he was getting solicitous calls about his health.
Then he realized that a newsletter published by the Society of the Silurians, a journalists' group, had listed him as deceased in its most recent issue.
"It was amazing," said Mr.
Dembo, who was vice president and general manager of WCBS, the radio station, and is now a professor of media studies at Fordham University.
"I started getting phone calls at 9 A.M. the day it came out, and they didn't stop. I heard from people I hadn't heard from for 30 years asking if it were true."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League
NL -- Suspended Fred McGriff of the San Diego Padres and Trevor Wilson of the San Francisco Giants for four days and fined them an undisclosed amount for their roles in a bench-clearing incident on June 18.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Barry Bonds, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 15.
Southern League
CHATTANOOGA LOOKOUTS -- Acquired Scott Robinson, pitcher, from the Charleston Wheelers, of the South Atlantic League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DETROIT PISTONS -- Named Billy McKinney director of player personnel.
United States Basketball League
ATLANTA EAGLES -- Signed Terry Acox, forward.
Placed Darrell Armstrong, guard, on the taxi squad.
Activated Ali Baaqar, guard, from the taxi squad.
LONG ISLAND SURF -- Signed Anthony Joseph, guard.
Placed Sean Green, guard, on injured reserve.
Activated Herman Alston, guard, from the taxi squad.
NEW JERSEY JAMMERS -- Signed Torgeir Bryn, center.
Placed Darryl Walker, forward, on the taxi squad.
TAMPA BAY SUNBLASTERS -- Acquired Charlie Mandt, forward-center, from the Atlanta Eagles for future considerations.
Football  National Football League
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Aaron Jones, defensive end, to a one-year contract.
Named Tom Modrak director of pro personnel; Charles Bailey college scouting coordinator and Phil Kriedler southeast scout.
Hockey National Hockey League
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Named Paul Baxter assistant coach.
OTTAWA SENATORS -- Traded Chris Lindberg, wing, to the Calgary Flames for Mark Osiecki, defenseman.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League
MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Named Peter Deakin vice president of marketing. College
COLORADO MINES -- Named Keith Brown men's basketball coach.
GEORGIA SOUTHERN -- Announced the retirement of Pat Spurgeon, kicking coach.
HAWAII -- Named Chris Smeland defensive coordinator.
KANSAS STATE -- Named Patti Hagemeyer senior women's administrator for the athletic department.
NORTH TEXAS -- Named Brian Hollen assistant sports information director.
RICHMOND -- Named Sheila Foot women's assistant basketball coach.
TENNESSEE TECH -- Named Myra Fishback women's assistant basketball coach.
VIRGINIA -- Named Dom Starsia lacrosse coach, effective Aug. 1.


Medical Waste Divides Mississippi Cities
Beyond the long sandy beaches of Mississippi's Gulf Coast, among the moss-draped oak trees of the region's eastern industrial edge, two old communities, predominantly white Pascagoula and mostly black Moss Point, have coexisted for years in relative peace.
But now an unusual fight is driving a wedge between the two, with one side accusing the other of "environmental racism."


INSIDE
New York Police Bolster Anti-Corruption Efforts
After recent drug charges against officers and criticism that the department's internal controls are too lax, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said he would increase the number of investigators in the Internal Affairs Division and focus their efforts on only the most serious cases.
Page B4.
Ukraine and Russia in Accord
The Presidents of Ukraine and Russia signed an 18-point accord settling disputes ranging from the Black Sea fleet to their finances.
Page A8.
U.S.
Stand on Bosnian Aid
The Administration indicated it was more willing to consider committing American forces to a United Nations effort to get aid to Sarajevo.
Page A9.
Inner-City Soldiers
The Senate Armed Services chairman proposed using military engineers, medics and other specialists to address urban problems.
Page A12.
Search for Exxon Executive
With two suspects in custody, the authorities are trying to learn whether another kidnapper might still be holding Sidney J. Reso.
Page B1.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on Sunday about fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina misstated the Bosnian Government's estimate of the number of Bosnian Muslim civilians being held in Serbian-run detention camps.
It is 100,000, not 10,000.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  LABOR VICTORY IN ISRAEL  Nearly complete election returns showed a resounding victory for Israel's Labor Party, creating the possibility of a center-left coalition.
A1  PROSPECTS FOR PEACE TALKS SEEN  Washington sees prospects for progress in the Mideast peace talks after the Labor Party's apparent triumph.
A1  Yitzhak Rabin could lead Israel down a new political path.
A10  MANDELA PULLS OUT OF TALKS  In the aftermath of the massacre in Boipatong, the African National Congress pulled out of talks on South Africa's future, demanding that the Government take firm measures before negotiations resume.
A1  RUSSIA AND UKRAINE IN ACCORD  The Presidents of Russia and Ukraine reached broad agreement on the major disputes that have arisen between their countries since the breakup of the Soviet Union.
A8  MIXED HARVEST IN FRANCE  While legislators made constitutional changes that paved the way to European unity, farmers blocked roads to protest cuts in European Community subsidies.
A3  IRAQ COVER-UP CHARGES SURFACE  The House Judiciary Committee heard accusations of an Administration cover-up of aid to Iraq before the Gulf War.
A7  A NEW THREAT FROM BAGHDAD  President Saddam Hussein and the Security Council are at odds over a threat by Iraq to expel about 1,000 United Nations officials.
A6  SCUDS SURVIVED, EXPERT SAYS  A United Nations missile expert says American aircraft failed to destroy any of Iraq's Scud mobile missile launchers during the Persian Gulf war.
A6  CROATS DEFY PEACEKEEPERS  In defiance of United Nations peacekeeping forces, Croatian troops are fighting to regain a swath of the nation held by Serbs.
A9  SCREWS TIGHTEN ON BELGRADE  The Administration signaled a greater willingess to commit American forces to United Nations relief efforts in Bosnia and intends to impose further sanctions on Serbia.
A9  Beirut Journal: A sweet summer routine masks the bitterness.
A4  National A12-16  BUSH PRODS THE FED  Showing election-year eagerness to speed economic growth, President Bush urged the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates further.
He said the central bank was wrong to worry that such a reduction would fuel inflation.
A1  PEROT ON THE DEFENSIVE  Ross Perot's campaign organization has been forced into a defensive posture for the first time, under growing attack by the Bush camp over news reports that Mr.
Perot used private investigators to gain damaging information about his foes.
A1  The G.A.O has long found problems in work by Perot companies.
A14  Clinton said his first days as President would be "explosive." A15  A filing showed the Clinton camp ever more deeply in debt.
A15  Clinton and Jackson took tentative steps to reconciliation.
A14  AMTRAK STRIKE AVERTED  A rail workers union postponed a threatened strike against Amtrak for 48 hours after negotiators failed to reach an agreement by a midnight deadline.
A1  INNER-CITY SOLDIERS  The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee proposed using military engineers, medics and other specialists to help civilian agencies and private groups address problems of inner cities.
A12  BUSH VETOES FETAL RESEARCH BILL  The President vetoed legislation that would have lifted the Administration's ban on Federal financing of research using tissue from aborted fetuses.
The veto is expected to be sustained.
A16  THE GROUNDINGS OF FREE SPEECH  News analysis: Two competing visions of the First Amendment were on display Monday as the Justices of the Supreme Court wrestled with the question whether the Constitution permits government to declare that some speech is so hateful that it may be punished as a crime.
A13  A QUARTER-CENTURY AFTER WATTS  Between what was promised for Watts after the 1965 riots and what has actually been done lies a wellspring of frustration.
A12  NEW BITTERNESS IN TWO OLD TOWNS  Two old Mississippi communities, predominantly white Pascagoula and mostly black Moss Point, have co-existed for years in relative peace.
Now an unusual fight is driving a wedge between the two, with one side accusing the other of "environmental racism." A16  Philanthrophic giving rose modestly last year, a study found.
A12  Education A17  An antitrust case against M.I.T. is set for trial.
Bush will unveil his school voucher plan this week.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 LIFE IN PRISON FOR GOTTI  Still defiant, John Gotti stood up and smiled, saying nothing, as he was sentenced to spend the rest of his life in prison.
As hundreds of Gotti supporters protested in front of the Federal courthouse in Brooklyn, the judge sentenced the convicted boss of the Gambino crime family and an associate to life in prison without possibility of parole.
A1  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-11  A little ketchup with your algae?
C1  The breakfasts of Asia C1  Christopher Walken: Taking stardom with a grain of salt C1  Health Page C14  Arts/Entertainment C15-20  The future of the Chamber Music Society.
C15  Theater: "The Innocents' Crusade." C16  Film: "L'Elegant Criminel." C18  Dance: From the Kirov, a new "Swan Lake." C15  Sports B7-13  Baseball: Mets win third in a row.
B9  Yankees lose to Royals.
B11  Basketball: N.B.A. seeks parity.
B11  Knicks close to a deal on Blackman.
B11  Boxing: Patterson wins title.
B8  Hockey: Rangers players balk at potential deal.
B9  Olympics: Reynolds finally runs.
B9  Tennis: Bates upsets Chang.
B13  Obituaries A18-19  M. F. K. Fisher, the food writer.
A18  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  The world watches murder.
Loosing hateful speech.
Be the Board of Education.
Topics: Drug war.
Letters A20  Anna Quindlen: With extreme prejudice.
A21  Mark Crispin Miller: Operation Desert Sham.
A21  Leonard Garment: That's entertainment?
A21


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN I am on an extremely tight schedule to produce a meal at home for four or more, I often reach for boneless chicken breasts.
Not only do they cook quickly -- whether grilled, poached, sauteed or broiled -- but they also adapt to an endless variety of accompaniments.
On one such rushed occasion I bought some shiitake mushrooms in the market and built a fast meal around them.
Believed to be among the oldest cultivated mushrooms, dating back 2,000 years or more, shiitakes have become a favorite ingredient of contemporary restaurant chefs.
Not so long ago they were available only in dry form.
But the proliferation of shiitake farms in California and Canada has made fresh ones available year-round.


Lloyd's Investors Angry at Losses


Justices Affirm Ban on Prayers In Public School
Reaffirming its precedents that bar state-sponsored prayer in the public schools, the Supreme Court ruled today that a clergyman's invocation and benediction at a Providence, R.I., junior high school graduation transgressed the constitutional boundary between church and state.
The 5-to-4 ruling was a decisive, if narrow, rebuff to the Bush Administration, which had seized on the case as an occasion to urge the Court to abandon its longstanding approach to deciding when an official practice amounts to an "establishment" of religion, prohibited by the First Amendment.
The Administration had urged the Court to adopt a standard permitting a much greater role for religion in public life.


Knicks Get Shooting Lift in Deal for Blackman
The Knicks acquired two shooters yesterday, a veteran who will make an immediate impact and a rookie with intriguing potential.
Getting a player they had coveted for more than a year, the Knicks acquired the shooting guard Rolando Blackman from the Dallas Mavericks in exchange for New York's first-round draft pick in 1995.
And with the 20th pick in the National Basketball Association draft, the Knicks selected Hubert Davis, a 6-foot-5-inch long-range shooting guard from North Carolina.


Most of Albany Plan for Legislative Districts Wins U.S. Approval
The Justice Department today gave almost total approval to the once-a-decade redistricting plan drawn for the State Legislature, fully certifying the State Senate's new district boundaries and requiring only one modification in upper Manhattan for the Assembly plan.
The change in Manhattan would help bolster the chances of a Dominican candidate's winning an election in Washington Heights by concentrating more Dominican voters in one of two districts there.


Salem Sportswear reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Commuting Into New York: No Strike Means No Problem
Railroad riders in the New York area were spared the commuter chaos that was predicted if Amtrak workers had gone on strike, as threatened, at 12:01 A.M. yesterday.
But if there was a collective "Whew!" from Long Island to New Jersey, the relief was temporary.
In agreeing to keep talking for only two more days, Amtrak's three major unions had set a new deadline -- and the same uncertainty for commuters -- at midnight tonight.
Contingency Plans
"We've got our contingency plans on hold," a spokeswoman for the Long Island Rail Road, Susan McGowan, said yesterday afternoon.
"The special emergency timetables that our customers picked up earlier this week, well, they should hold on to them."


Come to Canada. Play Quarterback.
Washington Redskins quarterback MARK RYPIEN will meet with BRUCE McNALL, the owner of the Canadian Football League's Toronto Argonauts, today in Portland, Ore.
They will reportedly discuss McNall's two-year offer worth $6 million.


Draft Sticks to Program Until the 5th Pick, That Is
The sure-thing selection process ended with the fourth pick of the 1992 National Basketball Association college draft tonight, and that's when the real lottery of talent began.
From the fifth pick on down, it was a question of taking a player and a chance.
As expected, the Orlando Magic took Shaquille O'Neal, the 7-foot-1-inch, 294-pound center from Louisiana State, while 6-10 Georgetown center Alonzo Mourning went to the Charlotte Hornets, 6-11 Duke forward Christian Laettner to the Minnesota Timberwolves and 6-6 Ohio State swingman Jim Jackson to the Dallas Mavericks.


Intermetrics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dr. Josef Warkany, 90, Pioneer In Study of Prenatal Health, Dies
Josef Warkany, a pediatric researcher who helped focus the attention of modern medicine on the hazards of the nine months of life in the womb, died on Monday at the Scarlet Oaks Retirement Community in Clifton, Ohio, near Cincinnati.
He was 90 years old.
He died of a stroke, his family said.


Bush in a World Remade: Will the Old Compass Do?
As Vice President George Bush accepted the Republican Presidential nomination on Aug. 18, 1988, he told thousands of cheering convention delegates that his goal as President would be to pick up where Ronald Reagan left off.
"The most important work of my life is to complete the mission we started in 1980," he declared.


CHRONICLE
At first glance, the winners of the Municipal Art Society's 1992 Awards, which are to be presented at ceremonies in Bryant Park today, are an eclectic lot.
But the winners, who were chosen for helping make New York more liveable, have more in common than meets the eye, KENT L. BARWICK, president of the society, said yesterday.
"They are our object lessons in how we are far from washed up, and in our best moments are smart, witty, compassionate, inveterate lovers of New York City," he said.


Baker Asks Resumption of Talks Shortly After Rabin Takes Office
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d called today for a quick resumption of Middle East peace talks once the new Labor-led Israeli Government takes office, as many American officials and Jewish organizations quietly expressed relief at the demise of the hard-line Likud Government.
Although most Jewish organizations issued only standard public congratulations to Yitzhak Rabin for his victory in Tuesday's election, in private many of them expressed both relief and joy.
The Likud Government's hard-line policies, including its refusal to halt settlement building in the occupied territories, had often forced American Jewish organizations into the nerve-racking choice they hate most: having to choose between supporting the policies of the President and the policies of the Israeli Government.


Sizzler International reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Cheating, Brawls and Suspensions
The images linger, and their recollection prompts at least a smile: Rick Honeycutt trying in vain to flick away a thumbtack that he had taped to his finger; Joe Niekro trying to be subtle as he slips an emery board out of his back pocket and drops it on the ground; Kevin Gross handing over his glove with a piece of sandpaper glued to the pocket but protesting that he hadn't used the sandpaper.
Now add the image of Tim Leary placing his glove in front of his face and surreptitiously (although witnessed by millions on television replays) transferring an unseen object from the glove to his mouth, then removing it when he reaches the dugout.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate; Perot Traces Spying Rumors To Bush 'Dirty Tricks' Staff
Denying reports that he had employed private investigators to uncover information that could be potentially embarrassing to President Bush, Ross Perot today called the accusations part of an orchestrated effort by the "dirty tricks crowd" in Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign.
"You all know what's going on, so let's don't pretend that we don't," Mr.
Perot told a news conference here after a dockside rally with his supporters.
"There has been a 90-day effort to redefine my personality by a group called opposition research of the Republican Party. They're generally known as the dirty tricks crowd."


Judge Rejects School TV With Ads
Ruling that students who are forced to watch commercials for toothpaste and potato chips during class are being deprived of school time, an administrative law judge has found that the controversial television news service, Channel One, violates New Jersey's compulsory-attendance law.
The judge, Bruce R. Campbell, found that Channel One, a 12-minute daily news show with two minutes of commercials, violates the state's constitutional guarantee of a "thorough and efficient" education.


Tending the Flame
To The Home Section:
Enid Nemy's account of the orthodox and predictable feminist explanations why widows choose not to remarry  [ " 'What? Me Marry?' Widows Say No," June 18 ]  overlooks another possibility: a widow may shun remarriage not because she particularly values the independence of being single, but because she loved her husband so much that any attempt to replace him would seem like a travesty.
This attitude may be unfashionable nowadays, but two of my widowed friends have it, and from what I know of their marriages, I don't blame them.
FELICIA ACKERMAN Professor of Philosophy Brown University Providence, R.I.


Growing
THE funny thing about the night the barn burned down is that none of us saw it happen.
I mean no one who is still alive.
Grandmother Raver just told the story so well that it burned itself into the collective memory of our Maryland family, kind of like Heathcliff calling for Catherine on the moors in "Wuthering Heights."


New Promise for Peace in Israel
Even Israelis seem surprised by the outcome of their most momentous vote in a generation.
Few predicted such a decisive turn to Yitzhak Rabin's Labor Party, ending its 15 years in the wilderness.
But enough Israelis voted cautiously for peace to enable him to form a government that's hostage neither to the extreme right or left.
This is an outcome Americans can welcome with relief and considerable hope.
For President Bush, who has suffered harsh criticism from some American Jews, the results vindicate a long, tenacious peace initiative.


Kleinert's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Home Video
Movies by Mail
When movies can't be found in video stores, thoughts often turn to mail order.
Numerous companies distribute movies and other titles by mail through clubs and catalogues.
As in stores, the selections range from vast to limited.
In a recent report, the trade publication Entertainment Marketing Letter surveyed 34 companies that offer tapes by mail and found that in the last year their total revenues of about $600 million amounted to about 20 percent of the overall video sales market.


A Call for Mr. Perot. It's the G.O.P. Leader
The first caller on the line on the "Larry King Live" television show wanted to challenge Mr.
King's guest, Ross Perot, about the Texan's assertion that critical news accounts were part of a Republican "dirty tricks campaign." Nothing unusual about that -- except that the caller was Rich Bond, chairman of the Republican Party.
For a few lively minutes, the kind producers of television shows long for, Mr.
Perot and Mr.
Bond engaged in a heated discussion.
Mr.
Bond accused Mr.
Perot of slandering the Republican Party and demanded that the Dallas businessman produce proof of his accusation.


Religion Remains Free, 5-4
Thirty years ago today, the Supreme Court held that mandatory prayer in the public schools was unconstitutional.
In the ensuing uproar, President John Kennedy remained calm: "We have in this case a very easy remedy and that is to pray ourselves" at church and at home.
Yesterday, as the Supreme Court reaffirmed this same principle of religious liberty, it was a Justice named Anthony Kennedy who had the same ecumenical message.


Arab Governments on Rabin: He's Not Shamir
Arab leaders, including officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said today that an Israeli Government led by Yitzhak Rabin would improve the chances for a peace agreement between Israel and neighboring Arab countries.
"The election result will give a strong push to peace efforts and the reaping of a golden opportunity to achieve historic reconciliation between Israel and the Arabs," said Osama al-Baz, a senior adviser to President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, which is the only Arab country to have a peace treaty with Israel.


Review/Theater; Of Gay Humor and Loss
Gay bars and gymnasiums are much funnier places in "The Night Larry Kramer Kissed Me" than they could ever be in reality, but the antics and attitudes of their inhabitants leave one with a distinct feeling of loss, if not sadness.
Two skits about those places, in the middle of David Drake's play, are the most memorable, enjoyable and troubling moments in what is otherwise a kind of celebratory and highly political set of sketches on gay life.
In them Mr.
Drake's writing is as good as his acting.
Every line is spare, quick, complex; all the ideas seem self-reflective, skeptical and ambiguous.


Corning Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 14


Jazz in Review
Shirley Horn Mel Torme  Carnegie Hall
Jazz singing comes in many flavors, and on Tuesday evening there were two distinct but complementary approaches to finding the spice within a song.
Shirley Horn opened the concert with subtly turned, blues-tinged and sometimes almost whispered accounts of ballads and torch songs.
And Mel Torme ended the evening with an extroverted, exuberant set that hankered after and often captured the spirit of the swing era.
Miss Horn's style has a quiet intensity that grows from the way she wraps her voice around a melody.
In songs like "Don't Let the Sun Catch You Crying" and "You Won't Forget Me," she began with plaintive directness, but as the verses unfolded she shaded and embellished the vocal line in ways that invariably amplified the emotional underpinning of the lyric.


Battle to Find Bad Apples From Outside Police Barrel
Its task is perhaps the most daunting of any review board in New York -- somehow to decipher and pass judgment on thousands of charges made against New York City police officers -- while working in the heat of that day's passing political furor.
In short, the Civilian Complaint Review Board, since its inception, has known few periods without controversy.
But yesterday's announcement that the Mayor was planning to create a board comprising civilians exclusively, measured even against the board's history, is a drastic step.
The change would further distance a board created as an arm of the Police Department from the Police Commissioner's control.


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bakst Prevails In Hochster Golf
Kenny Bakst, a real estate developer who maintains memberships at two clubs in the area, Sunningdale and Atlantic, captured the 55th annual Hochster Invitational yesterday at Quaker Ridge Golf Club.


Drop in Money Fund Yields Slowed Down in Last Week
The declines in the yields of the money market funds monitored by The IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report eased considerably in the latest week.
But Walter S. Frank, the chief economist at Donoghue's, said he did not expect yields to adjust much more.
"I don't see anything in the near term to put any pressure on the Fed to ease further," he said.


Fair Grounds Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


From Russia, With Luster
LAST year Sir Humphrey Wakefield, a consultant to Baker Furniture, went to Russia to put together a collection of furniture based on original Russian pieces.
Natalia Guseva, the curator of Russian furniture at the Hermitage in St.
Petersburg, was asked to help.
The reproductions are as grand as the pieces they copy, even though in some cases different woods were used.
Mrs.
Guseva, who recently came to the United States for the introduction of the collection, explained the use of the Karelian birch tree in some of the originals.


Jazz in Review
David Murray Quartet  Equitable Auditorium Manhattan
A tribute to a fellow musician became a survey of postwar jazz in David Murray's concert on Monday night.
Mr.
Murray's quartet performed the "Have You Seen Sideman" suite by Bobby Bradford, a cornetist who wrote it in memory of his longtime partner, the clarinetist John Carter.
Mr.
Bradford performed with Mr.
Murray on tenor saxophone and bass clarinet, Fred Hopkins on bass and Andrew Cyrille on drums.
They recently recorded the suite for a fall release on D.I.W./Columbia Records.
Sideman, Mr.
Bradford said, is "an allegorical figure" who "appears in the life of a musician." The suite alluded to the life of Mr.
Carter, who died in 1991 and whose major works were a series of suites, "Roots and Folklore: Episodes in the Development of American Folk Music." Where Mr.
Carter's suites encompassed music from West African traditions to abstract modern jazz, "Have You Seen Sideman" was more modest.
Its sections paid homage to Mr.
Carter's influences -- be-bop in "Woodshedetude," Thelonious Monk in "Waiting for Thelonious," Ornette Coleman in "Side Steps" -- along with somber elegies.


Board Agrees On Teaching About AIDS
After weeks of bitter fighting, the New York City Board of Education voted last night to adopt an AIDS curriculum for elementary schools that introduces condoms in the fourth grade but no longer mentions anal intercourse.
Before an audience filled with angry and often rowdy partisans of both sides, five members voted in favor, while the remaining two -- Michael J. Petrides and Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri -- chose to abstain to register their lingering dissatisfaction with passages in the curriculum.


Salesman Or Strategist?
No one is in a better position to take a stand on the Government's role in helping U.S. industry compete than Ross Perot.
An insider who understands the intricate workings of Government, he used his knowledge to build an industry -- Electronic Data Systems -- and great personal wealth.
The question is: Is Mr.
Perot the kind of leader who is willing to make commitments against which he asks to be measured, or is he the slick systems sales pro who will tell us anything to get the job and is never pinned down on specifics?


Ex-French Officials Go on Trial in AIDS Case
In a case that has stirred a mixture of disbelief and indignation throughout France, four former health officials went on trial here this week for authorizing distribution of blood products known to be contaminated with the AIDS virus in 1985.
As a result of receiving transfusions of tainted blood stocks during a five-month period when reliable screening methods were available, at least 1,506 hemophiliacs were infected with the AIDS virus, of whom 256 have already died.
Many victims were in court when the trial began Monday.


Water Gun Raises Problems of Responsibility
To the Editor:
In "Controlling the Wrong Guns" (Topics of The Times, June 10), you neglect to mention individual responsibility in the issue of Super Soakers, the water guns whose use has led to real gunplay.
Science and technology take developments to their next logical step, whether in nuclear power or Super Soakers.
The responsibility of using them falls to the citizenry.
Most city dwellers, including myself, suffer from some urban stress.
But if hit by a stream of water, however much it would vex us, we would not resort to violence.
But our city is also home to people truly living on the edge.
Some of them are armed and dangerous, and would not hesitate to retaliate with real guns, as we have seen in Boston and New York.


Data Translation reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


President Is Leaving Merged Bank
Robert H. Smith, the former chairman of the Security Pacific Corporation and one of the architects of its merger earlier this year with the BankAmerica Corporation, said yesterday that he would resign as the second-ranking executive at BankAmerica.
Mr.
Smith, who is 56 years old, said in a statement that he would leave in October because "my personal expectations for management challenge would not be met in my present capacity at BankAmerica." Mr.
Smith said he would pursue other business opportunities.


Books of The Times; Studying Soccer Violence by the Civilized British
Among the Thugs By Bill Buford 317 pages. W. W. Norton. $22.95.


BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB IS KEEPING PLANT IN BUFFALO
Westwood-Squibb Pharmaceuticals Inc., which employs 650 people at its skin-care products plant in Buffalo, said it had dropped plans to move.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., the New York-based pharmaceuticals giant that owns the company, had said last year that Westwood's headquarters and research divisions would be moving, probably to New Jersey.
But a Westwood spokeswoman said the parent had decided that the move would cost too much and would not be productive.


Water Gun Raises Problems of Responsibility; For Outright Ban
To the Editor:
"Water Gunplay Provokes Shooting of 2" (news article, June 10), coupled with the demand by Mayor Raymond Flynn of Boston for the outright ban on the sale of water guns, simply demonstrates how far down the rabbit hole we have fallen.
Am I the only one who has noticed the logical absurdity of this?


U.N. Official Warns Threat of New War Is Rising in Croatia
The senior United Nations military officer here said today that the threat of renewed war in Croatia was sharply rising as Croatian forces advanced against Serbs toward a six-month-old cease-fire line.
The officer, Gen.
Satish Nambiar, said he had failed to persuade Gen.
Anton Tus, the Croatians' commander, to order a retreat of units that began an assault on Sunday.


Total-Tel USA Commun reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Genesee Corp.  reports earnings for Year to April 30


New Jersey Steel reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Plaintiffs Are 'Thrilled' By School Prayer Ruling
When Daniel and Vivian Weisman married, the first song played at their wedding reception was "The Impossible Dream," from the Broadway musical "Man of La Mancha." Years later, on an anniversary trip, the Weismans bought an iron sculpture of Don Quixote on horseback challenging a windmill, and hung it in their home.
"We've tilted at a few windmills," Mr.
Weisman said today, shortly after the United States Supreme Court sided with the Weismans and upheld its 30-year ban on officially sponsored prayer in public schools.


Techmire Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rancor Reigns as Gun-Shy House Plays Tug of War With Its Budget
Even as the House debates such contentious questions as how to heal the cities and whether to use tissue from aborted fetuses for medical research, few bills have generated as much rancor as one dealing with the seemingly pedestrian matter of financing the legislative branch.
Not many parts of the appropriations process involve less money than the $1.8 billion budgeted for House and joint Congressional operations.
But in the aftermath of the scandals involving the bank, restaurant and post office serving the House of Representatives as well as the public's outrage over Capitol Hill perks, that relatively small sum touched off a spurt of furious finger-pointing and partisan posturing.


George J. McGuirk; Auto Dealer, 72
George J. McGuirk, a Ford dealer in Bronxville, N.Y., died yesterday at his home in Bronxville.
He was 72 years old.
He died of kidney cancer, his family said.


Bonilla Suspended 2 Games
The National League president, Bill White, suspended the Mets' Bobby Bonilla yesterday for two games for his part in the bench-clearing incident with the Cubs at Shea Stadium Monday night.
Bonilla appealed the suspension and will be granted a hearing at a future, undetermined date.
He is eligible to play until his appeal is heard and was in the lineup last night.
National League policy makes mandatory the ejection and fining of any player who charges the mound.
After being struck by a Shawn Boskie pitch in the fourth inning last Monday, Bonilla advanced at the mound carrying his bat.
He was quickly cut off by catcher Joe Girardi, and the scene then deteriorated into random wrestling.


Interstate Bakeries reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Rare Species and Red Tape
AT the home of Gary and Kari Johnson, eight endangered Indian elephants play along a hillside, basking in the Southern California sun and scratching their rough hides against granite boulders.
Meanwhile, just south of Boston, Himalayan snow leopards snooze in Albert H. Porges's backyard.
And in Baltimore, Miki Sparzak's white Rothschild's myna bird -- one of about 500 left in the world -- raises its crown, cocks its black beak straight up and crows softly.
From Australian parakeets to Indian pythons, endangered species are being kept and bred in backyards and basements across the United States.
About 850 people have registered to keep endangered animals under the Fish and Wildlife Service's Captive-Bred Wildlife Registration program.


Solectron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Most of Rail Network Shuts Down In Response to Strike at One Line
Most of the nation's freight railroads shut down yesterday in response to a limited strike against just one of them, and they immediately began urging Congress to step into the labor dispute by passing legislation imposing contract terms on recalcitrant unions throughout the industry.
Amtrak, the passenger railroad, was hobbled by the shutdown because most of its trains outside the Northeast run on lines owned by the idled freight railroads.
But many of the nation's biggest commuter lines, including those in the New York area, were not greatly affected.


Gerald A. Gura, Retail Executive, 57
Gerald A. Gura, the president and chief executive of CWT Specialty Stores in New England, died on June 19 at Sturdy Memorial Hospital in Attleboro, Mass.
He was 57 years old and lived in Sharon, Mass.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Ponder Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Uncovered Short Sales Edge Higher on Nasdaq
For the third month in a row, the number of shares sold short and not covered in over-the-counter trading established a record, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Short interest totaled 389 million shares on trades settled by June 15, higher by a nose -- two-tenths of 1 percent -- than the 388.2 million shares reported a month ago and 3.9 percent higher than the 374.3 million shares in April.


Carnival Cruise Lines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jesse H. Walker, Editor, 71
Jesse H. Walker, a former executive editor of The New York Amsterdam News, the weekly newspaper published in Harlem, died on Sunday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Walker died of cancer, said his wife, Esther.


Accounts
*
Kraft General Foods has placed two frozen-food accounts currently handled by the Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell, New York, in review.
The Bird's Eye vegetables and Budget Gourmet dinners' reviews, which were first reported in Frohlinger's Marketing Report newsletter, have combined billings estimated at $29 million.
Besides the incumbent contending in the review are Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, Chicago, and Young &amp; Rubicam, New York. *
Le Coq Sportif, Cranbury, N.J., the American subsidiary of the French sporting apparel company, to OMON New York Ltd., New York.
The company's advertising account was previously inactive.
Billings were not disclosed.


Palestinians Critique Election, and See Basis for Hope
On streets and in shops, in restaurants and offices throughout the occupied territories today, Palestinians chewed over the results of Israel's election and expressed hesitant hopes that the Labor Party's victory might bring them closer to peace.
Many watched the returns throughout the night on television, and their delight at the defeat of the rightist Likud Party was evident.
But their satisfaction was tempered with a heavy measure of caution.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Disabled Moviegoers
To the Editor:
Might I suggest that Robert Samuels, who wrote "Imagine What It's Like to Go to the Movies in a Wheelchair" (letter, June 6), visit a theater we built in 1989 for General Cinema at the Bay Plaza Shopping Center in the Co-op City section of the Bronx.
There are at least 20 handicapped parking spaces in front of the theater, curb cuts and elevators.
Most of the 10 theaters have designated areas for wheelchairs, albeit in the rear.
Furthermore, there are more than enough restroom facilities for the disabled.
LAWRENCE DWORKIN President, Dworkin Construction Co.
New City, N.Y., June 5, 1992


Gotti Begins Life Sentence At Prison In Illinois
As John Gotti began a life sentence yesterday in what the authorities call the nation's harshest Federal prison, the F.B.I. said a special squad was closing in on illicit wealth he secreted in the last six years.
Mr.
Gotti was assigned to virtual solitary confinement in a 7-by-8-foot cell at the Federal Penitentiary in Marion, Ill., far from the regal life style he enjoyed in New York, where Federal agents said they frequently saw him ordering sumptuous meals and $75 cognacs in supper clubs.


Powell Outduels Lewis in Long Jump
The last time Mike Powell and Carl Lewis met in the long jump, Powell won the world championship, broke the world record and Lewis's 10-year winning streak and his heart.
Tonight, they met again in the United States Olympic track and field trials, and Powell won again.
And looked good doing it.
This time, the pressure was not as great.
The first three finishers in the 12-man final qualified for the United States team in the Barcelona Olympics, and everyone expected Powell and Lewis (or Lewis and Powell) to finish one, two.
They did.
Powell won with 28 feet 3 1/2 inches, Lewis was second with 28 feet and Joe Greene third with 27-1 1/4.


Jazz in Review
Arturo Sandoval T. S. Monk Band  Equitable Auditorium Manhattan
Imagine a movie that's 80 percent high-speed car chases, with a smattering of dialogue and one tender love scene.
It would leave an impression similar to Arturo Sandoval's performance on Tuesday night.
Mr.
Sandoval, a Cuban trumpeter, was leading his group in music by and associated with Clifford Brown, the hard-bop trumpeter who died in a car accident in 1956 at the age of 25.
Brown could tear through chorus after chorus, and Mr.
Sandoval has emulated that velocity; he and David Sanchez, on tenor saxophone, even played a transcription of a Brown solo on "Cherokee." Most of Mr.
Sandoval's solos on Tuesday would toy with amiable melody for a little while, then race into the high register to streak through complex, virtuosic be-bop filigree.
As he was pushed along by the aggressive rhythms of Lenny White on drums and Charnett Moffett on bass, there was no question about Mr.
Sandoval's technical mastery or his knowledge of the challenging harmonies of tunes like "Joyspring" or "Daahoud." But the concert began to sound like an extended rendition of "Flight of the Bumblebee."


Bernard Nossiter, 66, Author and Journalist
Bernard D. Nossiter, an author and journalist, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said his companion, Eleanor Hauser.
Mr.
Nossiter was chief of the New York Times bureau at the United Nations from 1979 to 1983 after reporting for The Washington Post for 24 years.


NEW CARD LETS COMPANIES SPECIFY CALLING AREAS
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company is offering a new calling card that allows businesses to preselect what phone numbers can be reached using the card.
Businesses can designate the phone numbers, area codes or countries that can be reached or blocked using the card, with as many as 50 domestic and 50 international combinations, New York-based A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday.
The card can be obtained free through 1992, after which the telecommunications company will charge a service fee.


Integrated Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Keep the U.N. -- and America's Word
Mayor David Dinkins has mounted a catch-up campaign to keep four United Nations agencies from leaving New York City for cheaper pastures in Germany or suburban New Rochelle.
That's a start.
But this is not just a municipal matter.
It also involves winning world respect for America's word.
The Mayor needs help from Congress and the Bush Administration.
They're to blame for America's abysmal failure to pay, in full and on time, the dues owed the world organization.


Albany Seeks More Money for Child Health Insurance
For Flavia M. Torres, a 28-year-old Bronx mother, a new state program to provide health insurance for the children of the working poor has been nothing short of "a godsend."
Until April, when she was able to enroll her previously uninsured children in the Child Health Plus program, Ms.
Torres had to constantly weigh the cost of a doctor's visit against the condition of the child's health.
Now she and her children illustrate the success of a program that is quickly outgrowing its $20 million budget and that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Democratic legislators hope to expand.


Clarcor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Bridge
The doyen of bridge-club proprietors in New York City, and perhaps in North America, retired May 12 at the age of 88.
He has been known to generations of New York players as X, but few knew that his full name was, and is, Epominandes Xenides.
For 33 years he had conducted the Gotham Club in the penthouse of the Olcott Hotel at 27 West 72d Street.
Four-deal bridge, or Chicago, was played in an old-world ambience of high ceilings and large windows, and will continue to be played there under new management.


A Threat to Veto Democracy
White House officials say they're urging President Bush to veto the voter registration bill that just arrived on his desk from Congress.
It's terrible advice.
This common-sense measure, nicknamed "motor voter," honors democracy by making it simple and convenient for all Americans to register to vote.
Citizens could do so when they obtain or renew their driver's licenses.
The bill would also require states to offer registration by mail and at government agencies like welfare offices.
Together, experts say, these simple steps could boost registration to about 90 percent.


KRG Management reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Hubbard Holding reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


House Fails to Override a Veto on Fetal Research
The House today failed to override President Bush's veto of a bill that would have lifted the Administration's ban on federally financed research on the use of tissue from aborted fetuses.
The 271-to-156 vote fell 14 votes short of the two-thirds majority required to override a Presidential veto; 226 Democrats, 44 Republicans and one independent voted to override the veto, while 35 Democrats and 121 Republicans voted to sustain it.


Veronex Resources Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, is offering $150 million in 5.5 percent medium-term notes due in 1995 at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The issue is noncallable for one year.
*
First Union Corp., Charlotte, N.C., is offering $150 million in 5.95 percent senior notes due in 1995 at 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Noncallable, the notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


View From the Past
To The Home Section:
Your article on the Brownie camera  [ "From Little Boxes, Fond Memories," June 18 ]  was interesting and timely for me.


A Historic Colonial Garden Is Recovered From the Rough
ON a recent misty morning here in the Carolina low country, golfers teeing off at the 14th hole of the Crowfield Golf and Country Club were mindful that their golf balls could stray into an archeological dig.
A team of garden archeologists, wielding root clippers, trowels and whisk brooms between the 14th and 17th fairways, was investigating what has come to light as the earliest picturesque, or natural, landscape garden in America.
Twelve miles north of Charleston, the 23-acre garden was created at Crowfield Plantation by William Middleton in 1730.
The land, including the golf course, is owned by the Westvaco Corporation, the paper, packaging and chemical company.


Ousted Jersey City Mayor Gets 33 Months in Prison
Gerald McCann, the ousted Mayor of Jersey City, was sentenced today to 33 months in prison for defrauding a Florida savings and loan association of $240,000, but he was allowed to remain free until Sept. 30 so he can attend his sister's wedding.
Mr.
McCann was also ordered to pay $170,000 in restitution to the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency that took over the assets of the savings association after it failed.


DINKINS WILL SEEK CIVILIAN OVERSIGHT OF POLICE ACTIONS
Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose the establishment of an all-civilian review board to investigate charges of police brutality, top officials in the Dinkins administration said yesterday.
The Mayor's plan is a setback to Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, who has long opposed such a board.
It could also rekindle a divisive issue that in the 1960's pitted civil-rights groups, who supported a civilian board, against the police union and many white residents.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Good British Gardens
Q.
I am planning to visit Britain and hope to see as many gardens as I can.
How can I be sure of finding all the good ones? -- Millicent G. Evans, Framingham, Mass.
A.
The number of good ones is overwhelming.
That's why it is best to set limits and not expect to see everything, said Elizabeth Scholtz, the director emeritus of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, who plans and leads the garden's tours to Britain every year.
To make planning more manageable, Miss Scholtz suggested concentrating on a specific region, the work of certain landscape designers, unusual designs or particular plants.


Players Cite Restrictions
The McNeil v. the National Football League antitrust suit over free agency continued today with a pattern that will apparently persist as long as N.F.L. players take the witness stand.
The players discuss how restrictions in free agency hampered their earning power and then N.F.L. lawyers hammer home the points that the current system works and that the players are simply greedy.
Niko Noga, a linebacker formerly with the Phoenix Cardinals and the Detroit Lions who recently signed with the Raiders as a Plan B free agent, and Frank Minnifield, a Cleveland Browns defensive back entering his ninth season, were the chief witnesses today.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Economic Plan; Darman Crunches, Then Criticizes, Clinton and Perot Numbers
Richard G. Darman, President Bush's budget director, began hacking away today at two new targets: the deficit-cutting proposals made by Ross Perot and Gov.
Bill Clinton.
Joining in an accelerating round of attacks by Administration officials, Mr.
Darman ridiculed the proposals of Mr.
Bush's two likely opponents in the Presidential campaign, saying they lacked specifics and would do little to reduce the $400 billion annual deficit.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  RABIN ESTABLISHES PRIORITIES  Yitzhak Rabin said his priorities as Israel's Prime Minister would be peace talks to bring about Palestinian self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and an end to "political settlements" there.
A1  Palestinians in the occupied territories voice hope and caution.
A14  Secretary Baker called for a quick resumption of the peace talks.
A14  Rabin made clear right away who will be in charge.
A14  Arab leaders see better chances for a peace accord with Israel.
A15  ACCORD ON GEORGIAN REGION  The leader of Georgia and the Russian President signed an agreement to end fighting in secessionist South Ossetia.
Yeltsin then flew off to Turkey for a meeting that is expected to focus on ethnic fighting between Azerbaijanis and Armenians.
A3  PANAMANIAN MAYOR'S ANGER  For the Mayor of Panama City, the interruption of the American Presidential visit by police officers firing tear gas at protesters was a rare setback in a career that has taken her ever upward.
A4  ROUGH WELCOME FOR U.S.
ENVOY  In his first week as Ambassador to Ireland, William FitzGerald has been hit by what a diplomat called "the Irish Welcome Wagon." A5  DISPUTING RECORD ON P.O.W.'S  Senator Kerry took issue with almost two decades of statements by U.S.
Administrations that all Vietnam War prisoners were accounted for when Washington and Hanoi signed a cease-fire in 1973.
A7  A QUICK BILLION FOR RUSSIA  The I.M.F. plans to lend $1 billion to Moscow to help pay for crucial imports in a simplified reform agreement that the fund hopes to complete in the next several weeks.
A10  SARAJEVO SEEKS DELIVERANCE  As the Serbian siege of Sarajevo intensifies and the city descends ever deeper into a nightmare, residents look desperately to the outside world for relief.
A10  DE KLERK OFFERS CONCESSION  President F. W. de Klerk said he would accept an investigation by foreign experts into violence in black townships, but the African National Congress rejected the concession and stepped up its campaign for an international boycott against South African athletes.
A12  The London Zoo received a $1.85 million gift from Kuwait.
A17  National A18-28, B10-12  DECISION ON SMOKING LIABILITY  In an exceptionally broad decision, the Supreme Court opened the door wide to damage suits against the cigarette industry.
A1  The ruling came nine years after a dying smoker brought suit.
B10  JUSTICES RULE ON SCHOOL PRAYER  In a narrow but decisive rebuff to the Administration, the Court ruled that a clergyman's invocation and benediction at a junior high school graduation in Providence, R.I., had transgressed the constitutional boundary between church and state.
A1  The ruling happily surprised the couple who brought the case.
B11  THE PRESIDENT ON GEORGE BUSH  With the Communist menace vanished, the economy still weak and deepening social problems confronting the nation, a crisis of leadership threatens President Bush's re-election.
And, during an Oval Office interview, he seemed keenly aware of that crisis as he made his arguments for another term.
A1  INVESTIGATOR PEROT  Ross Perot does indeed have a history of using investigators and threats against opponents.
Now officials of the White House and the Bush re-election committee, who have not been shy about publicly discussing that history, are running the same sort of aggressive inquiry into his past that he has conducted against others.
A1  Perot lashed out at a Republican "dirty tricks crowd." A26  News analysis: Will the "spying issue" burst Perot's bubble?
A27  U.S.
TRADE RULING FAVORS JAPAN  The Federal trade agency ruled that Detroit's auto makers had not suffered significant harm from Japanese mini-vans and that tariffs on the imports would therefore not be imposed.
A1  VAST RAIL SHUTDOWN  Most freight railroads shut down in response to a strike against one of them, and they urged Congress to intervene.
Amtrak was also hobbled, but many commuter lines, including those in the New York area, were not much affected.
A18  Congress appeared in no hurry to step in.
A18  New York commuters face another deadline tonight.
A18  FETAL RESEARCH BILL DIES  The House upheld President Bush's veto of legislation that would have allowed the Government to finance research on aborted fetuses.
A23  WHO DISCOVERED H.I.V.?
A former senior American health official said that the Government had been misled by Dr.
Robert Gallo's claim to have been the sole discoverer of the cause of AIDS and that the United States now had a "moral duty" to give credit and the royalties to the French.
A22  Metropolitan Digest, B1 CIVILIAN REVIEW BOARD Mayor Dinkins will propose an all-civilian review board to investigate charges of police brutality, officials in the Dinkins administration said yesterday.
The Mayor's plan is a setback to Police Commissioner Brown, who has long opposed such a board.
A1 Business Digest D1  The Home Section C1-12  These shops sell the fine art of decorating.
C1  Around City Hall with Andy Logan: Memories of eight mayors.
C1  Rare species and red tape.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  Paderewski to be returned to Poland.
C16  Theater: The last bastion of stubborn culture.
C13  "The Night Larry Kramer Kissed Me." C19  Film: Talk of Hollywood C13  Music: Spinal Tap.
C13  Sports B13-19  Baseball: Howe permanently suspended.
B13  Gooden and Mets stop Cubs.
B13  Bonilla suspended for charging mound.
B15  Yanks beat Royals.
B15  Basketball: Knicks get Blackman, draft Davis.
B13  Columns: Moran on Title IX.
B13  Lapointe on pro hockey.
B15  Olympics: A quandary over Reynolds.
B19  Powell outjumps Lewis.
B19  Obituaries D26-27  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30  Promise for peace in Israel.
A threat to veto democracy.
Religion remains free, 5-4.
Keep the U.N.
Letters A30  William Safire: "Not in the system." A31  Anthony Lewis: The Kimberlin case.
A31  Robert B. Costello: Salesman or strategist?
A31  Jamie Ann Conway: Let women fly in combat.
A31


Fred Robbins Is Dead; Radio and TV Host, 73
Fred Robbins, a popular radio personality who went on to become a television host and celebrity interviewer, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old.
He died of lymphoma, said his wife, Ingrid.


Doctor Accused Anew on AIDS Studies
A former senior health official says the Government was misled by Dr.
Robert Gallo's claim to have been the sole discoverer of the cause of AIDS, and that now the United States has a "moral duty" to turn over the credit and the royalties to the French.
Comments by C. McClain Haddow in recent interviews are part of the increasing pressure being put on the Government to reverse its stand behind Dr.
Gallo.
At the same time, lawyers for the Pasteur Institute in France are lobbying officials of both the White House and the Department of Health and Human Services.
And two independent bodies have attacked Dr.
Gallo and what they said was the Government's limp investigation.


Expos' Calderon May Be Lost for Season
Montreal Expos outfielder IVAN CALDERON is probably finished for the season after undergoing arthroscopic surgery on his ailing left shoulder yesterday.


Cimflex Teknowledge reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Crazy Eddie's Chief Is Arrested in Israel
Eddie Antar, who disappeared more than two years ago after the demise of his Crazy Eddie chain of consumer electronics stores, was arrested today near Tel Aviv on fraud and other charges.
Mr.
Antar, 44 years old, was discovered by the Israeli police to be living in a luxurious town house in Yavne, a town in central Israel, under the name David Jacob Levi Cohen and was charged by the United States Government with stock fraud.
The charges include accusations that he made more than $74 million over 38 months from selling shares of the company's stock, all the while knowing that the retail chain had falsified its financial statements.


U.S. Trade Agency Turns Down Car Makers' Complaint on Japan
The Federal Government's trade agency ruled today that Detroit's auto makers had not suffered significant harm from imported Japanese mini-vans, a verdict that prevents the Commerce Department from proceeding with plans to impose tariffs on the imports.
The decision by the independent agency, the International Trade Commission, to reject a highly political case is a landmark in American trade policy.
It reflects the presence of a new majority, more skeptical of industry claims, on the little-known body, which has the power to block American industries from receiving Commerce Department protection from imports.
A Former Member's Analysis
Three new commissioners -- two Republicans and a Democrat -- have joined the six-member body in recent months, and the two Republicans appear to be taking a much narrower interpretation of the nation's trade law than their predecessors.
Their terms will last as long as nine years.


Review/Rock; Spinal Tap Re-emerges, Its Ineptitude Intact
The opening tableau of Spinal Tap's concert at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night was one that would remain imprinted on any rock fan's memory for years to come: the huge stage awash in red light, with a giant spine as a backdrop, and three pairs of feet poking out from below the ceiling curtain as David St.
Hubbins, Nigel Tufnel and Derek Smalls were precariously lowered to the ground.
Each was suspended in a decidedly uncomfortable-looking waist harness, and they were playing Spinal Tap's all-time greatest hit, "(Tonight I'm Gonna) Rock Ya Tonight."
As is Spinal Tap's wont, the production number did not come off smoothly.
Mr.
St.
Hubbins, the lead singer and guitarist, made it safely to solid ground, but Mr.
Smalls, the bassist, endured the song a few inches in the air.
Mr.
Tufnel, the guitarist, got stuck a good 10 feet above the stage.
He remained there for the entire song, swaying inelegantly back and forth like a dummy on a string.


Excerpts From Supreme Court's Decision on Prayer at School Ceremonies
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court ruling today, in Lee v.
Weisman, that prayer by a member of the clergy at a public school graduation ceremony violates the First Amendment's prohibition against establishing religion.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, and David H. Souter.
Justices Blackmun and Souter also filed concurring opinions that were joined by Justices Stevens and O'Connor.


Henderson Says He Was Only 'Jiving'
Hours after demanding to be traded, RICKEY HENDERSON said yesterday he was just "jiving" and would be happy to stay with the Oakland Athletics as long as they want him.
"That was a big joke so we can drop it, all right?" Henderson said.
"Rickey tricked everybody. Thank you all. I finally got a chance to laugh.


Banner Aerospace Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Editors' Note
An article on Sunday about Congressional redistricting depicted anxiety among members of New York State's Congressional delegation afraid of losing their seats.
As an illustration, the article reported a squabble between two Democratic Representatives, Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn and Jose E. Serrano of the Bronx, who had supported competing plans for redistricting.
The article reported that Mr.
Schumer was "said to have complained" to Mr.
Serrano: "I hear you really did us. You're making it very difficult for me to go and get you that seat on appropriations."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Detroit auto makers have not suffered significant harm from imported Japanese mini-vans, a Federal trade agency ruled.
The landmark decision prevents the Commerce Department from imposing tariffs on the imports.  [ Page A1. ]
Enterprise zones to spur the economy of 50 impoverished areas were voted by the House Ways and Means Committee.  [ D1. ]


Quest Biotechnology reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Teachers Protest the Lack of a Contract With the City


Save the Band Shell and Keep Central Park for All New Yorkers
To the Editor:
The scheduled July 15 demolition of the Naumburg Bandshell -- or disassembling, as Parks Commissioner Betsy F. Gotbaum has it (news item, June 10) -- would be a senseless destruction of one of Central Park's (and New York City's) most useful cultural and architectural treasures.
The Central Park Conservancy and Ms.
Gotbaum deem that this magnificent band shell is both incompatible with the new Victorian benches of their inauthentic restoration of the Central Park Mall concert grounds and superfluous because it was not in the plans of Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, the original architects.
Neither were the Wollman Rink, the Delacorte Theater, the zoo, Tavern on the Green, the ballfields or the proposed Harlem Meer restaurant.
Furthermore, funds for the band shell's repair costs (a mere fraction of the demolition costs) were offered by the Naumburg family and refused by Ms.
Gotbaum.


U.S. Moves Against Man It Links to Death Camp
The United States Department of Justice sought yesterday to revoke the citizenship of a 73-year-old man from Putnam County, N.Y., who it said admitted last month to taking part in the massacre of about 50 Jews at a concentration camp while serving as a sergeant in a Nazi SS extermination unit in World War II.
Department officials described the case against the man, Jack Reimer, as a rare case in which someone acknowledged his participation in the murder of Jews.
"His admissions are the smoking gun," said Neal M. Sher, director of the department's Office of Special Investigations.


Cabletron Systems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Thomas W. Kelly, Lawyer, 74
Thomas W. Kelly, a retired Manhattan lawyer who was the longtime general counsel for the national Girl Scouts and for several industry associations, died on Saturday at his home in Larchmont, N.Y.
He was 74 years old.
Mr. Kelly died of complications of lung cancer, his family said.


International Multifoods reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Central Co-operative Bank reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


RABIN PLANS TO ACT ON MIDEAST TALKS AND SETTLEMENTS
Yitzhak Rabin said today that his priorities as Israel's next Prime Minister would be peace negotiations to bring about Palestinian self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, and an end to construction of "political settlements" there.
Mr.
Rabin, the victorious Labor Party leader in the national election Tuesday, added that he hoped in the process to improve relations with the United States, which have been seriously strained over the settlements issue.


Stocks Rise in Tokyo
Stocks were higher in Tokyo today.
At the close of the trading session, the Nikkei average of 225 issues was up 290.05 points, or 1.83 percent, to 16,143.72.
On Wednesday, the average lost 253.32 points.


James J. Patterson, Daily News Executive, 69
James J. Patterson, a former vice president and assistant managing editor of The Daily News in New York, died yesterday in Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 69 years old and lived in Longboat Key, Fla.
He died of complications from diabetes, his family said.


3Com Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


'Amityville' Prisoner Says Movie Money Tainted Defense
In a revival of the case that inspired the haunted-house tale "Amityville Horror," the man convicted of killing his parents and four brothers and sisters 18 years ago has returned to court seeking a new trial, claiming that his original lawyer had movie contracts, rather than defense strategy, on his mind.
Speaking to reporters today at the Suffolk Country Correctional Facility, the prisoner, Ronald DeFeo Jr., insisted that his court-appointed lawyer in 1975, William Weber, pursued an insanity defense against Mr.
DeFeo's wishes.
He did this, Mr.
DeFeo said, to make the story more attractive for possible book and movie contracts.


Work Rules Set At Times Plant
A labor arbitrator issued a ruling on Tuesday establishing staffing and working conditions for New York Mailers' Union No. 6 at The New York Times's new printing plant in Edison, N.J.
Both The Times and representatives of the union said they were satisfied with parts of the ruling and not with others.


Old Favorites Sing New Tune
John McEnroe insists he is not a legitimate Wimbledon contender unless bolts of lightning or broken legs strike a couple of the favorites.
Pat Cash, with his sumo-style ponytail perched above his trademark checkerboard headband, insists he is "not expecting too much." And both have admitted feeling nervous.
The two former champions and strictly amateur musicians, both of whom have counted rock stardom among their pipe dreams, are scheduled to meet Thursday in what has been billed as Wimbledon's most enticing second-round match.
They are sharing a lot of humble pie along with the guitar licks and reminiscences of bygone glories.
Cash, who reached a career high of No. 7 in the world in 1987, the year he won Wimbledon, is a tennis part-timer now, ranked 191st, a career low.
McEnroe, Wimbledon's champion in 1981, 1983 and 1984, is ranked 30th, a personal low since joining the tour.


Big Board Fines Shearson and 2 Ex-Traders
The New York Stock Exchange fined Shearson Lehman Brothers and two senior traders a total of $600,000 yesterday for manipulating the price of a stock immediately before a public offering underwritten by the firm.
After a 19-month investigation, the Big Board charged that Peter J. DaPuzzo, the former co-head of international equities, and Emmanuel Geronimos, the former manager for Shearson's institutional block trading, arranged for a trade to manipulate downward the price of Conagra Inc. common stock at the time of a stock offering in November 1990.


Holds Anything, Including Tradition
THEY were even on Marlene Dietrich's wish list from America: the food-storage containers known as Tupperware.
But how do you give such icons a new look?
Gently, very gently, Morison Cousins might say.
He's the director of design at Tupperware in Orlando, Fla.
"The products are very to the point, very functional," Mr.
Cousins said.
The set of four canisters shown here is his first redesign.
"Very understated," he said, "with a look that's compatible with the kind of appliances out on kitchen counters. They are not meant to shout, 'Here I am: A decorative object!' "


Click, You're Dead!
To The Home Section:
"In Television, Children See the World and Believe"  [ Parent &amp; Child, May 14 ]  omits an influence on children that is, however, illustrated in the accompanying drawing.
The little girl is shown holding the remote control device at arm's length like a small gun, and aiming it at the television set.
This exercise, repeated thousands of times, can teach children that any person they don't like, or who annoys them, can be made to disappear.
Zap!
That person is gone.


Economic Scene; Rudderless In the Recession
THE numbers say the recession is over.
But with the latest polls showing that 78 percent of registered voters disapprove of President Bush's economic performance, it is plain that Americans aren't listening.
Why, then, is candidate Bush confining his economic maneuvers to jawboning the Federal Reserve for easier credit?
The short answer is that even if Washington had the will to stimulate the economy quickly, it lacks the way.
"The next six months," notes Neal Soss of First Boston, "are baked in the cake."


Fuller (H.B.) Co. (O) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


DU PONT AND HERCULES COOPERATE ON PLASTICS RESEARCH
The Du Pont Company and Hercules Inc. agreed to develop, make and market composite parts based on thermoplastic fiber placement technology.
Terms of the deal, announced by the Wilmington, Del., companies yesterday, were not disclosed.
The partnership, which will develop parts for aerospace and naval applications, grew out of a joint proposal the companies developed last fall with the University of Delaware's Institute for Advanced Composites Technology.
The proposal won a $2.5 million grant from the Defense Department to develop manufacturing technology for advanced plastic parts.


Phone Rewiring Case Discourages Investors
To the Editor:
"Battle Looms Over Paying to Rewire U.S. for Phones" (front page, June 9) tells less than the full story about attempts of utilities to recover their investment in facilities to serve customers.
Because of the rigors of the marketplace, competitive industries set targets of 5 or 10 years to recover capital investment through depreciation.
But the utility industry is rarely permitted by regulators to recover costs on mammoth investments over less than 25 or 30 years.
It is unfortunate that Gene Kimmelman of the Consumer Federation of America believes customers are being forced to invest when they are simply repaying investors who put the phone network in place years ago.


Irish Ridicule New U.S. Envoy Over Gaffes
In his first week as American Ambassador to Ireland, William FitzGerald, an 82-year-old businessman and friend of President Bush, has been hit by what a diplomat called "the Irish Welcome Wagon."
Major newspapers have mocked Mr.
FitzGerald in front-page articles because of errors he made about fundamental issues facing Ireland in testimony on June 3 in hearings in Washington on his appointment.


Law Partner of Senator's Brother Is Cleared
A law partner of Armand P. D'Amato, the brother of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, was acquitted of tax evasion on Tuesday by a Federal jury.
The partner, Jack Libert, a former counsel to the Nassau County Board of Supervisors, was exonerated on three counts of conspiracy to evade taxes and tax evasion involving about $30,000 said to be profit from a land deal in Mitchel Field, L.I.
His father-in-law, Paul Malkin, who was accused of helping in the tax evasion, was also acquitted.


Water Gun Raises Problems of Responsibility; Not Mutually Exclusive
To the Editor:
"Controlling the Wrong Guns" (Topics of the Times, June 10) describes the Super Soaker water gun as a harmless toy -- mere child's play.
What you overlook is that water hoses are powerful enough to be used in riot control.
Worse still, one of these toys had reportedly been loaded with a chemical material and sprayed onto a passer-by, which could have resulted in blindness.
Banning the Super Soaker and supporting the Brady bill are not mutually exclusive; they go hand in hand, just as playful aggression can escalate to bloodshed.
EDITH CALMENSON New York, June 11, 1992


Sosa, Bromley Helps Motel 6 Attract Hispanic Customers
LIONEL SOSA'S message that the nation's growing Hispanic market can deliver profits for advertisers willing to bankroll a well-aimed sales pitch -- has won over some of the biggest advertisers in the last few years.
Mr.
Sosa's firm, Sosa, Bromley, Aguilar &amp; Associates, is one of the largest agencies in the Hispanic market, with billings of some $65 million from such big clients as Coca-Cola USA, American Airlines, Anheuser-Busch and General Motors.


Diagnostic/Retrieval Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Evergreen Resources reports earnings for Year to March 31


American Franchise Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Wish List of Tiles
NEW tiles are just the thing to cheer up anyone's fantasies, armchair or otherwise, of home decorating.
Paris Ceramics, a London company, has just opened a showroom in the United States, and it happens to be in Greenwich, Conn.
The company sells both antique tiles and new terra-cotta and limestone tiles, as well as mosaic tiles and hand-painted designs.
Some are based on historical designs.
For example, the Chartier Cup series, with 12 different tiles, was inspired by objects in the Musee des Arts Decoratifs in Paris.
The cup-pattern series, shown below, has neo-classical motifs and costs $820.
The side pieces are $6 each, and the corner pieces $13.


Jazz in Review
Lionel Hampton  Avery Fisher Hall
Lionel Hampton's show on Tuesday night got off the ground during the second half.
Mr.
Hampton brought out a small group named the Golden Men of Jazz, including Harry (Sweets) Edison and Doc Cheatham on trumpets, Al Grey on trombone, James Moody on saxophone and a rhythm section including Junior Mance on piano, Arvell Shaw on bass and Grady Tate on drums.
After running through a whole set of features, allowing each instrumentalist the room to stretch out over the meaty and swinging rhythm section, the improvisations picked up some temperature.
The second half opened with Mr.
Hampton playing light and logical piano ideas behind the young vibraphonist Jay Hoggard.
Mr.
Hoggard worked up some ideas on "Stompin' at the Savoy," and he and Mr.
Hampton traded ideas on "C-Jam Blues." Then the Golden Men arrived; Mr.
Cheatham, trumpet aimed at the ceiling, put together a perfectly constructed solo, loaded with melodies.
His phrases end with a bit of wiggle, so the improvisation seemed to shake with details.
He followed that with a version of "Sweet Lorraine" that had him singing plaintively, and intimately, and improvising with a mute that made the performance even more introverted.


Durables Orders Post First Big Drop of Year
New orders for durable manufactured goods fell 2.4 percent in May, the first significant decline this year, the Commerce Department reported today.
Analysts had been expecting orders to rise and expressed disappointment at the results, although many economists found the report only mildly disturbing.
They noted that this series was subject to large swings and that orders fell just six-tenths of 1 percent when military orders are excluded.


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sports of The Times; Wanted: A Leaner and Lawful Goose
WHEN the afternoon of April 27, 1978, finally arrived, raw and rainy and reaffirming, the women who competed at a nearly empty Franklin Field in Philadelphia had no problem filling the place with their joy.
Women had competed in the Penn Relays before, but not like this, not with their own afternoon of events.
The 84th running had finally become theirs.
They could experience the same feeling they had heard from the boys and men at their schools, that after a punishing outdoor season on cinder tracks, running on the synthetic surface at Penn, before the double-decked stands, felt more like floating.


What Psychiatry Does
To the Editor:
A chart accompanying your June 8 front-page article on the battle for Texas between President Bush and Ross Perot states of Mr.
Perot: "Says psychiatry is close to faith healing; doesn't put stock in it." And of Mr.
Bush: "Does not like to 'get on the couch.' "


Violent Crime Drops 2 Percent; Total Crime Rises in New Jersey
For the first time since New Jersey began compiling statewide statistics on crime 25 years ago, the state recorded a decrease last year in each of four categories of violent crime -- homicide, rape, robbery and aggravated assault.
The state's 15 largest cities continued to lead the list in the number of all crimes, but when the report compared where crime was rising fastest, suburban and rural areas led urban neighborhoods, according to a report released today.


Broderbund Software Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Reitmans Canada reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Airline Official Defends Ice Checks on Fatal Night
A USAir official yesterday defended the method of checking for ice on an airliner's wing by looking through the cockpit windows.
That was the method reportedly used before a USAir jet crashed on takeoff from La Guardia Airport on a snowy March night, killing 27.
Federal investigators are examining the possibility that ice that formed on the wings while the plane waited for half an hour to take off had crippled the craft's lifting power, causing it to plunge back to the runway.
On Tuesday the plane's co-pilot testified at a hearing on the crash that he and the pilot, looking through the cockpit windows, had repeatedly checked for ice while the plane taxied and waited on runways, but had detected none.


Taiwan Fund Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Man in the News: Yitzhak Rabin  Battle-Scarred Warrior
The general was back today.
Yitzhak Rabin, former army careerist and a man familiar with chains of command, strode confidently into his first news conference after his Labor Party's spectacular election victory, and made clear off the bat who was in charge.


Banking Fraud Accusations
Federal regulators today accused 17 former officers and associates of four Connecticut banks and a savings and loan with fraud and illegal banking practices and sought $35 million in damages and restitution.
The executives were accused of lending each other tens of millions of dollars for speculative real estate deals that caused all but one of the institutions to fail.


Billington Signed, Sealed and Still a Devil
CRAIG BILLINGTON became the first of the free agents on the Devils to re-sign with the team.
LOU LAMORIELLO, the president of the Devils, signed Billington to a multiyear contract yesterday and said he did not anticipate any problems in signing the team's other unsigned players.
Billington was used primarily as the backup to CHRIS TERRERI in goal last season.
Billington, 25 years old, played in 26 games and had a record of 13-7-1 with two shutouts and a goals-against average of 3.04.
Lamoriello would not disclose terms of Billington's contract.


Sellers Drops His Suit Against N.C.A.A.
The former Connecticut center ROD SELLERS has decided not to file a lawsuit against the N.C.A.A. over his one-game suspension during the N.C.A.A. tournament.
Sellers was suspended for Connecticut's N.C.A.A. first-round victory against Nebraska because of an incident in the previous year's tournament.
CBS television cameras showed Sellers slam the head of Duke's CHRISTIAN LAETTNER onto the floor several times.
Although officials didn't call a foul, the N.C.A.A.
Division I Men's Basketball Committee issued the one-game suspension.


Two Old Rivals Now Running Together
Professional antagonists for so long, Magic Johnson and Larry Bird are finally together, both on the same team and in pursuit of the same goal: a gold medal in men's basketball at the Olympics this summer.
They've waited years for this, haven't they?
When they first met, it was 1979, in the Final Four championship game, Johnson playing for national champion Michigan State, Bird for runner-up Indiana State.
And later, in the National Basketball Association, they waged memorable battles throughout the 1980's, Johnson taking the Los Angeles Lakers to five league titles and Bird helping the Boston Celtics soar to three.


Signs of Olden Times Bring History to the Streets
IN these days of billion-dollar bankruptcies and trillion-dollar debts, the sign that went up this week on a lamppost outside the Municipal Building in lower Manhattan makes compelling reading.
"Guilt until the accused proved their innocence," the sign reads.
"Indefinite incarceration at the hands of creditors. That was debtors prison. (You're standing where it once was.) Between 1775 and 1831, thousands were jailed for debt -- sometimes for as little as $1."


Sun City Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Regents Plan Panel on Higher Education
Amid serious budget cuts and tuition increases that have plagued New York's public universities in recent years, the State Board of Regents is creating a commission to study the future of higher education in New York State, education officials said today.
Among the issues that the panel is likely to explore is the recurring question of whether the cutbacks have become so severe that either the State University or the City University of New York should close some of their campuses.


New Jersey Tornado Damages 5 Homes
A tornado touched down for 10 minutes last night in Washington Township, N.J., damaging five homes, knocking down several trees and cutting off power and phone service to more than a third of the town's 15,500 residents, the police said.
No one was believed to have been injured in the storm, the police said.
Several residents told the police that they saw a funnel cloud form at 7:10 P.M. over Schooleys Mountain, in the northwestern part of the township, which is in Morris County.
The National Weather Service said that the precise strength of the tornado could not be determined until today, but it was believed to have been weak.


Art of Yours From Art of Yore
LYNDA SANDHAUS'S collages started with an idea for "visual poems" using reproductions of art objects from periods past: the Renaissance, ancient Egypt, Impressionism.
"I like to contrast different images and mix them up," said Ms.
Sandhaus, who lives in Israel.
She glues single images to small painted canvases or uses several together.


Caring for Street Trees
To The Home Section:
I applaud Linda Yang's article on street trees  [ "A Colorful Carpet to Protect Street Trees," May 21 ] .
Street trees are sorely in need of friends.
The N.Y.C.
Street Tree Consortium (Trees New York), a private nonprofit organization, has been dedicated to the planting, preservation and care of street trees for over 16 years.
Our mission is to encourage good urban forestry management through active citizen participation.


A Sagging Italy Looks to Sale of State Enterprises
The economic system that sustained Italy's postwar development from ruin to leading industrial power has come unglued, causing a crisis of confidence that is undermining business and unmasking the real cost of the so-called Italian miracle.
From the deeply depressed Milan stock exchange, where trading has slowed to a crawl, to the dark corridors of state-owned industrial companies in Rome, where politically appointed managers talk morosely of privatization, the gloom is uniform.


De Klerk May Allow Outsiders to Survey Violence
In an effort to salvage his Government's flagging credibility, President F. W. de Klerk said tonight that he would accept an investigation by foreign experts of violence in black townships, including police conduct after the Boipatong massacre last week.
But the African National Congress, which on Tuesday broke off negotiations on the country's political future, rejected Mr. de Klerk's concession as "paltry" and stepped up its pressure by calling for an international sports boycott to be reimposed against South African athletes.


FSI International reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Tokheim Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Lobster That Flies
"THERE are no batteries involved," said Jane Corbus, whose Amazing Wind Machines company sells wind-propelled whirligigs shaped like lobsters, dinosaurs and fish.
Ms.
Corbus and her partner, Jeff Crewe, designers in Littleton, Mass., decided several years ago to update the traditional whirligig.


COMPANY NEWS
GENZYME CORP., Cambridge, Mass., a pharmaceuticals concern, bought Medix Biotech Inc., Foster City, Calif., a maker of medical chemicals, for $11 million cash from Biodor Holding Ltd., a closely held Swiss company.
GRUMMAN CORP., Bethpage, L..I., signed a $42.7 million contract with the Energy Department to build superconducting magnets for a particle accelerator being built at Brookhaven National Laboratory.


Financial Federal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


AG Services of America reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Creditors Focus on Loan by Olympia to Its Owners
Reichmann family interests borrowed $35 million (Canadian) from their flagship real estate development company about a year and a half before it filed for the equivalent of bankruptcy protection in Canada, lawyers for Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. reluctantly told an Ontario court yesterday.
The borrowing was made in exchange for a note that lawyers for the company and its creditors say was used to help finance the family's purchase of valuable real estate assets.


Essay; 'Not in the System'
On Oct. 13, 1989, a young Foreign Service officer sent a memo to his bosses warning of multiple investigations into the corrupt diversion of U.S. grain money for Saddam Hussein's nuclear bomb.
Two weeks ago, in preparation for a hearing of the House Judiciary Committee considering the need for a special Iraqgate prosecutor, that F.S.O., Frank Lemay, asked for a State Department copy of his memo and was surprised to see a cover note that had been attached: "Not in the system."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton Asks Executives to Accept His Economic Plan
Gov.
Bill Clinton asked manufacturers and business people today to buy his new plan for restoring the country's economic health, including his proposals for increases in corporate taxes and cuts in executive pay.
"It is clearly time to reassess and change our policies and face reality," the Arkansas Governor and presumed Democratic Presidential nominee told business executives attending a meeting here of the National Association of Manufacturers.


Abroad at Home; The Kimberlin Case
In this country government officials cannot stop anyone from speaking, or punish him afterward, because they dislike his political message.
That basic understanding of the First Amendment has just been reaffirmed by the Supreme Court in the St.
Paul cross-burning case.
But the principle has not helped Brett Kimberlin.
A Federal prison inmate, he has been silenced and repeatedly punished for wanting to tell the world that he sold marijuana to Dan Quayle.


COMPANY NEWS: For-Profit Foreign Aid; Seed Money With a Conscience
Mention alternative trade to most business executives and they assume you are talking about one of those complicated deals in which Russia or some other cash-short nation is trying to convince them to take 10,000 army boots or 500,000 goblets instead of money for their products.
But for Equal Exchange Inc. and some 200 other small companies gathering for a convention next week in San Francisco, alternative trade means paying high prices to small farmers and artisans in developing countries to help them prosper and adopt environmentally sound practices.


Dalmys Canada Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


I.M.F. Hopes to Lend Russians a Quick $1 Billion
In a move to speed aid to Moscow, the International Monetary Fund plans to lend the Russians $1 billion to help pay for crucial imports in a simplified reform agreement that the agency hopes to complete in the next two weeks.
The I.M.F.'s plan, as described by its officials, represented a scaling back of original plans for a multibillion-dollar package requiring more sweeping reforms by the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin.


Musical Promotion For Olympic Games
The Coca-Cola Company, NBC and the Warner Music Group are introducing a multimedia summer promotional program called "Medals and Music," combining the music of 18 artists with the broadcast of the 1992 Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain.
The program begins this week and continues through the Games, which start July 24.
The promotion includes distribution of 20 million compact disks and cassettes, with music by performers including Anita Baker, Eric Clapton, Rod Stewart and INXS.
Certificates will be randomly placed inside multipacks of Coca-Cola products and will be redeemable for one of three volumes of music.


House Panel Backs Enterprise Zones
The House Ways and Means Committee voted for a form of enterprise zones intended to spur the economy of 50 impoverished areas today, as it began work on a hodgepodge tax bill with elements of urban aid, tax relief for real estate and extensions of a variety of temporary preferences.
The committee quit work for the evening before reaching the sections intended to raise enough revenue to pay for the $14.4 billion in various cuts proposed by Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the committee chairman.
It is expected to complete action on Thursday.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voices -- Chicago; 3 Views on the President's Domestic Record
Political experts, local officials and ordinary voters in several cities were asked to appraise George Bush's performance as President.
Andrew Sohn  36 years old; lawyer in a small Chicago firm
I think one of Bush's problems is you really can't point to a single domestic program that you can call an achievement.
In a way, his neglect has been the most significant thing.
As a few months pass and you get some sense of who this guy is, you see he has a distinctly right-wing, almost extreme conservative mindset.
I was taken aback by how cool and harsh his opinions were.


Try This for Size: Nets Pick 6-11 P. J. Brown
In an interview conducted just two selections before the Nets made their first pick of the draft tonight, Nets Coach Chuck Daly said he would not be surprised if his team "takes a player with size."
The Nets made good on the prediction by making P. J. Brown, a 6-foot-11-inch, 240-pound power forward from Louisiana Tech, their first pick, which came as the second selection on the second round and the 29th player taken over all.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN SURGICAL TECHNOLOGIES CORP., Haverhill, Mass., named Kenneth P. Fallon 3d president and chief executive.
CLINIQUE U.S.A., New York, a unit of Estee Lauder Inc., named James Nevins to the new position of senior vice president and creative director.


Fielder on a Tear With 2 Home Runs
Tigers 5, Red Sox 1
DETROIT, June 24 (AP) -- Cecil Fielder homered twice today, leading the Detroit Tigers to a 5-1 victory over Boston, the seventh straight loss for the Red Sox.
Fielder now has 60 runs batted in for the season, and despite a hitting slump (averagewise) in recent weeks, he has 27 r.b.i. for his 22 games in June.
The two home runs he added today -- he had a grand slam Tuesday -- give him 16 for the season.


CHRONICLE
The Vice President's son TUCKER QUAYLE presumably does well in spelling, along with other subjects, because he will enter Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa., in the fall, where PATRICIA BOIG, the director of admissions, described him as "a very good student."
RITA MALONE, a spokeswoman for the university, said yesterday: "We have received a deposit from him for the fall. The basic problem is that he wants to be treated like other students and not have a big fuss made."





A Day's Work in Georgia: Shevardnadze Dodges a Coup and Ends a War
Only hours after the leader of Georgia, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, survived an apparent coup attempt, he and President Boris N. Yeltsin signed an agreement today to end the fighting in the rebellious Georgian province of South Ossetia.
Immediately after the signing, Mr.
Yeltsin flew off to Turkey for a meeting in which ethnic fighting between Azerbaijanis and Armenians is expected to be the dominant issue.


The Talk of Hollywood; Budgets Bloat; Studios Worry
The current fixation of Hollywood is how to cut the cost of movie making.
Executives and producers complain publicly about star salaries and costs, but keep shelling out lavish sums on films that often never quite pay off.
In the weird and wonderful world of movie economics -- actually they are financed in a hall of mirrors -- even hits are often not quite successful.
Is it any wonder that the Japanese may be, as the rumors go, scratching their heads and asking if they made a mistake by investing so heavily in Hollywood?
Were such recent big-budget movies as "Hook" and "Bugsy" financially successful, especially after the costs of promoting them?
Of course, say executives at Tri-Star Pictures, which made the films.
No way, say competitors.
The current crop of megadollar productions, ranging from "Far and Away" to "Alien 3," may be financial losers.
Not because the movies are poor or are doing terribly at the box office, but because they cost so much to make.


Corrections
A chart on Sunday showing racial breakdowns and median incomes for two communities in Chicago misstated several figures.
The 1979 income for the Roseland community, in 1989 dollars, was $31,300 (not $29,395); it decreased by 8.7 percent (not 2.7 percent) from 1979 to 1989.
The 1979 income for the Mount Greenwood community, in 1989 dollars, was $35,100 (not $34,874) and that figure increased by 14.5 percent (not 5.1 percent) from 1979 to 1989.


Events: Houses And Their Furniture
Architecture and Design
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6321.
A lecture about the building that houses the museum, the 1902 Andrew Carnegie Mansion, is scheduled at 6:30 P.M. on July 8.
A talk on the architecture of Mexico from the 1960's to the present will be given at 6:30 P.M. on July 30.
The fee for each lecture is $15 (members, $10); advance registration required.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Consumer's World page on Saturday about neckties misidentified the company with which Bert Pulitzer is associated.
Since 1987, Mr.
Pulitzer has been the design director of XMI, a label owned by TBS Marketing Inc.; he no longer has any connection with Bert Pulitzer Tiemakers.


Input/Output Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sarajevo's Prayer; Desperate City Looks Not to Europe But Across the Sea to U.S. for Help
As the Serbian siege of Sarajevo intensifies and the city descends ever deeper into a nightmare of hunger, destruction and death, people here look desperately to the outside world for relief.
Although Sarajevo is in Europe, and barely two hours' flying time from Bonn, Paris and London, virtually no one in the basement bunkers that shelter tens of thousands of people here speaks of a European solution.


Ballet; Danish Classicism and Bournonville
If there is one ballet company that functions as a truly national ensemble today, it is the Royal Danish Ballet.
Its most distinctive feature, of course, is a singular legacy, the genius of August Bournonville, the Danish choreographer and company director who left his troupe with the largest number of extant 19th-century ballets from the Romantic era.
Without this repertory of nine ballets plus assorted excerpts, the Royal Danish Ballet might well be like any other company.
But the Bournonville heritage has also colored its contemporary style, which is of the purest classicism without ever looking academic.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances this week (all times Eastern daylight):  President Bush
"20/20." ABC, Friday, 10-11 P.M. (Channel 7 in New York.)  Gov. Bill Clinton
No appearances scheduled.  Ross Perot
No appearances scheduled.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
AN extended visit by parents to their grown-up children and grandchildren has long been a staple of Hollywood screenwriters.
It is an event primed for conflict, plot and subplot, for low comedy and high drama.
While some families welcome the visit as a chance to strengthen their family ties, others dread it because of the stress they feel after a few days of enforced togetherness.
Dr.
Rita Underberg, a psychologist and clinical professor of psychiatry at the University of Rochester, described a couple she counseled after several annual monthlong visits from the wife's parents, who live in Italy.
While the intentions of both generations are good, the squabbles and other problems that developed each year have led to resentment and hurt feelings.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PROPOSED ALL-CIVILIAN REVIEW BOARD
Mayor Dinkins will propose the establishment of an all-civilian review board to investigate charges of police brutality, officials in the Dinkins administration said.
The Mayor's plan is a setback to Police Commissioner Brown, who has long opposed such a board.
A1.
Civilian Complaint Review Board has difficult task.
B4.
CHECKING FOR AIRPLANE ICE
A USAir official defended the method of checking for ice on an airliner's wing by looking through the cockpit windows.
That was the method reportedly used before a USAir jet crashed on takeoff from La Guardia Airport on a snowy March night, killing 27.
B3.
GOTTI BEGINS LIFE SENTENCE
As John Gotti began a life sentence in what the authorities call the nation's harshest Federal prison, in Marion, Ill., the F.B.I. said a special squad was closing in on illicit wealth he secreted in the last six years.
B3.
COMFORTING THOSE WHO PROVIDE COMFORT
Help in dealing with death has long been available for family members and friends, but it is only recently that the needs of nurses, social workers and others who care for the dying on a daily basis have been recognized.
Across the New York region increasing numbers of professionals are forming bereavement groups.
B3.
REGION  INSURANCE FOR POOR CHILDREN
After a slow start, largely because few people knew about it, a New York state program that provides health insurance for the children of the working poor now covers 27,000 children.
The new program, Child Health Plus, is quickly outgrowing its $20 million budget.
B5.
A REVIVAL OF 'THE AMITYVILLE HORROR'
In a revival of the case that inspired the haunted-house tale "Amityville Horror," the man convicted of killing his parents and four brothers and sisters 18 years ago has returned to court on Long Island, claiming that his original lawyer had movie contracts, rather than defense strategy, on his mind.
B6.
PUTNAM MAN LINKED TO NAZI WAR CRIMES
The Department of Justice is seeking to revoke the citizenship of a 73-year-old man from Putnam County, N.Y., who it said has admitted to taking part in the massacre of 50 Jews at a concentration camp while he was a sergeant in a Nazi extermination unit in World War II.
B7.
FORMER JERSEY CITY MAYOR SENTENCED
Gerald McCann, the ousted Mayor of Jersey City, was sentenced to 33 months in prison for defrauding a Florida savings and loan association of $240,000, but he was allowed to remain free until Sept. 30 so he can attend his sister's wedding.
Mr.
McCann was also ordered to pay $170,000 in restitution to the Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency that took over the assets of the savings association after it failed.
B7.
Bleak predictions about impact of New Jersey budget.
B7.
Railroad riders spared the chaos that an Amtrak strike would have caused.
A18.
Lower Manhattan Journal B3


Simmonds Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Xytronyx Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


INSIDE
I.M.F. Is Planning $1 Billion Loan for Russia
To speed aid to Russia, the International Monetary Fund is planning to lend Moscow $1 billion to help pay for crucial imports in a simplified agreement that the agency hopes to complete in the next few weeks.
Page A10.
De Klerk Move Is Rejected
South Africa's President said he would accept a foreign inquiry into township violence, but the African National Congress rejected the offer and called for a boycott against the nation's athletes.
Page A12.
Redistricting Plan Advances
The Justice Department gave almost total approval to the redistricting plan for the New York State Legislature, requiring only one modification for the Assembly plan.
Page B1.
Howe Banned From Baseball
The Yankee pitcher, who had previously been suspended six times, was permanently barred by Commissioner Fay Vincent following a guilty plea in a cocaine case.
Page B13.
AIDS Curriculum in New York
After weeks of bitter fighting, the New York City Board of Education agreed on an AIDS curriculum for elementary schools.
Page B1. 'Crazy Eddie' Is Arrested
Crazy Eddie's founder, Eddie Antar, was arrested in Israel on securities-fraud charges two years after the demise of his store chain.
Page D1.


Perot Under Fire: Sifting Facts and Motives
Only a short while ago Ross Perot had the sort of public image that would make any politician salivate: self-made billionaire, just-folks tycoon, scourge of the Ayatollah, straight-talking guy.
But lately a more ominous portrait has emerged: J. Edgar Perot, a man obsessed by conspiracies and beset by enemies in his mind, willing to use tactics of espionage and intimidation to destroy those who stand in his way.
Mr.
Perot, in an aggressive public relations campaign over the last few days, has denounced that characterization as false -- "fairyland," "animal crackers" and "Mickey Mouse tossed salad" were a few of his more colorful dismissals.
And he says this effort to redefine, and malign, his character has been orchestrated by President Bush and his re-election committee.


Arbitrator Could Put Lindros On Market
The arbitrator in the Eric Lindros case can come to one of several decisions.
He can rule that Quebec made only one true trade last weekend and award Lindros to the Rangers.
Or, he can rule that the Nordiques made two deals and award Lindros to the Philadelphia Flyers, who say they agreed on the first transaction.
Or, he could nullify both deals and tell Quebec to try again.
A fourth option, and an unlikely one, would please some and anger many and give the Nordiques the just punishment they deserve for their part in this tacky affair: He could declare Lindros a free agent and let a real auction begin.


Patchwork Outfield Works Out for Yanks
Figure this one out, if you can.
The Yankees did not have Danny Tartabull or Roberto Kelly available tonight and they had a pitcher who could not throw strikes in his last start.
No chance for victory, right?
Wrong.
Any doubt about their outfield was eliminated when Dion James and Jim Leyritz, the replacements for the two starters, helped the Yankees score four runs in the first inning.
And any doubt about Jeff Johnson's pitches was erased inning after inning as he cruised past the Royals for seven strong innings.


Lawyer Recalls a Dying Smoker's Tenacity
Back in the summer of 1983, Rose Cipollone, a smoker for 40 years, was dying of lung cancer and looking for a lawyer to sue three cigarette manufacturers.
She invited Marc Z. Edell to her house in Little Ferry, N.J., and appealed to him to take her case.
He tried to discourage her from tackling the cigarette industry.
"We sort of locked horns," Mr.
Edell recalled today in an interview in his law office here.
"I tried to convince her how difficult it would be. I told her this litigation would be extremely burdensome and debilitating, both emotionally and from a time commitment."


Scheib (Earl) Inc. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


7 ASTRONAUTS SET FOR LIFTOFF TODAY
The space shuttle Columbia was being prepared today for an attempt to break its orbital endurance record by spending almost two weeks in space.
Only uncertain weather and a series of minor mechanical problems threatened plans to launch the Columbia and its crew of seven astronauts shortly after noon on Thursday on a mission to explore the effects of gravity, or the lack of it, on numerous physical and chemical processes.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Reynolds Advances In Legal Rat Race
As Butch Reynolds moves closer toward earning a place on the United States Olympic team, the national governing body for track and field and the United States Olympics Committee have been thrust into the difficult position of deciding how strongly they will support his efforts to keep it.
Still under suspension for failing a drug test, Reynolds reached Friday's final by finishing second tonight in his semifinal to Quincy Watts, a senior at the University of Southern California whose time of 43.97 seconds was the sixth-fastest of all time and the first under 44 seconds since the final at the 1988 Seoul Olympics.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Year to Feb 29


When They Can't Watch Another Patient Die
In a darkened hospital room, a bone-thin patient held onto Janet Colding's hand.
After talking to her for weeks about his life, the 56-year-old patient fell silent, finally accepting that his cancer was terminal.
"We looked at each other and he nodded at me," said Ms.
Colding, a nurse who works with cancer patients.
"When he died a week later, it almost felt like I'd lost a member of my family."


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Sanchez Vicario Upset By Halard of France
Just three years ago, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario took a look at Wimbledon's green lawns and longed to be back on the red clay in Paris, where she made professional history and a personal breakthrough as the 17-year-old French Open champion.
Grass, she sneered, was meant for cows.
Today, Sanchez Vicario, seeded fifth and confident that her all-court game would carry her through to a respectable round, was upset, 6-3, 2-6, 6-3, in the second round by an astonished French underdog, Julie Halard.


Sceptre Investment Counsel reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Excerpts From Interview With President Bush on First Term and Future
Following are excerpts from an interview with President Bush in the Oval Office on Tuesday.
The questioners were R. W. Apple Jr., Joel Brinkley, Steven Greenhouse and Andrew Rosenthal of The New York Times.
Some questions have been edited or paraphrased because of space limitations.
Q:
We would like to talk to you about your record for the first term.
As you look back over the last three and a half years, can you tell us what you consider your most significant domestic initiatives that you have originated, promoted and seen through to fruition?


The All-Important Name
To The Home Section:
The ancient Latins, for whom names were more mystical than merely indicative ("Nomina sunt numina," names, like marriages, are made in heaven), would agree with the substance of the article "What's in a Name? For Stores, Success"  [ May 21 ] .
Perhaps, to some degree, the absence of a name may account for the disbandment of the nameless New York chorus, appropriately called the Sine Nomine Singers (music review, same issue  [ "Sine Nomine Singers Give Concert and Disband" ] ).
This small group of about six singers, after 24 years, "went out of business on Sunday afternoon."


International Jensen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Ketema Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on Friday about Martin Puris, who heads the media team for George Bush's re-election campaign, misstated Mr.
Puris's role at Ammirati &amp; Puris.
He remains chief executive; he has not taken a leave.
The article also referred incorrectly to projected billings for this year.
The agency expects billings to be $320 million, not $200 million.
In addition, the article included one company erroneously among the agency's accounts.
Club Med is no longer a client; Ammirati &amp; Puris resigned the account last year.


Norstan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


S.&amp; P. Lowers Its Rating On UAL and United Air Debt
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation announced yesterday that it had lowered the rating on about $2.9 billion of debt issued by the UAL Corporation and its United Air Lines Inc. subsidiary, placing the rating just above the level of junk bonds and making borrowing more expensive for UAL.
But the decision by S.&amp; P. to cut the ratings to BBB-, the agency's lowest investment-grade rating, barely rippled prices of the company's bonds yesterday.


Andersen Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


When Inspiration Strikes
To The Home Section:
Although I am rapidly approaching my 80th birthday, I feel that I would be remiss if I did not write.
I thoroughly enjoyed your article  [ "Look Anywhere, and See Design," June 11 ] .
Helen Baier  [ the writer's wife ]  and I returned to Syracuse University last fall for the dedication of the new Delta Kappa Epsilon (Deke) Fraternity House.
Among those present were Roy Simmons Sr., class of '25, and Charlie Brannock, class of '25  [ designer of the Brannock shoe-measuring device ] , both in their 90's.


Gerald A. Gura, Retail Executive, 57
Gerald A. Gura, the president and chief executive of CWT Specialty Stores in New England, died on June 19 at Sturdy Memorial Hospital in Attleboro, Mass.
He was 57 years old and lived in Sharon, Mass.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Wholesome &amp; Hearty Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Perot in the Glare of Political Scrutiny
Is this the needle that bursts the Perot bubble?
Can the undeclared independent candidate keep his remarkable drive toward the White House on course amid a storm of charges that his agents have spied on President Bush, members of the President's family and even his own children?
Those questions were the talk of political Washington last night and today.
Republicans and Democrats alike chattered about "Inspector Perot" and his comeuppance, though they pictured the Dallas billionaire turned populist politician as a more sinister figure than Peter Sellers' screen gumshoe.


Senator Disputes U.S. Tally of Vietnam Prisoners
A Senate committee chairman took issue today with almost two decades of Administration assertions that all Vietnam War prisoners were accounted for when Washington and Hanoi signed a cease-fire accord in 1973.
He said his committee's reading of official documents led him to believe that as many as 133 might have still been alive and in captivity at the time.
Opening two days of hearings, questioning present and former government officials whose job it was to keep track of missing Americans, Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the committee, also said that from 1965 to 1972 files on people involved in covert operations, often in Laos or Cambodia, were deliberately falsified to protect secrecy.


Facing Life After Alexander's; Retail Workers Look to the Future With Hope and Fear
The employees of Alexander's department store gathered for their farewell supper around the long narrow tables at Tony Roma's, a mile down the road from the discount store where many of them had worked since it opened in 1967.
Over spareribs and potatoes, they exchanged hugs and phone numbers, and a certain grim view of the future.
There was Maureen Murphy, 41 years old and single, who had started working in the store before Christmas 25 years ago and never left.
Now, she feared more than anything losing her home in Rosedale, Queens, just seven years shy of paying off the mortgage.


ValueVision International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


These Shops Sell The Fine Art Of Decorating
If museums are repositories of art, their gift shops are citadels of good design -- including objects for the home.
For their shops, museums transform images from their collections and search the world for objects that reflect their points of view.


Waste Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Joseph Porrello Dead; Tenor and Teacher, 56
Joseph Porrello, a tenor who performed opera, musical theater and cabaret music and also taught, died on Monday at the Terence Cardinal Cooke Health Care Center in Manhattan.
He was 56 years old and lived in Greenwich Village.
He died of AIDS, said Joseph Porter, a friend.


Bourgeois to Represent U.S. at Venice Biennale
Louise Bourgeois, whose idiosyncratic, often Surrealist work has made her one of the most respected sculptors in America during roughly the last half-century, will represent the United States at the Venice Biennale next year.
Ms.
Bourgeois was chosen by the Federal Advisory Committee for International Exhibitions, a standing committee of the National Endowment for the Arts.
"It's a great honor," said Ms.
Bourgeois, who is 81 years old and whose sculpture has become ubiquitous at major contemporary-art surveys.
"This is all the doing of the Brooklyn Museum. I'm also a bit skeptical since even I haven't officially been told the news."


Review/Television; A Gay Debut, Already Criticized in the Senate
Having been clobbered on the floor of the United States Senate nearly two weeks before it is even seeing the light of broadcast, "In the Life" makes its public-television debut tonight, on Channel 31 in New York at 9 o'clock, with a certain hesitancy that is all too understandable.
Actually this is just a "sneak preview" of a planned monthly magazine exploring gay and lesbian life and culture across the country.
It's not the first such effort, but its producers say the timing now is better than ever.
Out of the rage triggered by the nation's handling of the AIDS epidemic over the last decade has emerged a tough new gay and lesbian awareness, evidenced dramatically in the current vigorous boom in gay-theme novels, films and plays.


Reporter's Notebook; Theater, the Last Bastion of National Culture
Music and dance and art have no problems transcending linguistic frontiers.
Movies and television can be subtitled or overdubbed.
Literature can be translated.
But theater remains stubbornly isolated, the last bastion of national culture -- short of supertitles that can't hope to capture much of a fast-moving spoken text, or annoying insectlike earphone whispers that blot out the words actually being spoken.
In every country there are actors of enormous talent and popularity who are almost completely unknown outside their native cultures.
Unless, of course, they also happen to work in the quasi-international language of English or make movies.


Man in the News: Yitzhak Rabin  Battle-Scarred Warrior
The general was back today.
Yitzhak Rabin, former army careerist and a man familiar with chains of command, strode confidently into his first news conference after his Labor Party's spectacular election victory, and made clear off the bat who was in charge.


U.N.L.V. Grand Jury Is Keeping Busy
The head of the Clark County, Nev., grand jury said that an investigation of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, including the resignation of the basketball coach, JERRY TARKANIAN, has uncovered evidence that crimes were committed, and that several public officials and private citizens may be involved.
The forewoman, PATRICIA RANDELL, said there is also evidence that Federal laws, state civil laws and state ethics codes may have been broken.
Her accusations came in a letter to the legislative counsel, LORNE MALKIEWICH.


Market Place; At PPG the Worst Seems to Be Over
BY last year, it seemed that the recession had finally caught up with PPG Industries, which makes Pittsburgh Paints and Lucite as well as glass, specialty chemicals and coatings for the auto and construction industries.
After gliding through the tough terrain of business conditions in 1990 with record earnings, PPG saw its profits sag.
By the fourth quarter of last year, the company's earnings plunged 42 percent from their level a year earlier and earnings for the entire year dropped to their lowest level since 1983.
But PPG's fortunes seem to have shifted, several industry analysts say, contending that the company already absorbed the biggest blow from the recession, in the last three months of 1991.
In part, the improvement is the result of greater efficiency and the closing of high-cost operations, notably in glass making.
But the greatest benefit has come from the slow, but steady improvement in the economy, which has increased the demand for automobiles, houses and office buildings that use the company's glass for windows.


Panel to Recommend Ways to Fight TB In New York Jails
A task force led by New York City's Health Commissioner is to release its recommendations today on ways to help control the spread of tuberculosis in jails and holding cells.
Some of the recommendations have been put in place since the task force completed its research earlier in the year.
The city has budgeted $100 million for tuberculosis control this year.
The task force, headed by the Health Commissioner, Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg, said every new case of tuberculosis will cost from $15,000 to $250,000 to treat.


When a Mirror's Own Image Matters
MIRRORS, as Stanley Greenspan knows, can fool you.
A new mirror can be made to look old, with silvery spots, dark webbing and a foggy reflection.
And an old mirror can be cleaned up to look brand new.
Mr.
Greenspan's Manhattan company, Sundial Schwartz, is a hall of mirrors -- etched mirrors, tinted mirrors, frosted mirrors and, occasionally, cracked mirrors.
On a typical day, Mr.
Greenspan's crew will work on all types of decorative reflectors, from old mirrors in need of rehabilitation to new mirrors to cover a ceiling or wall.
Some mirrors will be resilvered, a process in which a new reflective backing is applied.
Others will have their edges beveled, or angled, a popular decorative touch.


Transactions
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Officially suspended Steve Howe, pitcher of the New York Yankees, permanently.
American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Johnny Damon, outfielder.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Signed Gus Gandarillas, pitcher, and Adrian Gordon, outfielder to minor-league contracts.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Optioned Joe Slusarski, pitcher, to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Johnny Guzman, pitcher, from Tacoma.
National League
NL -- Suspended Bobby Bonilla, outfielder, from two games and fined him an undisclosed amount for his role in a bench-clearing incident and for throwing an umpire to the ground on June 24.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed John Harris and Mark McGinn, pitchers, and assigned them to the Gulf Coast League and signed Don Parker, outfielder, and Justin Krablin, pitcher, to minor-league contracts.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Traded Jay Humphries, guard, and Larry Krystkowiak, forward to the Utah Jazz for Blue Edwards, forward, Eric Murdock, guard, and a 1992 first-round draft pick.
Signed Anthony Avent, forward, to a four-year contract.
Named Jim Eyen, assistant coach.
NEW YORK KNICKS -- Acquired Rolando Blackman, guard, from the Dallas Mavericks for their 1995 first-round draft pick.
Released Kiki Vandeweghe, forward.
Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY -- Signed Brent White, defensive end.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Bobby Harden, safety, to a multiyear contract.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Waived Rod Harris kick return specialist.
Signed Keith Neubert, tight end, and Curtis Moore, linebacker.
Released Stacy Hunter, tight end, and Chad McMillan, center.


Wise Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Corrections
An article on the Health page on June 10 about premature babies misstated a finding of a study at the University of Florida.
The babies who were held for prolonged periods by their mothers spent an average of 3.7 days in the hospital, in contrast to 10 days for those who received conventional care; the figures did not refer to time in intensive care.


Calendar: City Tours By Bus, Foot and Boat
Architecture Views
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6321.
A series of four walking tours highlighting Art Deco architecture and design in Manhattan will start Sunday and continue July 12, 19 and 26.
Each tour will be from 2 to 4 P.M. and cost $15 ($10, members).


Panama Journal; Tear Gas Has Cleared; the Mayor's Anger Lingers
On the afternoon of June 11, Mayor Mayin Correa and some friends and co-workers from City Hall were crowded onto the balcony of her high-rise condo overlooking the Pacific, reliving the day's tumultuous events, in a decidedly agitated state, when the telephone rang.
After a brisk introduction from the White House communications department, President Bush was on the line.


Congress or Bush Could Act, but Neither Is Eager
As railroads across the country slowed to a halt today, the Bush Administration and Congressional Democrats each demanded that the other take some urgent action to resolve a bitter, longstanding dispute between railroad unions and management.
Congress halted the last rail strike, in April 1991, after 17 hours, but this time lawmakers did not rush to jump into contract negotiations that mediators had been unable to resolve after more than two years.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the implications of the Supreme Court decision on "hate crimes" identified a spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union in New York incorrectly in some copies.
A correction in this space yesterday also referred incorrectly to the spokesman, Loren Siegel.
She is a woman.


United Foods reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jim Hjelm's Private Collection Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Quotation of the Day
"Religious beliefs and religious expression are too precious to be either proscribed or prescribed by the state." -- JUSTICE ANTHONY M. KENNEDY.  [ A1:5. ]


Bush's Letter
Following is the text of a letter from Vice President George Bush to Ross Perot thanking him for his concern about the Bush family.
The letter was made available by the Perot campaign.
Dec. 24, 1986 Dear Ross,
Tomorrow is Christmas; and today the gears here are shifting, at least for me.
This is the time to count one's blessings -- hence this letter.
You see I was very touched by your call(s) about my kids.
They are all straight arrows, uninvolved in intrigue and yet the rumor mill links them; and Ross it hurts 'em --
You understood all this --
What counts in life are honor, family, and friends --
We Bushes are very lucky.
These troubled times will pass but caring friends make it easier.
Happy New Year -- GEORGE


Blazers' Owner Wants Adelman Back
The owner of the Portland Trail Blazers said the National Basketball Association team intends to sign Coach RICK ADELMAN to a contract extension soon.
"Rick is going to be back as coach," the owner, PAUL ALLEN, said Tuesday, while dismissing rumors that Adelman would be dismissed or moved to another position within the organization.
Adelman, 46 years old, has one year left on a three-year extension signed midway through his first full season as head coach of the Blazers.


SciMed Life Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Rail Dispute Spares New Yorkers, So Far
Most of the country's freight railroads shut down in response to a strike against just one of them.
Amtrak was also hobbled, because most of its trains outside the Northeast run on tracks owned by the idled freight lines.
In the New York area, commuter lines were not affected.
But a strike deadline against Amtrak itself, now set for midnight tonight, could change all that, shutting Penn Station and causing havoc for New Jersey and Long Island commuters.


Permanent Ban Imposed on Howe By Commissioner
Finding that Steve Howe "has finally extinguished his opportunity to play major league baseball," Commissioner Fay Vincent yesterday made the Yankee pitcher's indefinite suspension permanent.
The decision, which had been expected, stems from Howe's entering a guilty plea in Montana to attempted possession of cocaine and marks the first time a baseball commissioner has permanently suspended a player for a drug-related matter.
The Players Association will challenge the suspension in an arbitration hearing, which is most likely to be held Monday.
The union had filed a grievance against Vincent's indefinite suspension of Howe June 8, but the hearing before the arbitrator, George Nicolau, was adjourned after a day to await a definite term from the commissioner.


Chemical-Arms Ban Written; Fast Action Asked
After eight years of negotiations, the 39 countries trying to draw up a treaty outlawing chemical weapons in the world have been presented with a draft text that they are being asked to accept as it stands without further changes by the end of August.
The compromise text, prepared by Germany, was given to the members of the United Nations Conference on Disarmament in Geneva this week.
Officials say that it falls short of some American goals in the negotiation and that the Bush Administration has not yet decided whether to accept it.


Paderewski to Go Home, 51 Years After His Death
After years of discussion and planning, the remains of the pianist, composer and statesman Ignace Jan Paderewski are to be returned to his native Poland.
Tomorrow his body is to be moved from Arlington National Cemetery to the main chapel at Fort Meyer, Va., where he will lie in state.
He will arrive in Warsaw on Monday, the 51st anniversary of his death.


Stride Rite reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.70
5.73
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.63
3.66
5.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.71
3.76
5.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.77
6.82
8.20
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.82
7.84
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.73
8.75
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.53
6.54
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Before Vote In Trenton, Anger Rises Over Cuts
Environmentalists, legislators and state department heads painted a bleak picture today of a New Jersey plagued by closed parks, fouled air and water, bulging prisons and sweeping layoffs as a result of the austere Republican budget whose passage is almost certain in a floor vote scheduled for Thursday.
Some of the bleak predictions were aired at a rump committee session held by Democrats frustrated by Republicans' refusal to hear any criticism of their proposed $1.1 billion in cuts, which would cut a swath across the entire government.


AROUND CITY HALL WITH: Andy Logan; Memories of Eight Mayors
ANDY LOGAN, the 72-year-old dean of the City Hall press corps, is giving you a "2-cent tour" of the place.
She has reported on eight mayors in her 50 years at The New Yorker, and at the drop of a fedora she will reach back to the days of Fiorello H. La Guardia, which, she suggests, were not all fire engines and funny papers.
"I can scare the hell out of the kids by telling them that the Mayor when I first came down here was La Guardia," she says.
"They help me in and out of the room for at least an hour after that."


Vikonics Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


White House Banking Bill
The Bush Administration today sent to the Congress a bill that would ease the regulation of banks.
"The S.&amp; L. crisis taught us the perils of weak regulation," Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said in a statement.
"Now we are learning about the costs of overregulation. This bill is designed to return the law to the proper balance."


Culbro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Au Pair's Lawyer Blames 2 Men for Fire That Killed Infant
For the first time in court today, the defense lawyer for a Swiss au pair named a convicted felon as the man who she said really set the fire that took the life of a 3-month-old girl last December.
The lawyer also asserted that the boyfriend of the infant's half sister arranged the arson and acted as the lookout.
But after hearing the arguments with the jury out of the courtroom, Judge Donald N. Silverman said the defense lawyer, Laura A. Brevetti, had based her theory on "wild speculation" and "a whole lot of nonsense." Then, in a major setback for the defense, the judge barred any evidence of other possible arson fires from being mentioned to the jury.


4 Straight Victories! Break Up the Mets? No, Not Quite Yet
Dwight Gooden's personal study of pitching art appreciation goes on.
The realization that modest, muted masterpieces can be as rewarding as extravagant, free-form explosions of strikeouts and shutout innings has come slowly, at a cost in personal ego and occasionally at a price on the field for the Mets.
But it is coming for Gooden, and the line he improvised against the Cubs last night was exquisite both in his mind's eye and to the rest of Shea Stadium: eight innings, six hits, one earned run, one intentional walk, three strikeouts.
The achievement, one crafted as much by subtle strategy as pure power, meant a 3-2 victory for the Mets and Gooden's first triumph in more than a month.


Players International Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Treasury Issues Increase in Price
Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates moved lower yesterday, propelled by a report on the economy that was weaker than expected and a successful auction of $10.5 billion of five-year Treasury notes.
The market's firm tone was established almost immediately after the Government reported that new orders for durable goods contracted by 2.4 percent in May.
Most Wall Street economists had projected that new orders would post a fairly healthy increase.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
STURDY sawhorses are convenient for many home repairs and for creating improvised flat surfaces like tables and desks.
Designs like the one described below are best because the legs splay both outward and toward the ends for maximum stability.
Such sawhorses are challenging to build; they offer practice in virtually all essential carpentry skills, and the finished product is rewarding as an artful example of form following function.


Apogee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Royal Gold Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Colonialism Haunts Armenians and Kurds
To the Editor:
In "Blood Tide Rising" (editorial, June 8), which discusses Armenian claims to Nagorno-Karabakh in the light of ethnic conflicts in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union, you strongly advocate preserving international borders because this is of paramount importance to the world community.
However, if peace and stability are true goals, there is no long-term gain in maintaining a political system that was created to support imperialist notions of the past.
Today's borders, created largely by tyrants and colonialist empires, are the cornerstone of today's international problems.
It should not be forgotten that when the British created the map of the Middle East after World War I, they consciously ignored the territorial rights of indigenous peoples like the Armenians and the Kurds.
Later on, Stalin, in an effort to divide and conquer his subject nations, worked with Turkey's Kemal Ataturk to dilute Armenian strength and viability in the Caucasus by awarding huge chunks of historic Armenia to its hostile neighbors.
As we can see, the results of these actions have been disastrous.
But especially galling is your tone, which suggests that economic and political viability are of a higher order than human rights and the self-determination of all peoples.
Today's problems in Nagorno-Karabakh, Kurdistan and other areas are related to the modern world's inability to correct past mistakes.
It's fine to talk of "reinforcing minority rights," but that is not enough.
When Azerbaijan closes its borders to impose a "final solution" to its Armenian problem, what then?
What will the international community do for the Armenians?
We must reflect on the lessons of the past.
What did the world do for the Armenians living under Ottoman rule, for Jews living under Hitler's vile despotism or for Kurds in Iraq?
Sadly, those in power still place minority rights low on the priority list.
True peace will never come about until national minority groups like the Armenians, Kurds and others can govern themselves and not be subject to the rule of those who despise them.
CRAIG S. WALLEN Executive Secretary Armenian Human Rights Committee Erdenheim, Pa., June 8, 1992


Central Guaranty reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COURT OPENS WAY FOR DAMAGE SUITS OVER CIGARETTES
The Supreme Court today opened the door wide to damage suits by smokers against the cigarette industry in a surprisingly broad decision rejecting many of the industry's arguments that such lawsuits were barred by Federal law.
The decision, in its most significant aspects, overturned rulings by a Federal appeals court in a case brought against three cigarette manufacturers by the family of Rose Cipollone, a Little Ferry, N. J., woman who died of lung cancer in 1984 after smoking for 42 years.
The vote in most parts of the decision was 7 to 2.


CHRONICLE
As the Presidential campaign rolls along, spelling seems to be emerging as a hot topic.
Last month, for example, AMANDA GOAD, 13 years old, had just won the 1992 National Spelling Bee in Washington and was walking down K Street, when who should appear but ROSS PEROT, who until then had not had much to say about spelling (never mind foreign and domestic policy).
"He was with a crowd of press people and admirers," Amanda, who lives in Richmond, said the other day.
"We pushed through the crowd and someone introduced me as being the winner of the spelling bee. He hugged me, congratulated me and asked me what the winning word was. When I told him, he spelled it, 'l-y-c-e-u-m,' and I told him, 'That is right.' He said, 'Congratulations. I can still spell.' "


New Coalition in Suffolk Passes Budget Plan
Faced with what he described as "one of the most dangerous deadlocks in Suffolk County history," County Executive Robert J. Gaffney today announced the formation of a new bipartisan coalition in the county Legislature that immediately approved a plan to help resolve a $100 million gap in the county's $1.3 billion budget.
In forming the caucus, Mr.
Gaffney, a Republican who took office six months ago, turned the political structure of the 18-member county Legislature upside down by abandoning efforts to govern with the help of the 11-member Republican-Conservative majority.


Indictment Cites Mob Infiltration in New York Post Union
Through control of a newspaper deliverers union, a Mafia family stole more than 10,000 copies of The New York Post a day over the last five years and used the newspaper's loading docks as headquarters for extortions, loan sharking, gun sales and the engineering of narcotics deals, a state indictment charged yesterday.
As a spinoff of the racketeering investigation, the authorities said they uncovered a scheme by two Post executives that inflated the newspaper's daily circulation figures by 50,000 copies until two months ago.
The New York Post Company pleaded guilty to a felony charge of fraud and was fined $10,000.


Shuttle Begins 13-Day Trip To Study the Uses of Gravity
Dashing skyward ahead of approaching thunderstorms, the space shuttle Columbia roared into orbit today on a 13-day mission to see if the lack of gravity in space can be put to use solving problems on Earth.
Columbia and its seven-member crew lifted off only five minutes late, at 12:12 P.M.
E.D.T., after launching controllers waited for openings in passing clouds.
The shuttle bolted to an orbit 184 miles above Earth to begin the work of the first United States Microgravity Laboratory.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Voices: Boston; Mixed Reviews on Bush's Foreign Decisions
Political experts, local officials and ordinary voters in several cities were asked to appraise President Bush's record on foreign policy.
Mark Brogioli  27 years old; insurance adjuster at Safety Insurance in downtown Boston
He's paid no attention to domestic affairs, or very little -- he's spent too much time concentrating on international affairs.
I think he should be a little more interested in what's going on at home.
He's lucky that things have sort of fallen into place as far as what's going on in the former Soviet Union -- I think that would have happened regardless of who was President.
He seems to be letting Russia make the moves and then responding to them.


Damage From New Jersey Tornado Is Assessed


Subpar-Growth Signs Help Prices
Additional signs of subpar economic growth drove up prices of Treasury notes and bonds yesterday and caused long-term interest rates to fall to their lowest level since early February.
An upward revision by the Commerce Department in first quarter economic growth to 2.7 percent from 2.4 percent was discounted by traders as old news, even though the rate of expansion was the strongest since the fourth quarter of 1988.


Agency Quits 3 Accounts
McCaffrey &amp; McCall in New York said yesterday that it was resigning the Air Canada, Greater New York Savings Bank and Unisa Shoe accounts, which have combined billings estimated at $5 million.


Breaking Tax Pledge Hurt His Credibility, President Tells ABC
President Bush says his decision to break a campaign pledge by raising taxes in 1990 "undermined to some degree" his credibility with the American people.
Mr.
Bush first repudiated the tax increase in March, as he struggled to beat back the challenge from Patrick J. Buchanan.
The conservative commentator was then contesting the Republican nomination for President and was battering Mr.
Bush with television commercials reminding voters that he had gone back on his "Read my lips, no new taxes" pledge of 1988.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about foreign ownership of auto factories in the United States misstated the scope of organizing by the United Automobile Workers.
Volkswagen's plant in New Stanton, Pa., was the one wholly foreign-owned operation where workers were represented by the union, but the U.A.W. has organized workers in several plants that are joint ventures between Japanese and American auto makers.


INDUSTRIES GAINING BROAD FLEXIBILITY ON AIR POLLUTION
The Bush Administration today issued a rule that will give manufacturers broad authority to increase substantially the amount of hazardous pollutants they can pour into the atmosphere beginning in the mid-1990's.
The Environmental Protection Agency reluctantly issued the new rule, which had been championed by the President's Council on Competitiveness, a Cabinet group headed by Vice President Dan Quayle.
The rule will be central to a system of pollution permits that will be established over the next 10 years under the Clean Air Act of 1990.


Review/Film; An Officer Too Involved in His Work
After Michael and Karen Carr (Kurt Russell and Madeleine Stowe) are frightened in their home by a menacing burglar, they are grateful to the police officer who comes to their rescue.
Too grateful, as a matter of fact.
Pete Davis (Ray Liotta) has barely arrived at the crime scene before he is warmly accepted by both Michael, who is impressed with Pete's skill and daring, and Karen, who is impressed for more basic reasons.
There are obvious impediments to a friendship between these three, not least of them the way Pete looks at Karen.
But for a while those obstacles are conveniently ignored.
Michael and Karen can be described as comfortable, economically and otherwise.
But Pete appears deeply uneasy.
Merely being in the presence of this successful entrepreneur and his glamorous wife makes Pete fidget, as does the sight of their well-appointed home.
But he is disarmed by their eagerness, and so he talks about his private life with Karen.
And he provides some vicarious excitement for the sedate, law-abiding Michael by taking him out for a Los Angeles police officer's night on the town.


Serbs React With Anguish As the U.N. Sanctions Bite
The war in Bosnia has come home to Serbia.
Though it has not experienced any fighting on its soil or lost a single inch of territory, this largest and most populous part of fragmented Yugoslavia is reeling under United Nations sanctions imposed to punish its leaders for provoking and sustaining fighting across its borders.


Price-Fixing or Charity? Trial of M.I.T. Begins
The values of competition collided with the virtues of charity today in the opening arguments of a Federal trial in which the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is charged with conspiring with other elite universities to fix prices, stifle competition and make it more expensive to obtain a college degree.
In opening arguments in the long awaited antitrust trial, M.I.T.'s lawyers acknowledged that the institute had shared information for more than 30 years with members of the so-called Overlap Group, which comprised the eight universities in the Ivy League plus M.I.T.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton and Tsongas Meet, With No Endorsement
Seeking broader support for his Presidential candidacy among Democrats and independents, Gov.
Bill Clinton spent an hour late Wednesday in Boston with former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, trying, unsuccessfully, to reconcile their political differences, particularly over economic policy.
Mr.
Clinton later described the meeting as "very good" and as part of a continuing dialogue with the man who was his strongest opponent in the early primaries.


Democrats Plan 3 Keynote Speakers
Democrats are expected to announce three keynote speakers for their convention in New York next month: former Representative Barbara Jordan of Texas, Gov.
Zell Miller of Georgia and Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey.
They will address the convention on Monday evening, July 13, the opening day of the gathering.
Ms.
Jordan, who served in Congress from 1972 to 1978, is a professor of ethics and government at the University of Texas at Austin.
She delivered a keynote address at the 1976 convention that nominated Jimmy Carter.


Hollywood Has Long History of Conservatism; On Broadway Too
To the Editor:
No one is as intolerant of an artist's political views as those in the artistic community, and your conclusion that Hollywood today is as fascistic toward conservatives as the 1940's and 50's were toward liberals (news article, May 31 and June 1) is proved every day.
And that goes for the movies and television shows produced.
I defy you to name a movie, prime-time network television series, or made-for-television movie that espouses any sort of intelligent conservative position (outside of mawkish and unrealistic "family values" or the vigilante justice dispensed in the clones of "Dirty Harry").


Bonilla Might Smile, But Pictures Don't Lie
If New Yorkers were a cynical lot, they would surely label the tale that the Mets wove yesterday as spin control of the first order.
You see, the Mets found themselves in yet another position of having a lot of explaining to do.
Not necessarily about a 9-2 loss to the Chicago Cubs but about the manner in which they, or one Met in particular, conducted business during the course of that loss.


Study Shows Air Bags Save Lives, But Says Seat Belts Are Needed, Too
The first Federal study of automobile air bags in actual traffic accidents has found that they are far more effective than seat belts alone, reducing the risk of death in head-on collisions by 26 percent and in all serious accidents by 13 percent.
In making the study public yesterday, the Department of Transportation cautioned that air bags worked this well only when occupants were also wearing a properly buckled seat belt over both lap and shoulder; other studies have found that without a belt, air bags are of slight benefit.
And there are lingering questions, not addressed in the new study, over the risk of injury from the bags themselves, which use hot gases to inflate at high impact.


Legislature Passes Reduced Budget and Sends It to Florio
Over the outcries of Democrats who called it "mean-spirited, heartless" and "a flimflam and a shell game," the Republican majority in the Legislature approved a scaled-back state budget tonight that made good on its promise to reduce taxes sharply and pare government to the bone.
By a vote of 23 to 13 in the State Senate and 56 to 21 in the Assembly, almost totally along partisan lines, the Legislature sent a spending plan to Gov.
Jim Florio that eliminated $1.1 billion from the proposed budget he introduced five months ago.


BALKANS IN UNITY WITH EX-SOVIETS
Eleven nations of the Balkan Peninsula and the former Soviet Union joined today in a group for economic cooperation.
In a solemn ceremony, Presidents Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine, Eduard A. Shevardnadze of Georgia and Prime Ministers Suleyman Demirel of Turkey and Constantine Mitsotakis of Greece signed the Declaration of Black Sea Economic Cooperation.


Scholarships to Be Cut
Purdue, Iowa and five other Big Ten Conference schools are offering to reduce scholarships in minor sports as punishment for violating National Collegiate Athletic Association limits on financial aid to athletes.
In Des Moines, JIM DELANY, the conference commissioner, said the offer was made after an audit disclosed that the schools provided excess scholarship assistance in the 1989-90 and 1990-91 school years.


Lindros Appears Before Arbitrator
Under secrecy and tight security, Eric Lindros testified today in the arbitration of his disputed trade.
Lindros, his agent, Rick Curran, and his father, Carl Lindros, were brought into a conference room at the Hotel Radisson Gouverneurs by a back door that they reached by taking a freight elevator and walking through a kitchen.
The route helped them avoid a group of about two dozen reporters gathered for the fifth day of arbitration hearings.


Review/Dance; Exploring Possibilities In an Updated Classic
Casts do make a difference but only to a degree.
The Kirov Ballet's "Swan Lake" at the Metropolitan Opera House still has the built-in choreographic and dramatic liabilities that marred its opening night.
But three subsequent casts gave different insights into Oleg Vinogradov's new staging.
On Tuesday night Olga Chenchikova, the senior ballerina on this visit, offered a true Odette, a swan queen of depth and sorrowful mien, through her eloquently lyrical phrasing.
As Odile, the evil counterpart to Odette, she moved too heavily to make her aggressiveness seductive.
But her partner and husband in real life, Makhar Vaziev, offered the best Siegfried in the series, not spectacular but polished in his dancing, noble in line and responsive as a cavalier.


In New York State, Crime Victims Get Their Day in Court
To the Editor:
Andrew Stein, in "Why Gag the Victim?" (Op-Ed, May 23), would lead one to believe victims of crime in New York State cannot speak at the sentencing of their victimizers.
Not true.
While New York does not have a statute mandating such a practice, the practice has been in effect in New York courts.
In my 14 years in the crime-victims movement, I know of no case where a victim of a felony in New York was directly denied the right to make a victim's impact statement before the court.
When we attempted to legislate such statements as a right for victims, the Assembly blocked passage by trying to force a ridiculous provision to allow defense counsel to cross-examine the victim at the time the statement is given.


TV Weekend; Winning His Heart, Not to Mention His Gallbladder
Pay television has discovered there's more than one way to tap vividly into the sex-and-violence market.
Showtime has enlisted the director Zalman King ("9 1/2 Weeks") to stretch his trademark kinkiness in an anthology series called "Red Shoe Diaries." Home Box Office, with a somewhat uneasy wink, just keeps bringing back the "Tales From the Crypt" series, its half-hour episodes inspired by E. C. Comics from the 1950's.
A fourth season begins on HBO tomorrow, 10:30 P.M. to midnight, with a trilogy of new stories.
The Crypt-Keeper, a puppet designed by the special-effects wizard Kevin Yagher ("A Nightmare on Elm Street"), is back at the beginning and end of each tale, cackling away over his atrocious and frequently leering puns.
Wondering if the fastest way to a woman's heart might be with a pickax, he segues with campy insidiousness into "None but the Lonely Heart," directed by Tom Hanks, who also puts in an appearance in a bit part.


Rouson Testifies That He Faked Injury by Order
Lee Rouson, a former Giants fullback from the 1985 through the 1990 seasons, said today under oath that during his rookie season in 1985, in the Giants' last preseason game at the Pittsburgh Steelers, he was asked to fake an injury so that the team could protect him on its injured-reserve list.
Rouson testified in the McNeil v. the National Football League antitrust suit over free agency in United States District Court that the Giants' trainer, Ronny Barnes, had asked him to fake an injury.
But then when another Giants running back, Rob Carpenter, was injured during the game, Barnes then told Rouson not to fake the injury.


Review/Theater; Al Pacino's Very Personal Vision Makes a Splash
Bejeweled and spangled, Al Pacino swaggers onstage as King Herod in "Salome" and raises his voice almost to a falsetto.
He does not edge into this role; he dives headlong.
It is a daring performance that flirts dangerously with camp but stays strictly within the character, at least the character as Mr.
Pacino envisions him.
The actor is performing the Oscar Wilde play in repertory with Ira Lewis's "Chinese Coffee" at Circle in the Square.
"Salome" closes July 23, "Chinese Coffee" July 15.


Reagan Can't Shift the Blame to Congress
To the Editor:
In "Bush Leads the Way" (Op-Ed, June 10), Ronald Reagan makes the assertion that Congress "has shown little restraint in spending" and therefore Congress alone is responsible for our debt-burdened condition.
The former President also accuses unnamed "pundits" of playing "the blame game" by critizing the White House for this mountain of debt.
It is true that only Congress can pass a budget (and therefore must shoulder some of the responsibility for the fiscal disaster of the 1980's), but it is the President who offers a budget to Congress.
Mr.
Reagan's claim that Congress is solely to blame for the massive budget deficits is similar to A blaming B because B did not prevent A from committing a crime -- that is, it is patently false.


CHRONICLE
Twenty-five years after he was supposed to have graduated from high school, BILLY JOEL received his diploma this week at Hicksville High School on Long Island.
The 43-year-old singer and songwriter didn't graduate with his class in 1967 because, as RICHARD HOGAN, the school's principal explained yesterday, "he was missing one credit in English." He was working as a musician and overslept, missing an English exam, said Mr.
Hogan, who was Mr.
Joel's fifth-grade gym teacher.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
First Bank Systems Inc., a Minneapolis bank holding company, is offering $125 million in 8 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 at a price of 99.832 to yield 8.022 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities.
Noncallable, the notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P. *
Mexico has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering in the United States of $250 million in 10-year notes through the underwriters Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., Merrill Lynch, and J. P. Morgan Securities. *
New Orleans Exhibition Hall Authority is offering $22 million in tax-exempt hotel occupancy tax refunding bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Yields range from 3.125 percent in 1993 to 5.4 percent in 1999, with all the bonds insured by the Ambac Indemnity Corporation.
Common  *
BPI Environmental Inc., Taunton, Mass., has filed for a public offering of 1.4 million units, each unit consisting of one common share, one class A redeemable common stock purchase warrants, and one class B redeemable common stock purchase warrant, through Thomas James Associates. *
Colorado Memory Systems Inc., Loveland, Colo., has filed for an initial public offering of 5.4 million common shares through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. *
Medrad Inc., Pittsburgh, a maker of equipment and disposable products that enhance the clarity of medical images, has filed for an initial public offering of one million common shares through Parker/Hunter Inc. *
Pyxis Corp., San Diego, a manufacturer of systems that automate the distribution, management and control of medications and supplies in hospitals, has filed for an initial public offering of four million common shares at an estimated price of $12 to $14 a share through Merrill Lynch.
Ratings  *
Orion CapitalCorp.'s subordinated debt rating has been increased to BB, from BB-, and preferred stock rating to BB-, from BB+, by S.&amp; P.


Politics Intrudes Into Police Force
Mayor David N. Dinkins's public embrace yesterday of a proposed civilian board to review complaints against the police was the latest instance of policy making imposed on a Police Department under siege.
In terms of timing, it struck some people as perhaps the most stunning of the disparate cases.
The New York City Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, has campaigned against an all-civilian board since his appointment more than two years ago.
For weeks he has struggled to assess the extent of corruption by police officers and their superiors and to respond appropriately.


McEnroe Isn't Ready For British Museum
The bright afternoon haze had turned to twilight above Wimbledon's center court, and sudden death was in the air.
But four hours after the start of a classic clash between former champions and self-described dinosaurs in a sport custom-made for teen-agers, John McEnroe and Pat Cash were still locked in a struggle.
The willowy McEnroe was, as usual, all hue and cry: He tore at his receding hairline, he dove to the ground, he somersaulted into the net, and he wore an expression of such pain that any opponent with half a heart would have found it tempting to put him out of his misery.


BellSouth Issue Is Priced
A $250 million debenture offering by BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., a unit of the BellSouth Corporation, was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Review/Art; A Conceptual Face-Off at 2 Whitney Branches
No one has yet calculated the half-life of Conceptual Art, which has for at least two decades made photographs and texts, as well as social critiques, an indelible part of contemporary art.
But the influence of this often cerebral art movement is showing no signs of abating, and is especially visible in a pair of group exhibitions at Manhattan branches of the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Both shows have highly specific themes.
"The Power of the City, the City of Power," at the Whitney's Federal Plaza branch in the Wall Street area, examines the ways in which several generations of artists have used the metropolis as the setting and the subject for their work.
At the Whitney Museum at the Equitable Center in midtown, "Dirt and Domesticity: Constructions of the Feminine" focuses on the portrayal of women, especially in their roles as homemakers or housekeepers.
But much of the work in both shows is either Conceptual, or pre- or post-Conceptual, in nature and as a result the two exhibitions tell us a good deal about the movement's past, present and possible future.


Foreign Affairs; Death and Indecision
World leaders drown in crises and killing -- from Cambodia to South Africa to Eastern Europe.
Institutions now in place lack the cohesiveness and strength to support effective intervention.
Western leaders themselves do not have the will or the political backing or the money to act decisively and are overwhelmed by their own domestic troubles.
Not least, the international crises -- rooted in centuries of ethnic, racial and religious bloodletting -- seemingly defy solution.
Morality requires doing everything possible to stop slaughter everywhere.
Practicality dictates an awful kind of international triage, choosing whom to save and whom to let die.


Havel Calls for Preservation Of United Czechoslovakia
President Vaclav Havel appealed today to Czechs and Slovaks to remain one nation, but he acknowledged that prospects for the 74-year-old union had dimmed.
"Perhaps we must truly divide if we are to unite again," Mr.
Havel said, a touch of sadness in his mellifluous baritone voice.


Emergency or Ploy?; Railroads Can Turn Sense of Crisis To Advantage Under 1926 Labor Law
As Congress confronted a costly railroad labor dispute, the antagonists bitterly disputed whether the shutdown of most of the nation's freight railroads was a crisis created by hardline unions or a disruption devised by railroads taking advantage of a decades-old labor law intended to encourage negotiation.
The debate goes to the heart of labor relations in the railroad industry, for on this issue hinges the rights of rail unions to strike, even in a limited fashion, against an industry that has been increasingly aggressive in cutting its labor costs.


Art in Review
Group Show  Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through July 31
All the work in this strong group show shares a painterly approach to geometric abstraction.
Harriet Korman, who began as a Minimalist, covers her surfaces with fleet brush strokes, more like watercolor than oil paint, over which she lays the ghost of a grid structure: a few black intersecting lines in one case, a network of bold triangular shapes in another.
A similar motif also appears in Martha Diamond's "Domes," but here the gold, maroon and orange forms are inverted and seem to be dropping like pods from a sharp blue sky.
In her "Bone Fire," a wavy horizontal line at midpoint and a cascade of colors pouring down the painting's center neatly fracture the composition into even quarters.


Robert de Lone, 52, a Consultant Who Sought Changes in Schools
Robert H. de Lone, a consultant on education who advocated school reforms to lift children out of poverty, died on Tuesday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
He was 52 years old and lived in Mount Airy, Pa.
His family said he died of lymphoma.


National AIDS Panel Says Administration Has Not Done Enough
The National Commission on AIDS said today that the Bush Administration had failed the nation by showing poor leadership in combating the AIDS epidemic.
The commission released a statement after what its members said was an extraordinarily disappointing meeting on Wednesday on AIDS and government leadership with Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services.


F.A.A. Official Doubts Method In Check for Ice
Federal aviation officials cast doubt yesterday on the effectiveness of checking for ice on airplane wings by looking through the cockpit window.
That was the method the co-pilot of a USAir jet said he used before the jet crashed on takeoff from La Guardia Airport on a snowy March night, killing 27 people.
Earlier this week a USAir official, testifying at a hearing on the crash, termed the method an effective way of checking for ice.
The method is one standard way that flight crews make the check.


Sounds Around Town
All His Own
Donald Brown, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Brown, a gifted pianist and composer, will be appearing through tomorrow night with two exceptional musicians, the bassist Charnett Moffett and the vibraphonist Steve Wilson.
The treat will be hearing them work their way through Mr.
Brown's compositions; he's known as one of the finest younger composers around, and he'll be on one of the city's best pianos.
On Sunday, the drummer Eric Walker will take Mr.
Wilson's place.
Shows through Sunday are at 10, 12 and 2; there is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
Living Myth
Ira Sullivan, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
He'll play saxophone, then trumpet, then a bit of flute, and it's all good.
Ira Sullivan, who rarely plays New York, is one of these underground legends, somebody with a sharp harmonic sense and a real ability to make music.
He's backed by a good trio.
Shows are at 9:30, 11 and 1.
There is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $15, and the minimum is $10; on Sunday, it's $12 and $7.50.
Quirks and Chops
Fish and Roses, CBGB, 315 Bowery, Lower East Side of Manhattan, 982-4052.
It's a quirky mixture of southern country purity, leftist politics and avant-gardism, but it works.
The band, just back from a tour of Europe, can rock, has its jazz elements and has a sense of humor.
They'll be joined by David Kilgour and the 3D's, two rockish bands from New Zealand with glowing reputations.
The music tonight starts at 9; there is an $8 cover charge.


Critic's Choice/Art; Guggenheim: Virtue Rewarded and Flaws Fixed
Even if the rotunda by Frank Lloyd Wright did not look so marvelous after its renovation, the reopening of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum on Sunday would be a cause for celebration.
It has been more than two years since its landmark collection of 20th-century art has been on view here.
Far more of it than was exhibited before can now be displayed thanks to the addition of a wing.
The wing is hardly perfect -- banal on the exterior and compromised on the interior by elevators and walls that interrupt the display spaces.
But it provides several floors of the sort of flat-floored, flat-walled galleries that Wright's design, for all its considerable merit as an exhibition space for easel-sized pictures, conspicuously lacked.
A mostly remarkable group of works from the collection now occupy the new wing, while the rotunda has wisely been given over to a terrific, quietly exuberant fluorescent light display by Dan Flavin, which highlights the sculptural brilliance of Wright's building and the splendor of its renovation.
The works from the permanent collection have not always been chosen with care or arranged with sensitivity, and one hopes that this has more to do with the desire by the museum to get as much on view as possible for the opening than with any philosophy by the director, Thomas Krens, and his staff.
Pictures are crowded together and sometimes oddly juxtaposed -- why the jarring juxtaposition of Cubist Picasso and early Renoir in the section of paintings from the Justin K. Thannhauser Collection, or the Chinese-menu-like, one-by-each-artist approach in an overstuffed gallery of art from the 1950's?
There are faint and disturbing echoes here of the bombastic contemporary German paintings show that Mr.
Krens organized a few years ago.


Guild Fights Daily News Plan
The Newspaper Guild has denounced Mortimer B. Zuckerman's demand for a free hand in forming a news staff as a condition for buying The Daily News, although other unions did respond positively to his proposal to buy the bankrupt paper.
Mr.
Zuckerman, the owner of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, has asked to be permitted to evaluate the news staff for 18 months and replace those he regarded as not meeting standards of journalistic excellence.
Unions usually view job security as among a contract's most important elements and insist that involuntary work-force cuts be done by seniority.


INSIDE
Kidnapping or Murder?
The fate of a missing oil executive and where he met it could determine where the case is brought.
Page B1.
A New Jersey couple are indicted in the case, and prosecutors assert that others were involved.
Page B4.
U.S.
Finds Air Bags Effective
A Federal study found that automobile air bags were far more effective in preventing deaths in traffic accidents than seat belts alone.
Page A10.
Test Scores Decline


Students Discover Replicas of Columbus's Fleet


New Campaigns
*
To spice up the typically dry advertisements for books, Carol Publishing Group, New York, is introducing a print ad with a comparative challenge.
The ad, created by an in-house team, compares two books written about the Princess of Wales.
The book published by Carol Publishing, "Diana -- a Princess and Her Troubled Marriage," is shown accompanied by statistics like the number of pages, the price of the book and cost per page.
"Diana -- Her True Story," published by Simon &amp; Schuster, is shown with less adequate statistics.
The headline reads, "More Diana for Your Dollar." The ad appears in The New York Times today on page C25. *
In an effort to portray Miller Lite as a beer with universal appeal, Miller Brewing is introducing two commercials showing partying aliens who travel to Earth just to seek out the brew.
The 30-second and 60-second spots, created by Leo Burnett Chicago, show the visitors dancing in a field to Miller Lite's theme song.


In New York State, Crime Victims Get Their Day in Court; The Parole Process
To the Editor:
Re "Why Gag the Victim?" (Op-Ed, May 23) by Andrew Stein, New York City Council President: Allow me to clarify the place of the crime victim in the parole process.
For years the Board of Parole has considered in its release decisions any written statements submitted by crime victims or their survivors about the crime and its impact on them, and their recommendation regarding an offender's release.
Last year I discussed with Barbara Leak, chairman of the Crime Victims Board, extending this right to those who feel a need to express themselves directly.
I decided to permit victims to make an oral statement in person to a member of the Board of Parole.
The board treats any victim statements, whether written or oral, as confidential.


RESULTS PLUS
CYCLING  Hartwell Qualifies for U.S. Olympic Team
Erin Hartwell qualified for the United States Olympic team yesterday by winning the men's kilometer time trial in the United States Cycling Olympic trials and national championships in Blaine, Minn.
Hartwell, of Colorado Springs, earned his fourth national title and first Olympic berth with a time of 1 minute 6.51 seconds in the trial, a four-lap individual race against the clock.
Chris Coletta of Addison, Ill., was second in 1:07.54 and John Levkulic of Allentown, Pa., placed third in 1:07.95.
Only the champion qualifies for the Olympic team. (AP) Furlan Nears Tour Victory: An Italian cyclist, Giorgio Furlan, virtually clinched the Tour of Switzerland and Roberto Pagnin of Italy won the ninth leg of the race, which has one day to go.
Pagnin sprinted ahead of Stephan Joho of Switzerland at the end of the tough 96.1-mile Alpine stage in 4 hours 7 minutes 50 seconds. (AP) EQUESTRIAN  Dello Joio Is Victorious in Speed Stake  Norman Dello Joio, a member the Olympic United States Equestrian team, won the Acceleration National Insurance Speed Stake yesterday at the Lake Placid (N.Y.) Horse Show.
Dello Joio, 36 years old, of West Palm Beach, Fla., finished the 14-jump course without any errors in 55.27 seconds.
Leslie Lenehan, who took top honors at the competition Wednesday, beat Dello Joio in speed but was penalized after she knocked down a rail during one mount.
Her adjusted time of 59.46 netted her a six place finish out of 24 entries. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  South African Wins at 1,500 Meters  Elana Meyer of South Africa easily won the women's 1,500-meter run yesterday as her country, back in good standing in the track world, made its first appearance in the African Athletics Championships at Pamplemousses, Mauritius.
Meyer, a leading contender for an Olympic medal at the Barcelona Games next month in Spain, coasted to victory in 4 minutes 18.44 seconds, more than two seconds ahead of a fellow South African, Gwen Griffiths. (AP) SOFTBALL  U.S.
Is Still Unbeaten in Challenger Cup  The United States beat Australia, 1-0, and China, 3-2, yesterday to remain undefeated in the world women's softball Challenger Cup tournament.
The United States team leads the tournament standing with a 6-0 record, followed by China and Australia, at 4-2. (AP)


For Children
Ezra Jack Keats Storytelling Series  Prospect Park Ocean Avenue Playground Ocean Avenue entrance Flatbush Brooklyn (718) 788-0055 Recommended ages: 3 to 10 Sundays through July 26
Ezra Jack Keats was a children's author and illustrator whose mission, it seemed, was to write about inner-city children, both black and white, without making them appear the least bit oppressed by their surroundings.
His textured and hot brush strokes (the colors pink and orange come to mind) transcend his inauspicious settings: tenements with crumbling walls, hard-scrabble empty lots.
"The Snowy Day," a Caldecott Award winner and probably Mr.
Keats's most popular book, is about a boy named Peter, who appears in other Keats books.
"That book broke the color barrier in children's picture books," said Deborah Pope, the artistic director of the Ezra Jack Keats Foundation in Brooklyn.
"It's about a boy who happened to be black. He was an urban child who wasn't robbed of his childhood, but who lived in a real world, one where a lot of children live, and who don't necessarily think of it as ugly." Mr.
Keats, who grew up in East New York, Brooklyn, and died in 1983, was white.


Jessica Lange Misses 'Streetcar' Performances
Jessica Lange, who co-stars with Alec Baldwin in "A Streetcar Named Desire" at the Barrymore Theater, missed a performance of the show last night.
Ms.
Lange was taken ill during the Wednesday matinee and left the stage after the first act.
An understudy, Leslie Hendrix, finished that performance.
Ms.
Lange missed the Wednesday evening performance.


Cigarette Ruling: Hour of Confusion
For a long hour on Wednesday morning, a big news event threw Wall Street into the kind of uncertainty that traders love and analysts hate.
The first news of the Supreme Court's ruling on a case concerning cigarette makers' product liability was an eight-word electronic headline on the Bloomberg News Service that seemed to be bad news for tobacco stocks: "High Court Says Smokers May Sue Tobacco Companies."


House Approves Foreign Aid At Lowest Level Since 1977
The House voted today to spend $13.8 billion on foreign aid, the lowest total since 1977 and an amount the Bush Administration called "inadequate."
Final passage came on a surprisingly wide margin as the bill was supported by 297 members and opposed by 124.
Republicans backed it narrowly, 92 to 72.
Democrats voted for it by a wide margin, 205 to 51.
The House's one independent voted no.


Johnson Settles Suit
Denver Broncos receiver VANCE JOHNSON has reached a settlement in his lawsuit against Home Box Office, the cable TV network, for allegedly broadcasting footage of him in the nude in a locker room following a football game.
Details of the settlement were not available.
The civil suit did not specify an amount, but said it did exceed $50,000.
The suit chrged invasion of privacy, outrageous conduct, defamation and negligence.


Umpire Says Met Got His Due
The umpires who worked Monday's game when the Mets and the Cubs engaged in a dugout-clearing scrap were emphatic yesterday in insisting that Mets outfielder Bobby Bonilla was responsible for the escalation of the incident.
And the umpires, angered by the Mets' contention that the plate umpire, Larry Poncino, had lost his balance when he hit the ground in the fracas, said Bonilla fully deserved the two-game suspension the National League president, Bill White, ordered Wednesday.
"He gave me a whirl," Poncino said of Bonilla, whom the umpire had tried to restrain from going to the mound.
"He definitely threw me to the ground. I don't know what triggered it."


Perot Offered Money to Help Panama After U.S. Invasion
Ross Perot, the billionaire and prospective Presidential candidate, offered to give the Bush Administration $5 million to help rebuild Panama after the American invasion in December 1989, a White House official confirmed tonight.
President Bush later wrote Mr.
Perot to thank him for his offer, a deputy White House spokeswoman, Judy Smith, said.
But after Congress appropriated $420 million in aid to Panama, the contribution was deemed unnecessary, she said.


Hollywood Has Long History of Conservatism; Gratuitous Slogans
To the Editor:
Re your article on how political conservatives in the movie industry must hide (May 31 and June 1): One need only look at the hit film "Lethal Weapon 3" for a demonstration that in Hollywood leftism is alive and well and packaging its political slogans under the guise of entertainment.
Forget that the heroine (played by Rene Russo) is more macho (and violent) than either Danny Glover or Mel Gibson.
And forget all the jargon in the script about safe sex.
These elements are de rigueur in films today.
I'm objecting to the printed messages sneaked into scenes for no other reason than to express the dogmatic stance of a film maker at the expense of the audience.


Merrill Denies Improper Calls
Stump Merrill, who was the first manager of George Steinbrenner's exile as managing partner of the Yankees, has denied having received telephone calls from Steinbrenner last season, and yesterday he apparently repeated those denials in the commissioner's office.
The former manager met for about half an hour with Thomas Ostertag, major league baseball's general counsel, and afterward Commissioner Fay Vincent said he had no reason to alter his assessment from earlier in the week that he had no evidence that would affect Steinbrenner's return to active duty with the Yankees.


O.E.C.D. Cuts Growth Forecast for the Year
Drastically cutting its growth forecast for the year, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development says that the world economy remains mired in uncertainty, but predicts that a recovery will take hold in 1993.
In its semiannual report, the 24-nation organization slashed its estimate for economic expansion in 1992 to an anemic 1.8 percent from the 2.2 percent it had predicted in December.
The group attributed the enduring economic weakness to high German interest rates, the bursting of Japan's speculative bubble, Britain's persistent recession and wariness among businesses and consumers.


Sports of The Times; Lithuania Meets Some Old Friends
THERE is a basketball game tonight between Lithuania and what used to be called the Soviet Union.
Other people dreamed about this game before Sarunas Marciulionis dared imagine it.
Now he is a potent sixth man for the Golden State Warriors, but four years ago he was still wearing the old C.C.C.P. uniform, in the age when the Soviet Union took the best of many small republics.


Bush's Roles on World Stage: Triumphs, but Troubles, Too
Conventional wisdom holds that there are two George Bushes: the skilled architect of foreign policy and the neglectful caretaker of domestic affairs.
Even some people on the Bush team have come to cultivate this image, since it allows them to explain away the President's shortcomings at home by saying he was too busy saving the world abroad.
But in fact George Bush has also shown at least two personalities in his conduct of the nation's foreign policy.
He has often really been the consummate seasoned statesman, but at other times he has seemed distracted and ineffective in a world undergoing dizzying change.


Kidnapping or Murder? Suspects Are Silent
Nearly two months after his disappearance, the whereabouts of Sidney J. Reso, the 57-year-old president of Exxon International, remain unclear.
But the fate of the oil executive, and whether he met it within New Jersey, could determine not only the charges that are eventually brought in the case but where it will be tried and the severity of the sentence that is eventually meted out.
The couple suspected of the kidnapping, Arthur D. Seale and his wife, Irene J. Seale of Lebanon Township, N.J., were each indicted yesterday by a Federal grand jury in Newark on six counts of conspiracy, kidnapping and extortion.
If convicted, each could face life imprisonment on the kidnapping charges, plus 65 years on the others.


Assembly in Albany Passes Insurance Bill
The Assembly passed legislation today to establish a universal health insurance plan that would provide access to health care for all New Yorkers and would be financed largely through a payroll tax on employers.
Passage of the bill, sponsored by Assemblyman Richard N. Gottfried, a Manhattan Democrat, was considered symbolically important by lobbyists for health care groups because it marked the first time that a chamber of New York's Legislature has approved universal health coverage.


Market Place; UAL's Prospects For a Recovery
THE UAL Corporation's United Airlines is a colossus that spans the globe.
It is the only carrier in the United States that has a major route system to both the Pacific and Europe.
Yet in spite of its powerful route system, it has been unable to remain unscathed in the current round of fare cuts, rising fuel prices and uncertain future bookings.
And the economies of the United States, Japan and other big industrial countries remain in the doldrums.


Democrats Offer New Health-Care Plan
Seizing the initiative on a politically charged issue, House Democratic leaders today unveiled a health care proposal intended to contain costs and insure more than half of the 30 million Americans not covered by health insurance.
But the fate of the measure is uncertain at best.
Even if approved by Congress, it would probably face a veto by President Bush.


Armed Robber at Stein's Apartment Locks Two Sons in Bathroom
An armed robber entered the Upper East Side apartment of City Council President Andrew J. Stein last night and locked a baby sitter and Mr.
Stein's two young sons in a bathroom, the police said.
The sitter, who was not identified, and the boys, Benjamin, 6 years old, and Jake, 4, were not injured, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.
The robbery took place about 5:15 P.M. in Mr.
Stein's sixth-floor apartment in a luxury building with a circular driveway at 60 East 88th Street.
Detectives from the 19th Precinct were investigating.  'Grateful and Relieved'
A spokeswoman for Mr.
Stein, Victoria Streitfeld, said the City Council President was en route to a speaking engagement at the Spanish Institute at 68th Street and Park Avenue when he received a phone call in his official car informing him of the robbery.
He immediately went home.
"He's with his family," Ms.
Streitfeld said.
"He's obviously very concerned, but grateful that nobody was hurt."
In a written statement that was issued last night, Mr.
Stein said: "My wife and I are tremendously grateful and relieved that our children are safe tonight. Obviously, this has been a traumatic experience for our family, just as it would be for any other family."
Mayor David N. Dinkins said he had spoken by telephone with Mr.
Stein.
"He's fine," the Mayor said.
"The thing I was most concerned about is that this gunman locked the children in the bathroom. Jake and Benjamin were not upset about it, but Andy and I were saying we hope there will be no aftermath of this thing." Mayor's Concern
Although Mr.
Stein is considered the leading Democratic challenger to Mr.
Dinkins in the 1993 mayoral election, the Mayor said: "Whatever disputes that Andy Stein and I may have, we are still friends and he knows how much I care about children. In fact, I have a picture of Jake and Benjamin in my office."
Ms.
Streitfeld said the police had informed Mr.
Stein that it was a young man with a gun who entered the apartment.
"There's a doorman in the lobby," the spokeswoman said, "but as I understand it, he managed to get in through some back entrance."
Mayor Dinkins said the baby sitter had stepped out of the apartment for a few minutes and left the door unlocked.
"This intruder was trying doors and came in," the Mayor said. Held in Bathroom
Ms.
Streitfeld said the man kept the baby sitter and the boys in the bathroom for about 30 minutes.
"The baby sitter was forced to hand over cash, about $100," she said.
"They're not sure what else was taken during those 30 minutes."
Not too long before the robbery, Ms.
Streitfeld said, the two boys had returned home from day camp.
Mr.
Stein's wife, Lynn Forester, a lawyer and president of a firm that invests in telecommunications companies, was at work at the time of the robbery, and quickly returned home, Ms.
Streitfeld said.
The Mayor said the police "have a pretty good lead on who this is -- a photo ID from the security camera." Robbed in Central Park
Yesterday's incident was not Mr.
Stein's first brush with crime.
Several years ago, while he was walking his dog in Central Park, Ms.
Streitfeld said, a man with a knife stole his coat.
Mr.
Stein was not hurt.
He won a State Assembly seat on Manhattan's East Side in 1968 and became known for investigations into nursing home abuses in the 1970's.
Mr.
Stein, who twice defeated Mr.
Dinkins for the Manhattan Borough Presidency, was elected Council President in 1985.


James Stirling, 66, a Bold British Architect, Dies
James Stirling, the maverick British architect whose work brought life to several major movements in postwar architecture, died yesterday in London.
He was 66 years old and lived in London.
His office declined to give the cause of death.


Dinkins Names Police Corruption Panel and Urges Civilian Police Review
Widening a rift with his Police Commissioner, Mayor David N. Dinkins took two strong moves yesterday to assert more civilian control over the New York City Police Department.
Mr.
Dinkins appointed a five-member independent panel to investigate corruption and called on the City Council to pass legislation to establish an all-civilian agency to monitor charges of police brutality.


Kohlberg, Kravis Plans Stake in TW
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company said today that it would invest $300 million in TW Holdings Inc., a money-losing restaurant and food services company with headquarters here.
TW Holdings owns the Denny's restaurant chain, as well as 500 Hardee's, 250 Quincy's Family Steakhouses and the Canteen Corporation, a cafeteria and vending business.
In 1990, it consolidated those operations into a new, 17-story building in Spartanburg, home of the company's first Hardee's restaurant.


Changed Path for Court?; New Balance Is Held By 3 Cautious Justices
Defying almost all expectations, the Supreme Court has rebuffed the Bush Administration within the past week on two issues the Administration cares most about, religion and habeas corpus.
The setbacks were startling, raising these questions: Did the Administration's lawyers simply miscalculate, taking for granted that the Court would be receptive to their arguments?
Or is the Court itself changing, so that legal arguments that appeared perfectly calibrated for success when they were dispatched to the Court ended up missing the target by the time they landed?


Town Debates Its Decaying Sliver of Nixon's Life
This month, as the rest of the nation marks the 20th anniversary of the event that led to Richard M. Nixon's downfall, this small Orange County town, halfway between Yorba Linda and Whittier and not too far from San Clemente, was debating his beginnings and whether a remnant of them should be demolished or preserved.
It was here in August 1939, in what was then a small crossroads community surrounded by walnut, avocado and citrus groves, that the 26-year-old Mr.
Nixon set up a branch office for the Whittier law firm that had hired him two years earlier.
His arrival was front page news in The La Habra Star, in which Mr.
Nixon ran a small advertisement: Richard Nixon, Attorney at Law. 135 West Central.
Phone Whittier 81-265.


President Bush Initiates Education Legislation


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Platform; In a Final Draft, Democrats Reject a Part of Their Past
In a final draft of its platform for this year's elections, the Democratic Party not only attacks the Reagan-Bush Administrations, but also spurns much of the "big government theory" that Democrats have embraced for decades.
The Democratic National Committee today issued the final draft, which reflects the political philosophy of Gov.
Bill Clinton, who has clinched the party's Presidential nomination.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  BOOMERANG HITS SERBIA
With the economy all but capsized and politics turning stormy, it is no longer possible for people in Belgrade to view the ferocious fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina as remote from their daily lives.
The war has come home to Serbia.
A1  Shelling abated around much of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
A8  LESS RIGOR FOR LITTLE PIONEERS
Children who once marched in stiff salute have shed their red kerchiefs at a summer camp in Russia.
The former "Pioneers" seem more relaxed, but the camps are threatened by the new attention paid to the bottom line.
A1  BRIDGING THE BLACK SEA


Charges of Profit Skimming Roil '92 Christopher Street Festival
When the women of "Dykes on Bikes" rev up their motorcycles on Sunday, they will lead off the city's largest gay event, the Lesbian and Gay Pride March.
As the parade winds down Fifth Avenue, organizers say a half-million people will participate in or watch the parade.
And as it has for 10 years, the march, which begins at 59th Street, will end at the foot of the Christopher Street Festival where participants spend millions of dollars at sausage stands and funnel cake booths, on mechanized rides and T-shirts sold by gay organizations like the Radical Ferries and the Gay Men's Heath Crisis.


Fund Plans Rights Complaint To Block Trenton Welfare Curb
The NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund will file a civil rights complaint on Monday seeking to block New Jersey from refusing additional benefits to welfare mothers who have more children while in the welfare program, a lawyer for the fund said today.
Alan Jenkins, assistant counsel for the New York-based legal defense fund, said the organization would lodge an administrative complaint with the Civil Rights Division of the Federal Department of Health and Human Services maintaining that legislation signed into law by Gov.
Jim Florio last January violates the civil rights of black and Hispanic women on several grounds.


You're Not Alone, Kids. Santa Can't Wait Either.
IT'S all downhill from here for Dee Eschmann.
For six months, ever since Christmas, she's put up with her husband, Richard.
He thinks he's Santa Claus.
So, actually, does the entire community.
At Christmastime Dick Eschmann is a joy to be around.
He's so, well, jolly.
He forgets his troubles and any aches.
He lives for others' happiness.
He listens.
He laughs.
Oh, how he laughs!
He gives gifts.
He pats toddlers.
But then Christmas is over.
Poof!
Just like that.
The red suit gets stored.
The world turns gray.
Santa is forgotten in his off-season.
And Santa gets grumpy.


Test Scores Fall on Math And Reading
Every one of New York City's 32 school districts, whether middle class or poor, slumped in reading this year and all but two declined in mathematics, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez announced yesterday.
Even though an overall drop began to emerge two weeks ago as superintendents analyzed scores for the springtime reading and mathematics tests, the consistency of the decline throughout the city's neighborhoods came as a surprise in a system that usually has more mixed results.


Page Smith Bigelow, Episcopal Minister, 69
The Rev.
Page E. Smith Bigelow, one of the first women to be ordained in the Episcopal Church, died Wednesday in St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
She was 69 years old and lived in Maplewood, N.J.
She died of cardiac arrest after a lengthy illness, her family said.
A graduate of Wells College and the General Theological Seminary in New York City, she was ordained in January 1977 after spending two years as a deacon.
She served as a priest in the city's Episcopal Church Center, then as a vicar in West Milford, N.J.
For the past six years her home parish had been St.
George's Episcopal Church in the Diocese of Newark.


Quartet of Taiwan
The Neo-Classic Quartet of Taiwan is to perform three concerts this weekend.
The performances will be at 7:30 P.M. today and tomorrow and at 2 P.M. on Sunday at the Taipei Theater, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street, in mid-Manhattan.
The program includes Mozart's String Quartet in D (K. 575), Shostakovich's First String Quartet and a work by the Taiwanese composer Ma Shui-long.
The pianist Daming Zhu is to join the quartet for Dvorak's Piano Quintet in A (Op. 81).
Tickets: $5 and $8.
Information: (212) 373-1850.


Mets End Homestand With Rudest of Goodbyes
The homestand ended with the inning that wouldn't.
For the Mets, who gave away three outs before they recorded three, there were errors, plays not made, a home run.
Yesterday's game against the Chicago Cubs began and ended before Shea Stadium had a pulse.
The tabulation for the Mets after one inning wound up seven runs and no chance.
It got worse before the game was over, the Mets ultimately losing to the Cubs, 9-2.


Businesses Feel Shutdown
The effects of the freight railroad shutdown were keenly felt around the country yesterday as businesses from California farmlands to Midwestern steel mills found their stockpiles of material dwindling.
Some companies heavily dependent on the nation's rail system for the delivery of material and transport of manufactured products were already preparing to close some operations before Congress and President Bush acted overnight to end the shutdown.


For Apollo, Bookings Are Scarce
Despite the continued popularity of the weekly amateur night, the Apollo Theater itself has been floundering financially for years and is in the midst of being converted to nonprofit status.
By September ownership of the theater is expected to be transferred to the Apollo Theater Foundation, a nonprofit organization hopeful of improving the fabled theater's prospects, said a spokesman for the investment group that currently owns the theater.
In a given week, it is rare for the Apollo to have more than the amateur night and one other weekend concert booking.


5 Die in Plane Crash
At least five people were killed Wednesday night when a twin-engine airplane crashed and burned on a mountainside southeast of here.
The plane, a Mitsubishi MU-2 with five or six people aboard, went down on the west side of the Sacramento Mountains after taking off from the Alamogordo-White Sands Regional Airport about 11:30 P.M.
Helicopters reached the crash site, in steep, rugged terrain, early today and retrieved five bodies.


Critic's Notebook; Summer's Movies Give Literacy a Rest
IT'S not easy to evoke "Wayne's World," either the delirious five-minute accumulations of non sequiturs that became a weekly segment on "Saturday Night Live," or the spin-off, Penelope Spheeris's sweetly mad theatrical film that, according to the latest Variety, has so far earned $117,592,110 in the United States and Canada.
"Wayne's World," about two aging young men and their public-access television show, is not only one of the biggest hits of the summer season, but it's also a seminal entertainment.
It somehow manages to celebrate the new style of nearly illiterate movie that it is simultaneously sending up.
Or, as someone in the movie describes the public-access television show within, "I think it's two chimps on a davenport in a basement."


On My Mind; Perot's Best Day
A healthy thing happened to Ross Perot on the way to Election Day -- healthy for him, for his campaign and maybe even for the country.
Mr.
Perot stopped, turned, saw three shadows that have been following him around and confronted them.


Tokyo Journal; About the Health of Leaders, a Healthy Curiosity
The aging leaders are rumored to be ill, perhaps fatally ill.
Political forecasters record their appearances on television, scrutinizing the images for hints about how long they can hang on to power, and quietly adjust their guesses about how health will affect succession to the highest offices of government.
The press stays away from the story, save for a few tantalizing hints tucked away between the lines.
China in the 1990's, waiting for Deng Xiaoping to pass on?
Yes, but this year it is also Japan, the world's second-largest industrial democracy, where deciphering conflicting rumors about the well-being of the nation's leaders has suddenly become a compelling preoccupation for most of the Government.


Tobacco Case Seen Having Wide Impact
The Supreme Court's ruling on Wednesday that smokers may sue cigarette companies for concealing facts about smoking and health may weaken an important line of defense for manufacturers that have been sued for product liability.
"It will undoubtedly impact other industries," said Arthur H. Bryant, a lawyer with Trial Lawyers for Public Justice, a law firm in Washington.
Legal experts said makers of cars, pesticides, medical products and liquor might well be affected.


Supporters Race to Reynolds's Side
As Butch Reynolds has fought his way through arbitration panels, courts and the bureaucracy of track and field into the 400-meter final of the United States Olympic trials Friday, he has become something of a folk hero as a champion of citizen rights.
After 22 months trying to overturn his two-year suspension by the International Amateur Athletic Association for failing a drug test, the issue of guilt or innocence -- whether he used the anabolic steroid, nandralone, as the world federation contends -- no longer seems to be the central issue.


Projecting the Present Onto Columbus
Historical uncertainty sails into New York Harbor today in the form of replicas of Christopher Columbus's Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria.
"Replicas" is an overstatement.
Although these models pay meticulous attention to detail, facts about the original caravels are sparse.
The same holds true for Columbus.
Perceptions of the man have ranged from heroic to villainous, depending on the era doing the perceiving.
As for the ships, the first documentation came only 15 years ago when Eugene Lyon, an American scholar, discovered some of Nina's details in a Seville archive.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.81
3.81
5.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.61
3.63
5.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.69
3.71
5.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.71
6.77
8.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.82
8.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.73
9.52
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.52
6.53
7.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"MULTIPLE EXPOSURE: THE GROUP PORTRAIT IN PHOTOGRAPHY," Zabriskie Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, near 57th Street, Manhattan.
Works by more than 30 artists, including William Wegman and Diane Arbus.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 307-7430.
"LIPS TOGETHER, TEETH APART," Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
Play by Terrence McNally about two married couples who share a beach house.
Last show tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Other performances, today at 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 924-8782.
"PUNCH ME IN THE STOMACH," New York Theater Workshop at Theater Off Park, 224 Waverly Place, Greenwich Village.
A black comedy by Deb Filler and Alison Summers about Ms.
Filler's life in New York and her family history as the child of an Auschwitz survivor.
Last show tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Other performances, today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 302-6989.
"SATAN," Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
A 1990 film by the Russian director Viktor Aristov about an amoral man and the world in which he thrives.
With English subtitles.
Last screening tomorrow at 10 P.M.
Other screenings, today at 2, 4, 6 and 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 4, 6 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
Information: (212) 875-5601.
Closing Next Week
"CARTOONS: THE STATE OF THE ART," Museum of Cartoon Art, Comly Avenue, Rye Brook, N.Y.
An exhibition of editorial cartoons, comic strips, books and video animation.
Through Tuesday, when the museum closes at this location permanently; it is to reopen in September in Boca Raton, Fla.
Hours: today and Tuesday 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Sunday 1 to 5 P.M.; closed Saturday and Monday.
Admission: $3; $2 for the elderly and students, $1 for children; under 5, free.
Information: (914) 939-0234.
Closing Next Weekend
"SPIKE HEELS," Second Stage Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street, Manhattan.
Theresa Rebeck's comedy about sexual relationships.
Last show July 4 at 8 P.M.
Performances: Mondays through Fridays at 8 P.M. and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22 to $28.
Information: (212) 873-6103.


F.D.A. Must Police Medical Journal Drug Ads
To the Editor:
The Food and Drug Administration must take responsibility for dealing with the significant amount of false and misleading information in prescription drug advertisements found in medical journals by researchers from the University of California at Los Angeles and reported in the Annals of Internal Medicine (front page, June 1).
Self-policing and voluntary screening of ads are no solution.
Drug manufacturers cannot screen these ads; they are not objective.
The journals, which scrupulously screen claims in articles, cannot screen the ads either: they also have a financial interest in seeing them published.


Importing The Glory Of Youth
Not all the action in Russian dance this weekend is at the Metropolitan Opera House, where the Kirov Ballet performs through July 3.
For those who enjoy folk dancing in all its lusty, vivid glory, there will be free performances by 14 teen-agers from the legendary Voronezh Dance Academy in Russia at 12:15 this afternoon at the Pan Am Building, 200 Park Avenue, at 45th Street, and at 12:30 and 2:30 tomorrow and at 1:30 P.M. on Sunday at the World Financial Center, West Street south of Vesey Street.
The academy, founded in 1938 in Voronezh, south of Moscow, is one of the last Russian ballet schools to incorporate a folk-dance curriculum, training performers in folk dancing and ballet for the Moiseyev, Kirov and Bolshoi companies.
These touring Voronezh dancers -- who range in age from 15 to 18 and who have trained since the age of 12 -- will perform colorful, lilting and acrobatic Russian and Slavic folk dances.
The dances, adapted for the concert stage by noted choreographers like Igor Moiseyev, include the czardas, the Gopak and Valenki, performed to music played by a teen-age accordionist from the academy.


Mistrial for D'Amato's Fund-Raiser
With the jury deadlocked, a mistrial was declared today in the case against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's chief fund-raiser in Puerto Rico.
The case had put a spotlight on the New York Senator's lobbying efforts on behalf of Puerto Rican developers.
At issue in the trial was a highly technical charge against the fund-raiser, Eduardo Lopez Ballori, a San Juan advertising executive, in connection with thousands of dollars in illegal campaign contributions he funneled to the Senator's campaign.


At the Movies
Out of the Closet
When "20 Bucks" opens, probably in the fall, the credit for the screenplay will include the name of the man who wrote the script perhaps 50 years ago and died a little more than two years ago.
His name was Andre Bohem.
The credits will also bear the name of his son, Les Bohem, who revised the tale.
It follows a $20 bill from the time it is printed until, worn and withdrawn from circulation, it is destroyed at the Treasury Department.


G.A.O. Investigator Opposes LTV Unit Sale
A senior Congressional investigator urged the Bush Administration today to block the proposed sale of a leading American military supplier to a French company.
At issue is the $300 million sale of the LTV Corporation's missile division to France's Thomson-CSF, one of the world's largest military companies.
Supporters of the sale say it would save jobs at the Dallas-based missile maker and bolster LTV's international marketing ability.
Opponents in Congress and the aerospace industry contend that the sale would compromise sensitive American military technology.


Art in Review
Jack Whitten  Horodner Romley Gallery 107-109 Sullivan Street SoHo Through tomorrow
Although Jack Whitten encountered the tail end of Abstract Expressionism when he arrived in New York in the early 1960's, his painting has been most obviously affected by the 70's obsession with the material process of art making.
His current work is about a physical deconstruction and reconstitution of the painting medium.
He begins by producing layered sheets of black, white and sepia acrylic; he cuts these into small squares, then glues the pieces, mosaic-fashion, onto canvas.
Some of the results, like "First Gestalt," with its dark central form reminiscent of a human head, seem to invite comparison with the similarly grid-based portraits by Chuck Close.
But in every case Mr.
Whitten's primary concern is with idiosyncratic abstract patterns.
"Homecoming: For Miles" is the most ambitious of them, its hundreds of white spattered acrylic pieces together suggesting a vaporous expanse of night sky peppered with stars and featuring a wheel-shaped constellation.


Tours of Harlem and the Apollo
Here is a sampling of Harlem tours that include a stop at the Apollo Theater.
"HARLEM HIGHLIGHTS TOUR." A walking tour examining the different ethnic groups that have lived in the area, with stops at Striver's Row, the Studio Museum in Harlem, the Apollo Theater, The Amsterdam News, the Abyssinian Baptist Church and the 125th Street Mart.
Sponsored by Reclaim the Memories.
Today at 1 P.M.
Also on Aug. 22, same time.
Fee: $15.
Information: (212) 299-7011.
GRAY LINE BUS TOURS.
Daily bus tours of Manhattan, from Harlem to Battery Park, including such sights as Lincoln Center, Central Park, Striver's Row, the Apollo Theater and the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Tickets: $16 to $57.50.
Information: (212) 397-2600.


Defenders Dispute Jury-Bias Ruling
A Supreme Court decision last week that was intended to banish discrimination by strengthening prohibitions against excluding jurors because of race will instead promulgate it, defense lawyers and legal experts say.
The decision left defense lawyers grappling with strategies to get the jury composition they want while complying with the ruling.


Biden Warns Bush on Supreme Court Nominations
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said today that he would oppose any future Supreme Court nominations made by President Bush unless the President consults the Senate in advance.
Mr.
Biden, a Delaware Democrat, also warned Mr.
Bush not to name anyone to the Supreme Court before Election Day, should a vacancy occur, to avoid what he said would be a political conflagration.
If Mr.
Bush did nominate a justice before Election Day, Mr.
Biden said that he would probably delay hearings until after the election.


Art in Review
Daniel Berlin  Kent Gallery 47 East 63d Street Manhattan Through July 2
The paintings and monoprints in Daniel Berlin's first one-man New York show try to give expression to non-Western religious concepts, and they demonstrate some of the hazards of this endeavor.
The content is largely derived from tantric Buddhism, with other ingredients added.
A single blood-red handprint in "Wailing Wall," for example, alludes to the holy site in Jerusalem as well as to Tibetan religious paintings, or tankas, on which such imprints often appear.
The paintings and prints modeled on tankas, with their grisaille skeletons in vertical side panels and abstract central forms, are the most successful works in the show because they both preserve the pictorial conventions of the originals and introduce a Western-style expressivity.
But the large paintings that offer awkwardly rendered figures of monks or Buddhist ritual instruments floating in luminous globes are a different matter.
They seem both overly literal and sentimental, like 60's poster art, while the more abstract paintings, with their portentous mists and glowing lights, enter a pictorial realm of high Western romanticism.


Restaurants
Just walking into Tavern on the Green, the most outlandish and celebratory restaurant in New York City, can be an adventure.
On one occasion, as I waited at the frenzied reservation desk a tourist offered to sell me a briefcase he said he had purchased that morning.
"Uncomfortable handle," he explained. "Half price."


New Commissioner for Correction Department Is Sworn In





A Day in Court for Smokers
The tobacco industry has made extravagant claims over the years, but what topped them all was its claim that Congress had given it immunity from lawsuits by sick, dying or dead smokers and their families.
The Supreme Court has now ruled that Congress gave the industry no such blanket exemption.
The welcome result is victims can at least get a hearing, even though one would never know it from the new industry whopper: "Philip Morris considers today's Supreme Court decision as a significant victory." Warning to the industry: Your news releases can be hazardous if you believe them.


Review/Art; A Magnificent Eight, Reveling in Rebellion
"Painters of a New Century: The Eight and American Art," which opens today at the Brooklyn Museum, is a pleasing exhibition that brings together works by the artists who gained temporary fame from their participation in a show that helped to shape modern art in this country.
It's amazing what good timing and savvy public relations can accomplish.
The Eight possessed both.
They included Arthur B. Davies, William Glackens, Ernest Lawson, George Luks, Maurice Brazil Prendergast, Everett Shinn, John Sloan and Robert Henri.
Each had shown plenty of times before, some at august and conservative institutions like the National Academy of Design, and none lacked for patrons.
Yet they promoted the exhibition at the Macbeth Galleries in Manhattan in 1908 as a rebellion against the entrenched establishment, and that tried-and-true ploy of outsiders against insiders helped to catapult the event onto the front of newspapers at a time when art coverage rarely escaped the ghetto of the women's pages.


The Perot Pendulum
Ross Perot was swimming along nicely a few weeks ago, riding a wave of public discontent with established parties and politicians.
Quite suddenly, the can-do billionaire with the common touch now finds himself portrayed as a sinister gumshoe with an uncommon taste for intrigue, investigations and conspiracy.
The political pendulum has swung back against Ross Perot, as it usually does when politicians stay in the limelight long enough for people to begin asking questions.
It's the same pendulum that, for various reasons, smacked into Gary Hart in 1984, Michael Dukakis in 1988 and, in the last year, President Bush.


Rabin Pledges a Settlement Cutback
One of his first orders of business as Israel's next Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin says, will be to greatly scale back settlement construction in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
But even if he were to declare a freeze on all new building, which his Labor Party platform urges for a year to enhance the Middle East peace process, settlements would continue to grow because of the 10,000 to 12,000 new houses and apartments now under construction.


McGwire Hits 25th As A's Beat Twins
Athletics 5, Twins 1
OAKLAND, Calif., June 25 (AP) -- Mark McGwire hit his 25th homer and Carney Lansford drove in two runs, leading the Oakland Athletics past the Minnesota Twins, 5-1, today in the opener of a four-game series between the top two teams in the American League West.
Bob Welch (4-4) pitched in and out of trouble for seven innings and allowed one run and eight hits.
The Twins put two runners on base in three innings against Welch, but got their only run on Brian Harper's leadoff homer in the fifth.
Dennis Eckersley pitched one and one-third innings for his 25th save this season and 29th straight over two seasons, a continuing major league record.


Tyson Case Takes an Unusual Turn
The Rhode Island Supreme Court, in a highly unusual move, today ordered evidence forwarded to the Indiana judge who presided over the rape trial of the former heavyweight boxing champion Mike Tyson that indicates the victim and her father may have committed perjury.
The information "might well have an effect upon the validity" of Tyson's conviction, this state's highest court said.


S.E.C. Rules On Pay Data Welcomed
The sweeping package of reforms that the Securities and Exchange Commission agency proposed Tuesday would vastly improve the information companies share with their stockholders about executive pay.
And it would eliminate most, though not all, of the gimmicks companies use to conceal tidbits they would rather their holders not know, compensation experts said yesterday.
"I haven't felt this happy since I found a set of electric trains under the Christmas tree 50 years ago," said Graef Crystal, a former compensation consultant who has made a career out of deciphering the Delphic documents that companies send their shareholders.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 595 money market mutual funds decreased $5.14 billion, to $491.97 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 219 institutional funds decreased $3.8 billion, to $180.53 billion.
The assets of the 283 general-purpose funds were down $313.7 million, to $172.43 billion.
The 93 broker-dealer funds decreased $1.03 billion, to $139.02 billion, the institute said.


Maria Alba, Flamenco Dancer And Teacher Noted for Passion
Maria Alba, a noted flamenco dancer and popular teacher in New York City, died on Wednesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
Shigeko Suga, a spokeswoman for Miss Alba's family, declined to give Miss Alba's age.
She died of cancer, Miss Suga said .


Sophie Leavitt, 86; Noted for Art Loans And Frugal Recipes
Sophie Leavitt, an author of cookbooks and, with her husband, a collector of contemporary art who contributed works to several museums throughout the country, died on June 23 in her home in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 86 years old.
Mrs.
Leavitt died of natural causes, said Brenda Collins, a spokeswoman for Levitt-Weinstein Memorial Chapels of West Palm Beach, Fla.


Review/Film; On the Sax, Freedom Isn't Found In Freedom
"Branford Marsalis: The Music Tells You" is an appreciative, hourlong documentary portrait of the jazz saxophonist, directed by D. A. Pennebaker and Chris Hegedus in typically simple, penetrating style.
Seen mostly while on the road, Mr.
Marsalis is revealed as an uncommonly articulate musician with distinct ideas about his work in particular and jazz in general.
"You don't play what you feel," he says, during the discussion from which the film's title is taken.
"There's only freedom in structure, my man. There's no freedom in freedom."
As someone who can readily discuss jazz polyrhythms -- as he does during a visit to the class of his former teacher, Prof.
David Baker at Indiana University -- Mr.
Marsalis would make a stimulating documentary subject even if he did not also contemplate the larger context for this music.
"The difference between them and us," he says about jazz pioneers like Charlie Parker and their hopes for a music that could bring about social justice and racial equality, "is we know that's not going to happen."


Braves Want Sanders
The Braves also opened negotiations with outfielder DEION SANDERS yesterday, hoping to sign the two-sport star to a multiyear contract.
General Manager JOHN SCHUERHOLZ said he made an offer Wednesday to Sanders's agent, EUGENE PARKER.
He would not comment on specifics but The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported the offer was believed to be for about $1.8 million a season.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Bush's term in office referred incorrectly to his service as a diplomat in China.
He was the second American envoy to the Communist Government, serving from 1974-75.
The first was David K. E. Bruce.
A caption with excerpts from an interview with Mr.
Bush misstated the date of the interview in some copies.
He was interviewed on Tuesday, not on Wednesday.


Yanks End Road Trip And Call It All Even
Through four cities and four airports while enduring too many lumpy hotel pillows, the Yankees played to expectations over the last two weeks, dancing around the .500 plateau.
So it was uplifting today when Kevin Maas stroked a three-run homer in the seventh inning off Mark Gubicza to thrust the Yankees to a 4-3 victory and allow them to finish their longest trip of the season with a 7-7 record.
It is exactly .500.
The fact that they avoided their sixth one-run setback of the excursion made the long journey seem sweeter.


The Art Market
Sonnabend Loses
Faxes were flying this week from Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim &amp; Ballon, the New York lawyers representing the art dealer Larry Gagosian in a lawsuit filed against his gallery and the artist Peter Halley by the Sonnabend Gallery in SoHo.
"The suit has been closely watched by the New York art community," read one Phillips, Nizer fax, which announced a decision dated June 18 by Justice Carol H. Arber of State Supreme Court in Manhattan in favor of Mr.
Halley and the Gagosian Gallery, which has branches on Madison Avenue and in SoHo.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  POLICE TO FACE MORE CIVILIAN SCRUTINY
Over the open opposition of his Police Commissioner, Mayor Dinkins took two strong moves to assert more civilian control over the New York City Police Department.
Mr.
Dinkins appointed a five-member independent panel to investigate corruption and called on the City Council to pass legislation to establish an all-civilian agency to monitor police brutality.
A1.
Police officer is arrested on a murder charge.
B2.
Second-guessing the Police Department.
News analysis, B2.
REPUTED MAFIA SOLDIER COULD FACE DEATH
Setting the stage for a possible death sentence, a jury convicted a reputed Mafia soldier of committing six murders in racketeering and narcotics operations.
The defendant, Thomas Pitera, is the first person prosecuted in New York State under a 1988 Federal law that provides the death penalty for intentional murders carried out as part of major drug trafficking.
B3.
MOB THEFT CHARGED AT NEW YORK POST
Through control of a newspaper deliverers union, a Mafia family stole more than 10,000 copies of The New York Post a day over the last five years and used the newspaper's loading docks as headquarters for extortions, loan sharking, gun sales and the engineering of narcotics deals, a state indictment charged.
B3.
Newspaper Guild denounces a proposal to buy The Daily News.
B3.
Robber breaks into Council President Stein's apartment.
B2.
REGION  COUPLE INDICTED IN KIDNAPPING
The New Jersey couple accused of kidnapping Sidney J. Reso were indicted by a Federal grand jury in Newark, while the authorities continued to search for the Exxon executive.
B4.
SENATE PASSES BUDGET PLAN IN NEW JERSEY
The Republican majority in the New Jersey Senate gave overwhelming approval today to a sharply reduced budget that promises to reshape government in the state by cutting or eliminating programs in almost every state agency.
B6.
MISTRIAL IN CASE OF D'AMATO FUND-RAISER
With the jury deadlocked, a mistrial was declared in the case against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's chief fund-raiser in Puerto Rico.
The case had put a spotlight on the Senator's efforts on behalf of Puerto Rican developers.
B5.
WELFARE COMPLAINT AGAINST NEW JERSEY
The NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund will file a civil rights complaint on Monday seeking to block New Jersey from refusing additional benefits to women who have more children while in the welfare program, a lawyer for the fund said.
B5.
A NEW BIPARTISAN COALITION IN SUFFOLK
Faced with what he described as "one of the most dangerous deadlocks in Suffolk County history," County Executive Robert J. Gaffney announced a bipartisan coalition in the County Legislature that immediately approved a plan to help resolve a $100 million budget gap.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5  Chronicle B6


U.S. Envoy Says Talks Find No News on Viet Missing
A special Presidential envoy to Hanoi said today that five years of discussions with the Vietnamese about missing United States servicemen have produced no evidence that any of the Americans are still alive in Vietnam.
But the envoy, Gen.
John W. Vessey, also said in testimony to the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs that he had found no new information to change the perception that Americans were left behind in Vietnam in 1973, when United States forces withdrew from Indochina.


Bruins Hire McVie
TOM McVIE, who was dismissed as coach of the New Jersey Devils after a disappointing 1991-92 season, was named yesterday as an assistant coach under new head coach BRIAN SUTTER with the Boston Bruins.


Perot's Progress


Rx for Olympic Athlete: Heal Thyself
In Colorado and Korea, Dr.
Robert Voy seemed edgy, under pressure, a loyalist who knew too much.
He was chief medical officer of the United States Olympic Committee then and its director of sports medicine and science.
If anyone knew whose muscles were pure and whose were juiced it would be Voy.
But he was coy, reluctant to point a finger, still hoping to reform a system built on "sink testing," urine samples from star athletes being routinely poured out before positive results could be logged.


With This Spiral; Guggenheim Inaugurates a Marriage
Man makes art work, is married in it. That's the short version.
Seen from the cultural perspective, the story is that Dan Flavin, the Long Island sculptor whose lighting installation fills the rotunda of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, was married there yesterday to Tracy Harris, a painter from Dallas.


Prayer Ruling May Not Be Court's Last Say on Subject
While the Supreme Court decisively reaffirmed its school prayer precedents with its ruling on Wednesday on graduation prayers, the Justices are not necessarily about to withdraw from the battle over the constitutional boundary between church and state.
Sometime before the Court recesses for the summer in the next few days, the Justices will probably indicate whether they plan to re-enter the church-state fray during the new term that begins in October.
They have many cases from which to choose, any one of which could reignite a far-reaching constitutional debate with an outcome that is far from clear in advance.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New York City Board of Education's adoption of an AIDS curriculum for elementary schools referred incorrectly to the policy on references to anal intercourse.
Such references were deleted for the fifth grade but retained for the sixth.


Disco, Not Marching, at Russia Summer Camp
Weeds are growing up over the parade area at the Green Pine Forest summer camp, where only two years ago children with red kerchiefs around their necks, their elbows bent in stiff salute, used to march along the flower beds with banners urging them to "Be Ready" for the Communist Party's call.
Like other Communist rituals, the one that used to begin summer days for millions of Pioneers -- a children's organization that was virtually unavoidable for anyone growing up in the Soviet Union -- is gone.
There is still a morning lineup, but it has shed its quasi-military character.


Books of The Times; Well-Turned Twists On Well-Known Tales
Be My Guest  Two Novellas  By Rachel Ingalls  238 pages. Turtle Bay Books. $20.
Near the beginning of "Be My Guest," one of Rachel Ingalls's new novellas, a young woman by the name of Sandra sits in front of the television set and watches a movie, mesmerized by the story she sees on the screen.
The movie is an old-fashioned thriller about a sailor who discovers an uncharted volcanic island.
The sailor learns that the island is ruled by a violent cult that worships a fabulous diamond; the cult is about to sacrifice a beautiful maiden to the diamond idol.
Needless to say, the sailor falls in love with the beautiful maiden and eventually rescues her with the help of a fortuitous volcanic eruption.
As the final credits roll, Ms.
Ingalls observes: "Sandra sighed. She relaxed. Right up to the end, she'd been worried that something would go wrong."
Ms.
Ingalls's own novellas create a similar sense of anticipation in the reader, and they also owe a decided debt to such heart-stopping movie melodramas.
Her best-known book, "Mrs. Caliban" (1982), which brought her controversial acclaim when the British Book Marketing Council named it one of the 20 greatest American novels written since World War II, puts a spin on "King Kong" and "Beauty and the Beast." In this case, the beauty is a long-suffering housewife, the beast a tall, sexually nimble amphibian who goes by the name of Larry.


Quotation of the Day
"I could actually feel my nose touching the steering wheel when there was a sudden flash of white that exploded me backwards." -- THOMAS TONY, a Pennsylvania salesman who thinks an air bag saved his life.  [ A10:5. ]


Three Hikers Are Rescued From Mountain Ledge


Police Officer in Brooklyn Is Arrested on Murder Charge
A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday and charged in the killing of a 41-year-old Brooklyn liquor store owner during an attempted robbery in February 1991, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said at a news conference last night.
The officer, Robert Cabeza, who was off duty at the time and accompanied by two unidentified men, flashed his badge to gain access to a portion of the store that was secured behind a plexiglass barrier, Commissioner Brown said.


Reputed Mobster Guilty In Six Narcotics Murders
Setting the stage for a possible death sentence, a jury convicted a reputed Mafia soldier yesterday of committing six murders in racketeering and narcotics operations.
The defendant, Thomas Pitera, is the first person prosecuted in New York State under a 1988 Federal law that provides the death penalty for intentional murders carried out as part of major drug trafficking.
No one has been executed under the law.


Texaco Balks At Canary Wharf Move
Texaco, the American oil giant, said today that it was putting off its move to Canary Wharf, an announcement that could only make it more difficult to find investors for Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.'s vast office development in East London.
Texaco was scheduled to move the 1,000 people in its British headquarters from the Knightsbridge section of central London to Canary Wharf on Aug. 17.
The oil company signed a lease for 232,000 square feet of space.


Bonds Awarded By Pennsylvania
Lehman Brothers led an underwriting group that bid successfully yesterday for a $403 million general obligation bond issue by Pennsylvania.
The tax-exempt bonds were reoffered to the public at a price to yield from 4 percent in 1994 to 5 percent in 1997, 5.7 percent in 2002, 6.15 percent in 2007 and 6.25 percent in 2010 to 2012.


Couple Indicted in Kidnapping of Exxon Executive
The New Jersey couple accused of kidnapping Sidney J. Reso were indicted by a Federal grand jury here today, as Federal prosecutors asserted that others were involved.
The assertion was included in the indictment that added two charges to the four counts of kidnapping, extortion and conspiracy that were filed against each of the suspects, Arthur D. and Irene J. Seale, both 45 years old, after their arrests last Friday in a car rental office in Hackettstown, N.J.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW Amsterdam Avenue between 72d and 75th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the District 7 street fair.
SUNDAY


CHRONICLE
What is it like to watch your child being blasted into outer space?
"It's very scary," CLAIRE SHULMAN, the Borough President of Queens, said yesterday.
Two hours earlier, the space shuttle Challenger -- on which her daughter, Dr.
ELLEN BAKER is an astronaut -- had lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Fla.
The mission, which is to end on July 8, is to be the longest American shuttle flight.
Dr.
Baker, a 39-year-old physician, had already been in space once, in October 1989.


Thumb Injury Sets Back Ewing
They have insisted all week that this is serious business, and today the players on the United States men's basketball team demonstrated how much.
In a heated morning scrimmage with his teammates, Patrick Ewing, the Knicks' center and franchise player, suffered a dislocated right thumb and is expected to miss the first three round-robin games of the Olympic qualifying tournament next week in Portland, Ore.


Doing Right by Russia
Finally, Boris Yeltsin has won a victory he has richly earned: economic help from the West.
For six months the Russian President has implemented astonishingly bold market reforms, pushed his country to democracy and, last week, proffered momentous nuclear cuts.
The West, after having given him many warm words and little cold cash, finally has its priorities straight.
The International Monetary Fund has decided to lend Russia $1 billion before working out the details of economic reform.
It's a big win for all sides.
Under the arrangement, Russia gets cash that will preserve reform, and democracy.
And the I.M.F. gets time to hammer out a long-term plan satisfactory to Western creditors.


Trade Panel Approves Canada-Lumber Duty
In the latest sign that their 1988 free-trade agreement did not settle all trade disputes between the United States and Canada, a Federal trade agency ruled today that imported Canadian lumber had hurt American producers, a decision that will allow the United States to impose a 6.51 percent import duty next month.
Within minutes of the 4-to-2 vote, William A. Dymond, the commercial counselor at the Canadian Embassy, told reporters that Canada would try to overturn the International Trade Commission's ruling by appealing to a binational arbitration panel.


All Bunched Together in Westchester
While Tom Kite was surviving the perils of United States Open afterglow, five golfers overcame the tricky winds and high rough of the venerable Westchester Country Club today to tie for the first-round lead of the Buick Classic.
Steve Elkington, Bob Tway, David Frost, Ted Schulz and Greg Kraft all shot four-under-par 67's as Westchester's 70-year-old course once again ably resisted the PGA Tour's best attempts to humble it.
Trailing the leading five were five golfers at 68 and four at 69.


B.P.'s Chief Is Forced Out; Stock Plunges
In a move that caught the outside world by surprise, Robert B. Horton, the 52-year-old chairman and chief executive of financially beleaguered British Petroleum Company, resigned today after only 27 months at the helm of the world's third-largest oil company.
The announcement came after the London Stock Exchange had closed.
But on the New York Stock Exchange, the company's American depository receipts, each of which represents 12 shares, plunged.
They closed at $48.375, down $6.


On Stage, and Off
The Time to Open Is Now Tony Time
You can hear a pin drop in Broadway offices this week, and it looks as if that won't change for a good many months.
In recent years, the cycle of activity has shifted away from the traditional season, which used to start in earnest with the school year.
Now the bulk of the openings are scheduled from February to April, to compete for Tony Awards, which have become a show's most effective marketing tool.
Pair that with the fact that big musicals have become so expensive to produce (roughly $8 million now) that when they hit, they need to run as long as possible to recoup the producers' investments.
With a show like "Cats" due to celebrate its 10th anniversary in October, there is much less turnover of theaters than there used to be, and fewer openings.
In fact, the only openings listed now for Broadway before Jan. 1, 1993, that are not at nonprofit, subscription theaters are two musical revivals ("Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" and "Stardust").


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 18; Rest for the Weary
At one time I figured the only people thrilled to be in North Dakota were North Dakotans.
But yesterday the 33 cyclists from 12 states, and Great Britain and Australia on the Coast-to-Coast Bicycle Classic were ecstatic to reach this outpost of 13,000 people on the Missouri River.
One reason is that we are almost one-third of the way to Asbury Park, N.J., the trip's final destination.
Another reason: After eight straight nights of camping, we rest today in an honest-t0-goodness motel, complete with beds, bathtubs, air conditioning, touch tone phones and color television.
It is a welcome luxury for the 22 men, who range in age from 23 to 65, and 11 women (22 to 50) in the tour.


Trenton Acts on Other Matters Besides Budget
On a day when the debate over the state budget commanded the lion's share of attention, legislators today found time to act on a variety of other subjects: the state pension system, financing for hospitals, automobile insurance and construction permits.
The low-key debate on the bills, which on any other day would be headline-grabbing, provided an interlude between the jocular banter that opened the Senate and Assembly sessions and the angry exchanges sparked by the budget debate.


No Progress at Peace Talks
A European Community mediator seeking to revive Yugoslav peace negotiations reported no success today after meeting separately here with top officials of Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Lord Carrington of Britain, who undertook the community's Yugoslav peace effort last September, said his two hours of talks today with Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President, were "disappointing."


The Wild Calls. Anybody Listening?
WITH an uncanny precision that perhaps comes from knowing that no one else is counting, New York City officials can at a moment's notice announce precisely how many gallons of water currently reside in their complex system of regional reservoirs.
Having automatic access to that water is essential to the city's well being.
And such volume figures are most helpful when necessary to flush guilt through the modern consumer's civic psyche.
What have never been tracked so closely, however, are the city's equally vital reservoirs of serenity, those sirenless, automobile-alarm-free areas where urban residents of even modest means can fleetingly flee the city life they are paying so much to endure.
In these rural refuges for humans where only visitors lock their cars, city people can pay large sums of money to accommodating local citizens to allow them to sleep, eat, hike, swim, canoe, read, acquire souvenirs and generally relax the way real people do routinely all over this country.


CONGRESS FORCES END TO SHUTDOWN OF TRAIN SERVICE
Congress approved binding arbitration late Thursday night to settle the labor dispute that shut down the nation's freight lines and threatened commuter rail service, mainly in the Northeast.
The legislation was rushed early today to the President, who signed it immediately.
The House of Representatives first passed the legislation by a 240-to-140 vote and then the Senate by a 87-to-6 vote just before midnight.
President Bush's signature insured that there would be no further disruption of freight lines as well as Amtrak, the Federally subsidized passenger carrier. 'Going Back to Work
The White House said in a statement, "The President is pleased that Congress, with bipartisan cooperation, has met its responsibility to end the rail crisis."


An Evening of Music for the Soul
Soul music and gospel-charged dance music are on the program tonight at the Apollo, with the triple bill of Bobby Womack, Junior Walker and the All-Stars, and Loleatta Holloway.
Bobby Womack may be best known as the songwriter of "It's All Over Now" (a hit for the Rolling Stones), "Lookin' for a Love" (a hit for the J. Geils Band) and "I'm a Midnight Mover" (a hit for Wilson Pickett).
On his own, although he tours too infrequently, he is one of the great soul singers.
His voice has a knowing tenderness and an earthy rasp, and his dramatic timing turns songs into gospelly revivals.
The tenor saxophonist and singer Junior Walker was one of Motown Records' mainstays in the 1960's, with hits like "Shotgun" and "I'm a Road Runner." And Loleatta Holloway brought her extravagantly emotional voice to some of the most fervent records of the disco era, including "Queen of the Night," then dropped out of sight until the pop rapper Marky Mark brought her voice back to the radio with his "Good Vibrations."


COMPANY NEWS
BOATMEN'S BANCSHARES CO., St.
Louis, agreed to buy Security Bank, Tulsa, Okla., and its sister bank, First Bank of Catoosa, for an undisclosed amount of cash.
COMPUTER DATA SYSTEMS INC., Rockville, Md., won a General Services Administration contract worth up to $102 million to provide software modernization services.
HONEYWELL INC., Minneapolis, purchased Sacda, London, Ontario, a company specializing in simulation of industrial processes, for undisclosed terms.
NATIONWIDE CELLULAR SERVICE INC., Valley Stream, L.I., signed a letter of intent to sell its 89 percent subsidiary, Portable Cellular Communications Inc., to ATC Inc., in a transaction valued at $4.5 million.
TAMBRANDS INC., Lake Success, L.I., a manufacturer of consumer products, completed the sale of its Maxithins sanitary pad business to Hospital Specialty Co., Cleveland, Ohio, a unit of Tranzonic Cos.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
UNC INC., Annapolis, Md., an aerospace and aviation concern, acquired Southern Aero Corp., Ozark, Ala., and renamed it UNC Helicopter.


For the Soda Jerk Lurking in All of Us
A new weapon has been developed for the cola wars: a supermarket self-service soda-bottling machine.
Fountain Fresh International, which makes soda machines and soda syrups in Salt Lake City, expects customers to clamor to fill their own one- or two-liter plastic soda bottles at the supermarket rather than plucking them off shelves.
The 18 regular and diet flavors will cost less than store brands and serve up more profit to supermarket chains.


Executive Changes
AGENCY RENT-A-CAR INC., Cleveland, an automobile insurance replacement company, appointed Terry W. Holt chief executive.
BUDGET RENT A CAR CORP., Lisle, Ill., named William N. Plamondon president and chief operating officer, and Kevin McShea executive vice president and chief financial officer.
CONSOLIDATED EDISON, New York, named Carl W. Greene senior vice president of accounting and treasury.
GENELABS TECHNOLOGIES INC., Redwood City, Calif., a biopharmaceutical company, named John S. Hegedus senior vice president of corporate development.
HACHETTE MAGAZINES INC., New York, appointed Paul De Benedictis vice president and chief financial officer.
HUFFY BICYCLE CO., Dayton, Ohio, named Gary E. Morin president.
JOCKEY INTERNATIONAL INC., Kenosha, Wis., the apparel company, appointed Paul E. Sebastian president and chief operating officer.
LOCKHEED FINANCE CORP., Calabasas, Calif., appointed Kathleen H. Anderson to the new position of executive vice president.
MELNOR INDUSTRIES, Moonachie, N.J., a manufacturer of lawn and garden-watering equipment, named Clarence H. Yahn president and chief executive.


Pop/Jazz; Wanted: Tomorrow's Superstars
RALPH COOPER 2D's ears hurt.
The phones had been going helter-skelter all day.
He took a call.
"Hi, you're an act?" he said.
"When are you going to be in town? . . . Achoo . . . Excuse me, my hay fever.  . . . Now, you know there's no cursing? What's the group's name? 'Sounds Funky.' That's cute, real cute. Now, I assume you're going to do an original tune. For this audience, you better be kicking or they don't want to hear it. They'll run you out of there squealing. O.K., I've got to jump off."
He pounced on another call, someone feverishly promoting a singer.
"Yes, I feel she can be the first video babe of the 90's," Mr.
Cooper said.
"Now I got to jump. My hay fever is kicking."


Judge Is Urged to Credit Milken for Helping Prosecutors
A Federal prosecutor said yesterday that Michael R. Milken should be given credit for cooperating with investigators even though Government officials do not believe the former financier was candid with them.
The comments by John Carroll, head of the securities and commodities fraud unit for the United States Attorney's office, came in a conference between lawyers in the Milken case and Judge Kimba M. Wood of Federal District Court in Manhattan.


When Car Makers Retaliate Against Critical Magazines
READERS of the August issue of Automobile magazine may notice an advertisement from Buick and another from Oldsmobile, signifying the magazine's emergence from the doghouse, where the General Motors Corporation now and then banishes miscreants.
G.M. had sentenced Automobile to three months without advertising after the magazine's editor, David E. Davis Jr., delivered a scathing attack against the auto maker in a speech in January.
Mr.
Davis rebuked G.M. at the annual black-tie gala of the Washington Automotive Press Association, expressing dismay at G.M.'s announcement that it was closing 21 plants and eliminating 74,000 jobs.
He contrasted G.M. management with the industry's founding fathers, calling the heirs "piano players in whorehouses."


Arthur Lundahl, 77, C.I.A. Aide Who Found Missile Sites in Cuba
Arthur C. Lundahl, an aerial-photography expert whose detection of missile installations in Cuba in 1962 led to the Cuban missile crisis, died on Monday at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 77 years old and lived in Bethesda.
He died of respiratory failure, his family said.


Sounds Around Town
Songs of the Heart
Rosanne Cash and Lucinda Williams at Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield in Central Park, at 70th Street, (212) 360-2777.
Rosanne Cash has a country pedigree (she's Johnny's daughter), and Lucinda Williams started out as a folk-blues singer, but both have grown to be songwriters who capture the everyday pain and small triumphs of lovers in and out of love.
Both have voices in which blues and country intertwine; both can project fragility, determination and sly humor.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.; admission is free.
Swingers
Kanda Bongo Man and Mingus Big Band at Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield in Central Park, at 7oth Street, (212) 360-2777.
A double bill of two very different kinds of swing.
Kanda Bongo Man, from Zaire, leads a band that plays soukous, with interweaving guitar lines and an African-Latin lilt, as he sings with one of the sweetest voices in rock.
The Mingus Big Band has revived Charles Mingus's repertory and the brawling, muscular, hard-swinging, bluesy way he wanted it played.
Sunday at 3 P.M.; admission is free.
From the Caribbean
Kassav', the Ritz, 254 West 54th Street, West Side of Manhattan, (212) 541-8900.
Kassav' virtually invented a modern dance music for Martinique and Guadeloupe called zouk.
It combines a log-drum rhythm with lilting, arpeggiated keyboard and guitar lines and suave singing, for a sunny hybrid of island tradition and digital technology.
On Friday, Haiti's masters of the compas direct, Tabou Combo, are also on the bill, which includes a younger Haitian band, Zin.
The openers on Saturday are System Band and Lakol, both from Haiti.
Music begins at 9 P.M.; tickets are $22.50 in advance, $25 on the day of the show.


The Spoken Word
READING OF EDNA ST.
VINCENT MILLAY, Playhouse 125, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
"Edna St. Vincent Millay: A Celebration of the Artist Through Her Letters and Poetry," featuring four actresses -- Bobbi Randall, who also did the arrangement, Deborah Dutton, Elizabeth Striker and Madigan Ryan; Gary Covello is the director.
Presented by the Blue Heron Theater.
Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission: $12 ($10 for the elderly; $6 for students).
Information: (212) 787-0422.
READING BY RAUL JULIA, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Fifth Avenue at 55th Street, midtown Manhattan.
The actor will read from works by Tolstoy, Shakespeare and others.
Today at 1 P.M.
Free.
Sponsored by the Free Theater Project to Promote the Arts, Literacy and Cultural Democracy, a 10-year-old organization that sponsors free readings.
Information: (212) 247-0490.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances this week (all times Eastern daylight):  President Bush
FRIDAY: 10-11 P.M., ABC, "20/ 20," interview. (Channel 7 in New York.)  Gov.
Bill Clinton
No appearances scheduled.  Ross Perot
FRIDAY: 5-6:30 P.M., C-Span, "Road to the White House," rebroadcast of speech given Wednesday to supporters in Annapolis, Md.


Crew of 7 on Space Shuttle Columbia
Richard N. Richards Mission Commander
Captain Richards, a 45-year-old Navy pilot, is flying his third shuttle mission in four years.
He has logged more than 4,400 hours of flight time, and has spent 219 hours in space since becoming an astronaut in 1981.
Although born in Key West, Fla., he considers St.
Louis as his hometown.
Captain Richards received a bachelor's degree in chemical engineering from the University of Missouri in 1969, and a master's in aeronautical systems from the University of Florida the next year.


U.S. Charges 2 Defrauded School Unit On Asbestos
The owners of the company that did most of the monitoring for asbestos in New York City's public schools have been indicted on charges that they used unqualified workers to test for asbestos and to analyze the tests, Federal law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The indictment, announced by the United States Attorney for the Southern District, Otto G. Obermaier, also charges the owners of the Sandaq Engineering Company with submitting $500,000 in false bills to the city's School Construction Authority.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Manufacturers will get broad new powers to pollute under a rule issued by the Bush Administration.  [ Page A1. ]
President Bush signed a bill ending the railroad shutdown, which had threatened to damage the nation's economy.  [ A1. ]
The economy grew at an annual rate of 2.7 percent in the first quarter, the briskest pace of the Bush Presidency, but some private economists suggested the economic recovery is too slow.
Unemployment claims surged and sales of existing homes fell.  [ D2. ]
A package of tax changes endorsed by the House Ways and Means Committee would help blighted areas and repeal luxury taxes on expensive yachts, furs and jewels.  [ D16. ]
The Supreme Court's ruling on cigarette companies also opens other manufacturers to product liability suits, lawyers said.  [ D5. ] International
Canadian lumber hurt American producers, a Federal trade agency ruled, allowing the United States to impose a 6.51 percent import duty next month.  [ D1. ]
The O.E.C.D. drastically cut its growth forecast for the year, to an anemic 1.8 percent from an earlier 2.2 percent.  [ D2. ]
The Bush Administration was urged to block the proposed sale of LTV's missile division to Thomson-CSF of France by Joseph E. Kelley, a senior Congressional investigator.  [ D4. ] Companies
British Petroleum's chief, Robert B. Horton, quit after only 27 months at the helm.
The stock tumbled $6 to $48.375.  [ D1. ]
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts said it would invest $300 million in TW Holdings, a money-losing owner of restaurants.  [ D4. ]
Citibank settled charges that it failed in the safekeeping of canceled corporate bonds, bank regulators said.  [ D4. ]
Lotus Development shares plunged 23 percent after the software company slashed earnings estimates.  [ D5. ]
Katy Industries shares soared 23 percent after the Carroll family, which holds 51 percent, said it might acquire more.  [ D4. ] Markets
Wall Street zigged and zagged on tobacco stocks, as traders rushed to sell after reading the first headlines on news tickers only to start buying once analysts had their say.  [ D1. ]
Stocks edged down, with the Dow Jones industrial average giving up 6.69 points at 3,284.01.  [ D6. ]  Prices of Treasury securities rose and long-term interest rates fell.  [ D13. ]
Heavy selling drove the dollar down sharply against major foreign currencies.  [ D14. ]  Grain prices surged on forecasts of more rain in the wheat belt and not enough for corn and soybeans.  [ D14. ] Today's Columns
Analysts give cautious support to U.A.L., which lost $92.3 million in the first quarter and saw its debt rating lowered.
They cite its tremendous marketable assets.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]
The sensitive, dependent and sometimes tempestuous relationship between auto magazines and the industry was clear in a recent absence of G.M. ads from Automobile.
Advertising.  [ D9. ]


Corrections
A brief biographical sketch on June 16 about Edward J. Rollins, a co-chairman of Ross Perot's campaign for President, misstated Mr.
Rollins's birthplace.
It was Boston.


Campaign '92: Live, in Color, and Bare-Knuckled
The Presidential race has turned into a fractious television brawl as the campaigns of President Bush and Ross Perot battle for air time to accuse each other of gutter-level campaign tactics.
In hour after hour of extraordinary live television in the last two days, millions of Americans watched as Mr.
Perot repeatedly accused the Bush campaign of engaging in "dirty tricks" to discredit his business practices.
To counter Mr.
Perot, Rich Bond, the Republican National chairman, made the rounds on morning talk shows today, defending the President and lashing out at Mr.
Perot for leveling "wild and reckless charges."


Heir to Shamir Says He, Too, Will Bow Out
The battle for future leadership of the defeated Likud Party took shape tonight when Defense Minister Moshe Arens, considered an heir to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, announced that he would quit politics once the new Labor-led Government took over.
Mr.
Shamir, 76 years old, has already made clear that he also is about to retire from political life, and he repeated that today to reporters, saying, "I do not know yet the precise day, but I'll do it."


New Coach for Kings
The Los Angeles Kings, a franchise with marquee players in need of a lift, will be getting a new coach.
The Kings have called a press conference today in Inglewood, Calif., and are expected to announce the hiring of BARRY MELROSE, who was lured away from the Detroit Red Wings' organization by the owner of the Kings, BRUCE McNALL.


Aquino Urges Military to Yield Its Role in Politics
In her last major speech before she leaves office, Corazon C. Aquino faced the military officers today who had saved her presidency and some who had betrayed it, expressing the hope that in a few days "you, too, are leaving politics with me."
Mrs.
Aquino's plea to the military, which enforced martial law for two decades under Ferdinand E. Marcos and then became the breeding ground for seven coup attempts against her, was met with long applause outside the armed forces headquarters here today.
But in private, both politicians and officers said it was highly questionable if the military was ready to give up its role in Philippine politics, even with a former general, Fidel V. Ramos, elected in Mrs.
Aquino's place.


From Hardly Playing at All To Being the Nets' No. 1 Pick
As the Nets' first selection in the National Basketball Association draft Wednesday, P. J. Brown has some adjusting to do.
He's on a new team, drafted as a power forward after playing center at Louisiana Tech, and he will have to wrestle for playing time at a position already two deep.
But one change is guaranteed to be pleasant.
Signing a contract with the Nets will elevate Brown from the poverty in which he was raised.


Hollywood Has Long History of Conservatism
To the Editor:
Your article on Hollywood conservatives (Styles of The Times, May 31; National Edition, June 1) is wildly inaccurate in stating, "Hollywood has always been a liberal enclave." Unless always means since 1975.
During the 1920's and 30's, most of the studio heads were conservative Republicans, who spent millions of dollars (including sums docked from employee paychecks) to defeat Upton Sinclair's 1934 gubernatorial bid and to block union and guild organizing.


Iran-Contra Inquiry Turns to Top Reagan Officials
Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra prosecutor, told Congress today that his investigation was now centered on whether Reagan Administration officials "at the highest level of Government" had engaged in wrongdoing, and, without elaborating, he left open the possibility of more indictments.
Coming nine days after the perjury indictment of former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, the prosecutor's report represented Mr.
Walsh's first detailed explanation of the current phase of his inquiry.
It was also a pointed rebuttal to Republican lawmakers who had criticized the length and expense of the $31.4 million investigation, which began in December 1986.


Watch This Space! Knicks Still Shopping
The Knicks will spend the off season continuing their efforts to build a championship roster.
Already, many of the pieces are in place.
They have a dominant center in Patrick Ewing.
They have surrounded him with a balanced mixture of experienced veterans and young, improving players.
And they alleviated their biggest weakness, outside shooting, by acquiring both Rolando Blackman from Dallas and a draft choice, Hubert Davis, from North Carolina on Wednesday.


Esasky May Be Headed Back to the Minors
The Atlanta Braves yesterday asked first baseman NICK ESASKY to accept an assignment to their Class AAA minor league team.
Esasky has until Sunday to accept the offer.
If he does, he will be placed on waivers, said JIM SCHULTZ, a spokesman for the Braves.
If no other major league team claims him, Esasky can join the Richmond farm club on June 30.
Regardless of his decision, Esasky's contract guarantees he will receive $1.95 million this season.
Esasky, who has suffered from vertigo since 1990, began a 20-day rehabilitation assignment with Richmond on June 5.
In 18 games, he hit .270 with 4 home runs and 10 runs batted in.


At the Bar; Oy! One misused Yiddish word in court, and just listen to all the kvetching going on.
Monica Santiago v.
Sherwin-Williams et al. had already droned on for four years when counsel for the defense filed its umpteenth otherwise unmemorable motion in the case last August.
"It is unfortunate," it declared, "that this court must wade through the
dreck
of plaintiff's statement of undisputed facts."
Jonathan Shapiro of Stern, Shapiro, Rosenfeld &amp; Weissberg in Boston, one of the plaintiff's four lawyers, was startled by the choice of words.
Dreck, he knew from his grandparents, was Yiddish for doo-doo, though a tad more tart.
Even by the standards of the
nareshkaytn  normally filed by opposing lawyers, he thought such chutzpah  intolerable.
So last September he and a co-counsel, Neil Leifer of Boston, resolved to talk takhles  with Judge Joseph L. Tauro, the tsadik
hearing the case.


Diner's Journal
Felix
Felix, the polyglot, too-cool-to-be-believed bistro at West Broadway and Grand Street in SoHo, does a outstanding job of alienating customers.
If you don't get run over by the charging waiters on your way in or elbowed by couples playing bar games at the front of the dining room, you might make it to your destination.
This airy, glass-wrapped tavern with neighborly tables that spill out of French doors onto the sidewalk features more posturing than a Mr.
Universe competition.
It's often hard to distinguish those who work there from those who just strike a pose on the fringes of the room.


Brown, Eagles Lineman, Is Killed In Accident
Jerome Brown, the Philadelphia Eagles' star defensive tackle, and his 12-year-old nephew were killed yesterday afternoon in his hometown of Brooksville, Fla., when the 1992 Corvette Brown was driving skidded out of control on wet pavement, hit a palm tree and overturned, the police said.
Brown, 27 years old, was speeding before the crash on Hale Avenue in Brooksville, according to a witness who refused to give his name.
The witness said it had been raining earlier in the day, but that it was not raining when the accident occurred at approximately 4:45 P.M.
Brown and his 12-year-old nephew, whose name was not released, were pronounced dead at 5 P.M. 'The Car Was Destroyed'
"The car skidded off the left side of the road for about five car lengths before it hit the tree," the witness said.
"The car was destroyed and there was damage everywhere. I could see part of his head and shoulders in the car and part of the boy's body. They must have died instantly."


Broker in Insider Case Made Sales, Not Waves
In a business where gregarious back-slappers seek the highest possible profile, a stockbroker accused of insider trading this month is an anomaly: colleagues seem to know little about the highly successful but mysterious figure.
Or maybe it is a case of friends deserting Oppenheimer's Million Dollar Roundtable broker now that trouble has presented itself.


Perot's Progress


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about trading in tobacco stocks on Wednesday after the Supreme Court's ruling on cigarette product liability misattributed the first news of the decision seen on most traders' computer screens.
The headline was from the Dow Jones News Service, not Bloomberg Business News.


Bodega Owner Slain in Bronx
The 59-year-old owner of a Bronx bodega was shot and killed last night when two 15-year-old boys tried to rob his store, the police said.
The teen-agers were wounded, neither of them seriously.
It was unclear who had shot them, the police said.
Lieut.
Luciano Mercado of the 41st Precinct Detective Squad said that he thought that one of the 15-year-olds had fired a shotgun at the store owner, striking him in the chest.
The owner, Fulvio Jimenez of 701 West 177th Street in Manhattan, was pronounced dead at the scene, Lieutenant Mercado said.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Report Says Police Violated Policies to Aid Perot
Despite policies forbidding the use of police officers in civil cases, an officer with a drug-sniffing police dog and officers in marked police cars assisted Ross Perot during a dispute with a tenant in 1990, a private investigator's report on the incident says.
Mr.
Perot has said he requested a highly unusual court order that allowed him to inspect the rental property three times a day because he feared that the tenant, H. Wayne Hayes Jr., would damage the property.
Mr.
Hayes, an investor with interests in oil and insurance, has since been fined $1.2 million by the Securities and Exchange Commission for defrauding investors.
He pleaded guilty to securities fraud and is in prison in Hawaii.


Ruling May Force Financing Changes at Colleges
Public universities across the South could face sweeping changes as a result of yesterday's Supreme Court ruling that Mississippi has not done enough to eliminate racial segregation at its state-run colleges, legal experts and university officials say.
The Court's decision leaves open the highly charged issue of the fate of historically black colleges and universities.
While civil rights groups hailed yesterday's decision, some supporters of black institutions said they feared that by encouraging integration, the ruling could rob the colleges of their historic purpose.


Justices Uphold Airports' Right To Ban Begging
The Supreme Court today upheld the Port Authority's ban on begging in the terminals of the three New York-area airports, but said the First Amendment gives people the right to hand out pamphlets and other literature there.
The split ruling, the result of shifting voting blocs and rationales within the Court, affirmed in both its aspects a decision last year by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan.


Steinbrenner Summit Is Set
Commissioner Fay Vincent is scheduled to meet with George Steinbrenner on Monday as his inquiry into allegedly improper communications between the owner and the Yankees proceeds.
Vincent said yesterday that Arnold Burns, Steinbrenner's lawyer, requested the meeting.
Manager Buck Showalter was interviewed at Yankee Stadium yesterday by Kevin Hallinan, the head of security for the commissioner's office.
Showalter denied having had contact with Steinbrenner, who is barred by his agreement with the commissioner from communicating with Yankee officials.


Life on the Edge


Joyner Signs Multiyear Deal With Royals
The Kansas City Royals signed first baseman WALLY JOYNER to a multiyear contract yesterday that will keep him with the club into the middle of the decade.
Joyner, 30 years old, who was to be a free agent after the 1992 season, signed a contract through the 1995 season with an option for 1996.
Joyner joined the Royals as a free agent last December after spending the first six years of his major league career with the California Angels.


T Cell Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Maverick Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Gateway to the West Slams Shut on Mets
The baseball went one way, and nine Mets went another.
The game was done, a night of failed strategy, high anxiety and another defeat was finished.
The Cardinals, who obliterated an early 3-0 deficit, won the game in the ninth on Felix Jose's one-out bases-loaded single to center that left the final score of 4-3 flashing on the giant screen in left field and in the frayed consciousness of the Mets.


At Les Pleiades, Going, Going, Gone!
For many people in the art world, Thursday night was truly a last supper.
There were tears and eulogies and even a presiding minister.
But this was a culinary celebration rather than a religious one, marking the closing of a beloved institution.
The institution is Les Pleiades, the French restaurant on East 76th Street that for 21 years has been the place where the art elite meet to eat.
The owner, Pierre Amestoy, invited 120 regulars to a farewell bash, which included an auction of one of the much-maligned paintings that have hung for years above the restaurant's signature red banquettes.


CHRONICLE
What will the DUCHESS OF YORK do if she and PRINCE ANDREW, who are presently separated, are divorced?
Not to worry.
The Duchess, the former Sarah Ferguson, has signed a deal with a British production company, Sleepy Kids P.L.C., to turn the "Budgie the Little Helicopter" books that she writes into animated cartoons, initially for television and ultimately for videos and movies.
VIVIEN SCHRAGER-POWELL, a managing director of Sleepy Kids, said that the Duchess's friend JOHN BRYAN had set up the deal.
She would not divulge any financial details.
Mr.
Bryan, a Pittsburgh millionaire, is said to be a friend of both the Duke and the Duchess of York and has acted as an intermediary in efforts to reconcile them.


Lennar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


David H. Sears, Writer, 44
David H. Sears, a writer on modern dance, died on Wednesday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 44 years old and lived in Jersey City.
Mr. Sears died of cancer, his brother, Richard, said.


Let the Delegate Beware, New York Says
In preparation for the Democratic National Convention to be held in New York next month, city consumer inspectors fanned out from Madison Square Garden recently.
After making unannounced visits to 2,400 stores that convention delegates may patronize, the inspectors issued 4,000 summonses to delicatessens, souvenir shops, drugstores and a host of other businesses.
The inspections were part of the city's plan to protect delegates against consumer frauds.
Besides conducting inspections, the city is distributing 25,000 cards with tips for safe shopping and taxi-riding.
Once the convention opens on July 13 at the Garden, the city's Department of Consumer Affairs will assign mediators to delegates' hotels to answer consumer-related questions.


COURT, 8-1, FAULTS MISSISSIPPI ON BIAS IN COLLEGE SYSTEM
Thirty years after a court order forced the University of Mississippi to accept its first black student, the Supreme Court ruled today that Mississippi had failed to prove that it had met the constitutional requirement of erasing the legacy of segregation in its state university system.
The 8-to-1 ruling, written by Justice Byron R. White, overturned a Federal appeals court decision that Mississippi had done all that the Constitution required by making its eight public universities at least nominally open to students of all races.
The five formerly all-white universities remain largely white, and the three historically black universities still have enrollments that are almost entirely black.
Called Civil-Rights Victory
Justice Antonin Scalia filed a dissenting opinion that rejected the majority's rationale, although as a technical matter he joined in the Court's judgment that the case had to be sent back to the lower courts.  [ Excerpts from the opinions, page 10. ]


Review/Jazz; McFerrin Pulls the Strings, Bringing Audience to Life
When the first recordings of Bobby McFerrin were released, in the mid-1980's, listeners were amazed by his flexibility, range and inventiveness.
Singing unaccompanied, he used circular breathing techniques and vocal acrobatics to fill the musical space around his melodies, giving the impression that he was a human music box, both singer and band in a single organism.
When he sang "I Am My Own Walkman," who could argue?
He did not sing that song at Carnegie Hall on Thursday night, when he joined forces with the keyboardist Lyle Mays and the drummer Jack DeJohnette.
But its message -- that instead of listening to music, one should make it -- was the point of the show, which was part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
Throughout the 90-minute set, he wove individual listeners' responses to his antics into the rhythms of his improvisations, or exhorted the audience at large to repeat short melodic phrases.


INSIDE
Trade Battle Over Steel
American steel makers plan nearly 100 trade complaints seeking billions in tariffs on imports from Japan, Canada and other countries.
Page 37.
Police-Corruption Records
The Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said the police had stopped releasing important records about corruption.
Page 27.
Florio Vetoes a Budget Plan
Gov.
Jim Florio vetoed the New Jersey budget just hours after the Republican-controlled Legislature adopted the sharply cut plan.
Page 25.
Maximum Term for Warmus
Carolyn Warmus was sentenced to a term of 25 years to life in prison for killing her lover's wife.
Page 28.


Mark's Work Wearhouse reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Capitals Make Offer for Manson
The Washington Capitals made a rare foray into the free-agent market yesterday, offering defenseman DAVE MANSON a four-year contract in an effort to lure him away from the Edmonton Oilers.
Manson, 25 years old, signed an offer sheet that calls for $1.1 million for the first two years and $1.2 million for the third and option year.


Era in Los Angeles Ends as Chief Quits
Once again taking Los Angeles by surprise, Police Chief Daryl F. Gates cleaned out his desk on schedule and left office quietly today, concluding a stormy 14-year tenure that ended with his greatest failure, a riot.
"I think I've done an outstanding job," he said as walked out of his office for the last time.
Some of his subordinates, crowding around him in the corridor, shouted, "We love you, Chief."


Nichols Research Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Gilbert Fires Record 62  Gibby Gilbert shot a tournament-record eight-under-par 62 yesterday in the opening round of the Southwestern Bell Classic, in Kansas City, Mo., matching the lowest round on the PGA Seniors Tour this year.
Gilbert, seeking his first Seniors Tour victory after four second-place finishes, had eight birdies and 10 pars on the 6,496-yard Loch Lloyd Course.
Gilbert tied the course record set in the pro-am Wednesday by Dick Hendrickson, who was one of three golfers at 66. (AP) BOXING  Ruddock Beats Jackson  Donovan (Razor) Ruddock knocked out previously undefeated Phil Jackson at 2 minutes 12 seconds of the fourth round of their scheduled 10-round heavyweight bout last night in Cleveland.
Jackson survived a third-round knockdown, but didn't make it past the fourth as a two-punch combination along the ropes ended the fight at the Cleveland State University Convocation Centre. (AP)


Medical Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jazz in Review
'There Was Only One Stan Getz'  Avery Fisher Hall
Thursday night's tribute to Stan Getz rambled a bit, stumbled some and redeemed itself occasionally with a few solo spots.
The show, at Avery Fisher Hall, was stuck in a tough position: Mr.
Getz, an important figure in American popular culture, left no important acolytes, no stylistic school and no overwhelming sensibility.


Navy Chief Quits Amid Questions Over Role in Sex-Assault Inquiry
Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d resigned today amid questions about his involvement in a scandal stemming from the assault of 26 women, including 14 female officers, at a convention of naval aviators last year in Las Vegas, Nev.
The Navy Secretary, who attended the Tailhook Association convention but said he saw no misconduct, had come under growing criticism from Congress in recent days for the Navy's handling of the inquiry, which Mr.
Garrett last week turned over to the Defense Department inspector general.


Infertile Couples Need the Option of Surrogacy; Maintaining Her Rights
To the Editor:
As parents of two wonderful children born through surrogate parenting, we vigorously oppose the pending legislation in Albany to ban or criminalize surrogate parenting contracts, which you support (editorial, June 10).
Surrogate parenting is not for every infertile couple or potential surrogate, but it should be preserved as an option for those who really wish to participate in it.
You are misinformed to believe that "the surrogate gives up her right to make deeply intimate decisions about prenatal care, amniocentesis, abortion and the circumstances of delivery."


Xytronyx Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


British Succession Offers a Ray of Hope
To the Editor:
Anthony Burgess suggests in "Beds of Nails" (Op-Ed, June 13) solving the British "royal problem" by a Stuart restoration to replace "the upstart Hanoverians, the sausage-eating swine."
The fly in this ointment is that the legitimate Stuart pretender is the heir to the throne of Bavaria, also presumably a sausage eater.
The last Queen of Bavaria, Maria Theresa of Austria-Este (died 1919), brought unquestioned Stuart credentials to the Bavarian dynasty.
Indeed, she was regarded by British legitimists as Queen Mary IV and III.
I have a strong hunch how the British would go if they should have to choose between a divorced Prince Charles and a Wittelsbach Roman Catholic.


County Chiefs in Albany Seek Approval to Borrow
A delegation of government leaders from Nassau and Suffolk counties went to Albany yesterday to lobby for borrowing plans to balance their budgets and to save Long Island homeowners from property-tax increases.
As lawmakers raced toward adjournment, County Executives Robert Gaffney of Suffolk and Thomas S. Gulotta of Nassau, both Republicans, worked the corridors of the State Capitol, accompanied by local legislative leaders.


OrNda Healthcorp reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Loud Alarms Aren't Just For Cars, Or Are They?
The Personal Attack Alarm is a safety alarm for people.
When its small pin is pulled, the alarm emits a sharp, piercing screech that may scare an attacker away.
Made by Applied Electronics of Hong Kong, the alarm is about the size of a beeper, 2 by 3 inches.
The sound emitted is 104 decibels, about the same as a train whistle, the company says.
The device comes with a short wrist strap and a belt clip.


Bassett Furniture Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Relieved Stein Hopes for Robber's Arrest
City Council President Andrew J. Stein, speaking publicly for the first time since his two sons and their baby sitter were locked in a bathroom by an armed robber in the family's Upper East Side apartment on Thursday afternoon, said yesterday that he was relieved that no one had been hurt.
Mr.
Stein also said in an interview that if the robber turned out to have a previous arrest record, he hoped the man would be convicted and serve a lengthy prison term.


Dr. Daniel Casner, 82, Clinical Psychologist
Dr.
Daniel Casner, a retired clinical psychologist, died on Monday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 82 years old and lived in Staatsburg, N.Y.
Dr. Casner died of a stroke, said his daughter, Jill Casner-Lotto.


Friends See Secretary as Honorable but Ill-Served
Friends and colleagues of Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d say he has always been a meticulous lawyer, an unflappable crisis manager, a loyal public servant and an absolute "straight arrow."
But as Mr.
Garrett's distinguished career began to disintegrate in recent months, ending with his resignation today, his admirers perceived a puzzling flip side to the traits they find so admirable.


RehabCare Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Pension Fund Wins Ruling Against Olympia &amp; York
One of the nation's largest pension funds won a court victory yesterday against two affiliates of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.
The ruling, which concludes that the troubled Canadian real estate company reneged on a $250 million loan agreement in 1983, could thwart the developer's efforts to avoid a huge bankruptcy filing in the United States.
The case involves a lender upset that Olympia &amp; York never availed itself of the $250 million it had promised to borrow to refinance one of the towers it built in the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan, one of the few unflawed jewels in the developer's crown.
The complaint is a sharp contrast to the positions of many creditors who regret lending money to the troubled company.


Diploma Comes First In the Sealy Family
The parents, Ann and Sidney Sealy, did not cry as the son, Malik, marched to the stage, graduating from the St.
John's Redmen to the National Basketball Association in black Indiana Pacers cap, no gown.
Ann Sealy, tall, slender and composed, admitted she had wept during another recent procession, the one in which her son was handed a bachelor's degree in business administration.
Sidney Sealy, long ago a bodyguard for the late black activist Malcolm X and now employed by a taxi company in the Bronx, added: "We got much more pleasure that he graduated from college than from him standing here now."


U.S. Sends Mobutu a Message By Welcoming a Cleric-Critic
With negotiations to bring democracy to Zaire entering a critical phase in Kinshasa, the Bush Administration has given an unusually high-level welcome to a Roman Catholic archbishop who is leading the movement for change in the Central African country.
The cleric, Laurent Monsengwo Pasinya, the Archbishop of Kisangani, said today that he had come to ask for the moral support of the United States as he begins negotiations with President Mobutu Sese Seko, Zaire's dictator for 27 years, to install a new prime minister and open the way to more representative government.


Warmus Begs for Leniency But Gets Toughest Sentence
Carolyn Warmus begged for leniency today, declaring she did not kill her lover's wife but a judge sentenced her to the maximum term for intentional murder.
Judge John Carey imposed a term of 25 years to life in prison and said Ms.
Warmus had been motivated by her "greed for what belonged to another," the married man with whom she had been having an affair.
The 28-year-old Ms.
Warmus, who is appealing her conviction for murder in the second degree, would not be eligible for parole for 25 years.


Rag Shops Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Rodney King Arrested in Dispute
Rodney G. King, whose videotaped beating by police officers led to the trial that touched off the recent riot, was arrested briefly and released today after his wife complained that he had injured her during a fight over a tape recorder, the police said.
Deputy Chief Mark Kroeker, who went to Mr.
King's house in the San Fernando Valley after a call from his wife, Crystal Waters, said she had suffered minor cuts.
Ms.
Waters told the police that Mr.
King physically abused her, but officers later said the circumstances were "insufficient" to press charges.


Review/Music; New Jersey Orchestra Tries Out a Conductor
Old concert seasons never end, it seems; they just move outdoors.
Like many other musical organizations, the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra is offering a combination of pops concerts and standard symphonic programs during the summer, and tonight it opened its annual series at the Garden State Arts Center here.
The orchestra has a special agenda this summer and next season.
It is looking for a music director to replace Hugh Wolff, who is leaving on Aug. 31 to direct the St.
Paul Chamber Orchestra.
The announcement today that the New Jersey orchestra had signed Zdenek Macal to a two-year term as artistic adviser indicated that the choice of a new director is not imminent.


Observer; Systems Going Down
Nobody wants to go back to the age when there was nothing in the house to read but "Pilgrim's Progress" and the Bible, but the other extreme isn't so wonderful either.
Just yesterday I blew six fuses after plunging into David McCullough's new 992-page Truman biography, titled with merciful brevity, "Truman."
It was lucky all my circuits didn't go out the way HAL's did after Keir Dullea yanked his computer chips in "2001." Come to think of it, though, what's so bad about just sitting under the apple tree singing, "Daisy, Daisy, give me your answer do . . ."?


Rome Journal; Who Will Save Italy's Ragged Past?
First it was the Leaning Tower of Pisa, whose leaning had become so extreme that a corset of steel was strapped around its 819-year-old base to prevent it from tumbling.
Then a 10-yard section of the 500-year-old ramparts of Urbino crumbled in heavy rains this month, leaving not only a hole in the wall but also a much bigger question: What is Italy doing to save a tapestry of antiquity that is among the world's richest but ranks, too, among the most ragged?


Usual Pleas, Usual Causes, Usual Airport
The summertime crowds of tourists, vacationers and business travelers poured through the main terminal at Kennedy International Airport yesterday afternoon and, as usual, the deft hands and insistent voices of the solicitors were there, aggressively seeking money for political and religious causes.
Solicitors for the Hare Krishna movement, for the Presidential aspirations of the extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche and for opponents of human rights abuses in Iran worked the terminal in pairs, apparently unaware of the Supreme Court's decision prohibiting their requests for money, though not the distribution of their literature, in airport terminals.


A Day in a Lobbyist's Fight for a Credit-Bureau Bill
Lobbyists are flooding the halls of Congress these days as the summer recesses near.
Lawyers, economists and other representatives of companies and trade associations are making their views on various pieces of legislation known to senators, representatives and committee staffs.
At the same time, consumer lobbyists can be seen all over Capitol Hill doing their bit to influence the course of legislation.
One of the busiest of these lobbyists is Edmund Mierzwinski, whose title is consumer advocate of the United States Public Interest Research Group, an environmental and consumer protection organization.
After four years in his current job and seven years as executive director of the Connecticut Public Interest Research Group, Mr.
Mierzwinski, who is 38 years old, is used to the hectic pace of the close of a legislative session.
But last week was particularly hectic for him because committees of both houses were taking up bills overhauling the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970, which governs the functioning of credit bureaus.
Bill Would Pre-empt State Laws
This legislation is of primary importance to the consumer movement, but after more than two years of hearings, acrimonious exchanges between consumerists and industry officials and hard-fought compromises on a number of contentious matters, an important issue remains unresolved for Mr.
Mierzwinski and his colleagues: the matter of pre-empting state laws on the issue.


Review/Dance; A Festival That Knows No Bounds
The American Dance Festival is doubly important.
Every summer it offers significant examples of American modern dance.
At the same time, it shows American audiences works by contemporary choreographers from around the world.
It thereby proclaims the essential internationalism of modern dance.
National styles do exist.
Yet dance can leap across boundaries.
This year, when arts organizations everywhere are commemorating the voyage of Columbus, the festival's schedule features several Spanish and Latin American choreographers and groups.
The program on Wednesday night at the Reynolds Industries Theater on the campus of Duke University was shared by Nucleodanza, a company from Buenos Aires, and Monica Valenciano, a solo dancer from Madrid.
Their presentations were always dramatic, but only intermittently convincing.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  U.N. ULTIMATUM FOR SERBS
The United Nations told Serbs attacking the Bosnian capital that they had 48 hours to stop fighting and put heavy weapons under United Nations control.
Envoys said failure to comply could lead the Security Council to authorize military action.  1  THE SARAJEVO OF SONG
For the families trembling in Sarajevo's basements, survival depends on Djordje Krcum and other volunteer militiamen who have united to defend the city.
Mr.
Krcum is a Serb, but he wants to preserve the old Sarajevo, where he can live side by side with Muslims and Croats.  5
Hopes for relief flights fade as Serbs pound a Sarajevo suburb.  5  SHAMIR'S GOALS QUESTIONED
Israel's outgoing Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, was quoted as saying that he wanted to drag out peace talks with the Palestinians for a decade while vastly increasing the number of Jewish settlers in Israeli-occupied territories.  1  YELSTIN 'MISSPOKE' ON G.I.'S
The American co-chairman of the commission searching for missing servicemen in Russia said President Boris Yeltsin "misspoke" last week when he said American prisoners of war might still be there.  1  EUROPE RENOUNCES 'SUPERSTATE'
Sobered by Denmark's rejection of a treaty on European union this month, European Community leaders met in Lisbon and pledged to curb the power of bureaucrats based at their headquarters.  3  GERMANY'S ABORTION BATTLE
After months of fervent debate, a mood of exhaustion settled in with the German Parliament's adoption of a liberalized abortion law.3  OUSTED HAITIAN IS URGED TO TALK
In a strong shift of policy, the United States is urging Haiti's ousted President to meet with the country's army-backed Prime Minister and negotiate his return from exile.  2  NEW PRIMER FROM THE VATICAN
The Vatican announced that it had completed a "universal catechism" to guide Roman Catholics in presenting Church teachings.
It said the document would not be issued for six months because it must be translated into many languages.  4  ZAIRIAN PRELATE EMBRACED IN U.S.
With negotiations to bring democracy to Zaire entering a critical phase, the Bush Administration has given an unusually high-level welcome to a Roman Catholic Archbishop who is leading the movement for change in the Central African country.  2  Yemen sees a crisis as Somali refugees arrive by the boatload.  4  Rome Journal: Little effort to save a ragged tapestry of antiquity.  4  National 6-11  JUSTICES RULE ON DESEGREGATION
The Supreme Court said Mississippi had failed to prove that it had met the constitutional requirement of erasing segregation's legacy from the state university system.  1  The ruling could bring sweeping change in the South.  10  DECISION ON AIRPORT BEGGING
The Supreme Court upheld the Port Authority's ban on begging in the terminals of the three major airports in the New York area.
At the same time, the Justices said the First Amendment gave people the right to distribute pamphlets and other literature there.  1
On the day the Court ruled, solicitation as usual at Kennedy.  11
Another Court ruling stripped Massachusetts of a House seat.  11  NAVY SECRETARY RESIGNS
H.
Lawrence Garrett 3d stepped down amid questions about his involvement in a scandal stemming from the sexual abuse of 26 women at a convention of naval aviators last year.  1
The puzzling flip side to Garrett's admirable traits.  7  BUSH AND IRAQ
The stark question is this: Could President Bush have avoided the Persian Gulf war by moving to restrain, rather than reward, Saddam Hussein earlier?
Mr.
Bush and his aides insist that the answer is no.
Still, no other foreign policy issue is so likely to dog the President throughout this election year.  1
News analysis: Perot's approach to the economy.  9
Perot's crowds are a mix of the believers and the curious.  9
Perot, his tenant and those highly unusual inspections.  9
Cuomo is missing from the convention's lineup of speakers.  9  GATES LEAVES QUIETLY
The Los Angeles Police Chief, Daryl F. Gates, cleaned out his desk and left office, concluding a stormy 14-year tenure that ended with his greatest failure, a riot.  6  FREIGHT TRAINS ROLL AGAIN
President Bush signed a bill that ended a shutdown of the nation's freight railroads, and the lines moved quickly to resume normal service.  6  ADVANCE IN AIDS RESEARCH
A picture of an enzyme associated with the AIDS virus has been created by a team of scientists at Yale.
The development may speed new drugs to fight the disease.  6  Space-shuttle astronauts conducted a fire experiment.  7  Metropolitan Digest, 25  Business Digest, 36  Arts/Entertainment 13-18  Les Pleiades is gone.  13  Music: From knowing to feeling.  15  New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.  18  Bobby McFerrin.  13  Dance: American Dance Festival.  17  A landmark "Romeo" based on Socialism.  13  Consumer's World 50  Let the delegate beware.
A day in a lobbyist's fight for a credit-bureau bill.
Sports 30-35  Baseball: White Sox nip Yanks. 31  Mets squander lead and lose in St.
Louis. 33  Column: Vecsey on Lithuanian basketball team 31  Golf: Frost takes 1-stroke lead. 35  Olympics: Reynolds finishes fifth at track trials. 31  Dan and Dave start decathlon competition. 34  Soccer: Denmark stuns Germany. 35  Tennis: Victory for Lendl at Wimbledon. 31  Obituaries 12  Lewis Freedman, TV producer  Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials 22  Bush fights the right to life.
Albany's parting shots.
Friendlier skies in Europe?
Enduring cost of rent control.
Letters 22  Russell Baker: Systems going down.  23  Kathleen A. Frankovic: Reading between the polls.  23  Marie Brenner: Texas word slingers.  23  John Anthony West: The case of the missing pharaoh.  23


Review/Ballet; A Landmark 'Romeo' With a Socialist Ideology
Leonid Lavrovsky's "Romeo and Juliet," for which Prokofiev wrote his now-famous score, was a landmark ballet, a milestone in dramatic realism that revealed a startling new esthetic to the Western world.
Now this historic work has returned to New York for the first time since 1959 in somewhat diluted form with the Kirov Ballet.
At its weakest, it is a grand curiosity.
But at its best, which takes on an immense pictorial impact, this "Romeo" is a masterpiece of a very particular genre and is worth a trip to the Metropolitan Opera House.


Chief Gates Leaves, Quietly and on Time
The Los Angeles Police Chief, Daryl F. Gates, cleaned out his desk and left office, concluding a stormy 14-year tenure that drew to a close with a videotaped police beating and a devastating riot.
Even before Mr.
Gates departed, his successor, Willie L. Williams, was quietly sworn in at a private ceremony at home.


Investigation Of Officer Fuels Queries On Division
By any measure, the case of Officer Robert Cabeza gave the Internal Affairs Division of the New York City Police Department a rich collection of clues and rumors to investigate.
There were tips about drug theft, of an assault and a robbery and misuse of his gun, and even suspicion of murder.
Through persistent surveillance, some law-enforcement officials said yesterday, the Internal Affairs Division could have brought charges against him.


Lewis Freedman, Producer, 66; A TV Career Spanning 45 Years
Lewis Freedman, a television producer and program executive for CBS and PBS, died on Thursday at his home in Chicago.
He was 66 years old.
He died of complications of a stroke, according to an announcement by the University of Chicago, where he was the founding director of the William Benton Broadcast Project.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about Claire Shulman, the Borough President of Queens, and her daughter, Dr.
Ellen Baker, misidentified the space shuttle on which Dr.
Baker is an astronaut.
It is the Columbia.


Nighttime Futures Trading Begins Cautiously on Globex
The Champagne flowed freely Thursday night as traders munching chocolate cake milled about the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, awaiting the start of a new era of 24-hour electronic futures trading.
Finally, at 6 P.M., as a three-piece band struck up the theme to "2001: A Space Odyssey" (from Richard Strauss's "Thus Spake Zarathustra"), a trading bell rang ceremoniously and the new trading system, known as Globex, clicked into operation.
Within seconds, to cheers on the floor, the first trade in the new 12-hour session flashed across a computer screen: 11 September futures contracts for the Japanese yen.


Sunrise Leasing Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Leaders Vow Limits to a United Europe
Sobered by Denmark's rejection of an ambitious treaty on European union earlier this month, European Community leaders pledged today to curb the power of bureaucrats based in Brussels and stressed that they had no intention of building a highly centralized "superstate."
Meeting for the first time since they negotiated the treaty in the Dutch city of Maastricht in December, the leaders insisted they would move ahead with their plans to create a single currency and adopt common foreign and security policies -- with or without Denmark.


Wine Maker Quits Lobby In California
The Robert Mondavi Winery of Oakville, Calif., has resigned from the Wine Institute, the California wine industry's primary lobbying body.
The withdrawal of the winery's founder, Robert Mondavi, who symbolizes California wine worldwide, is a significant blow to the institute.
Fifty other wineries, including the Sebastiani Vineyards of Sonoma, Calif., have resigned from the Wine Institute since it became a voluntary organization two years ago, but industry consultants predict a broad exodus following the departure of Mr.
Mondavi.


Advantage Health reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORP., New York, authorized the repurchase of an additional 10 million shares, or 3.1 percent, of its outstanding common stock.
BOSTON PACIFIC MEDICAL INC., acquired Boston Medica Ltd., a medical products distributor in Bogota, Colombia.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about an education consultant who advocated school reforms to lift children out of poverty misidentified him and misstated the title of a book he wrote.
He was Richard H. de Lone; the book was "Small Futures: Children, Inequality and the Limits of Liberal Reform" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979).


Excerpts From Justices' Opinions on Mississippi's Public University System
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's ruling today in United States v.
Fordice that Mississippi must do more to dismantle the legacy of segregation in its eight public colleges and universities.
Justice Byron R. White wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy, David H. Souter and Clarence Thomas.
Justices O'Connor and Thomas also wrote separate concurring opinions.


Parlux Fragrances Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Warmus Begs for Leniency But Gets Toughest Sentence
Carolyn Warmus begged for leniency today, declaring she did not kill her lover's wife but a judge sentenced her to the maximum term for intentional murder.
Judge John Carey imposed a term of 25 years to life in prison and said Ms.
Warmus had been motivated by her "greed for what belonged to another," the married man with whom she had been having an affair.
The 28-year-old Ms.
Warmus, who is appealing her conviction for murder in the second degree, would not be eligible for parole for 25 years.


Religion Notes
Switching Allegiances
Americans are a changeable people.
They switch homes, cars and spouses with alacrity.
A new national poll shows that religion is no exception.
One out of four Americans has switched faiths or denominations at least once from the religion in which they were born, according to the Princeton Religious Research Center, an affiliate of the Gallup Organization.


Another Hope Is Dashed in Sarajevo, as Serbs Shatter Airport Truce
The latest effort by United Nations commanders to start relief flights to Sarajevo airport broke down on Friday as Serbian nationalist forces used tanks and artillery to attack civilian buildings in an airport suburb, Dobrinja.
The attacks, some of them in the presence of the United Nations military commander here, Maj.
Gen.
Lewis W. MacKenzie of Canada, contravened what were described as assurances by the Serbian nationalist leaders on Wednesday.


Shopko Stores reports earnings for Qtr to June 20


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters; At Back of Perot's Noisy Crowds, The Curious Are Quietly Listening
At the front of the crowd, the people are excited.
Wearing T-shirts, and buttons emblazoned with pictures of their hero, Ross Perot, they carry placards urging him to run.
They greet virtually every sentence he utters with a full-throated cheer or a hearty laugh.
At the back of the crowd, it is different.
There, hardly any Perot buttons can be seen on dark business suits or bright summer dresses.
There, the people have yet to be convinced that Mr.
Perot is a savior, even though some say they have signed petitions to qualify him for the ballot.


Diploma Comes First In the Sealy Family
The parents, Ann and Sidney Sealy, did not cry as the son, Malik, marched to the stage, graduating from the St.
John's Redmen to the National Basketball Association in black Indiana Pacers cap, no gown.
Ann Sealy, tall, slender and composed, admitted she had wept during another recent procession, the one in which her son was handed a bachelor's degree in business administration.
Sidney Sealy, long ago a bodyguard for the late black activist Malcolm X and now employed by a taxi company in the Bronx, added: "We got much more pleasure that he graduated from college than from him standing here now."


Dole Food Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Waterhouse Investor Services reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Proper Daily Accused of Islamic Impropriety
One of the more strident anti-Western institutions and champions of Islamic propriety, the Kayhan newspaper chain, has itself come under attack, a state-run newspaper reported.
On Tuesday, the newspaper Salam reported, 300 demonstrators on motorcycles protested Kayhan's publication of a sewing pattern that, "with very close attention," resembled the profile of the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
The design, published in Zan-e-Ruz (Woman Today), was interpreted as an insult to the Ayatollah.


Sports of The Times; Lithuanian Makes Point, But Not 54
THE lead got to be 20, and then it was 25, and then it was 30, but the Lithuanian regulars played on, and on, and on, against their good friends from what used to be called the Soviet Union.
What with another week of the Olympic basketball qualifying tournament coming up in Zaragoza, it seemed like a very good idea to rest all the regulars.
But Arvidas Sabonis, the giant with the repaired Achilles' tendon, lumbered up and down the court.


Biomet Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


WD-40 Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


British Succession Offers a Ray of Hope
To the Editor:
Anthony Burgess (Op-Ed, June 13) writes of two attempts by Prince Charles Stuart to reimpose the House of Stuart on England in 1715 and 1745.
While Charles, "The Young Pretender," was the key figure in the rebellion of '45, his father, James, "The Old Pretender," was the leader of the '15 rising.
JONATHAN BLACKWELL Cortlandt, N.Y., June 13, 1992


Wise Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Cuomo Is Not on List Of Those Addressing Party's Convention
In the glittering lineup of speakers for next month's Democratic National Convention in New York, there is one notable omission: Mario M. Cuomo, the Governor of New York, who has been known to give a well-received speech from time to time.
Mr.
Cuomo said he had not been asked.
"No one's ever spoken to me from the Clinton camp or from the national committee," he said in a telephone interview from Albany tonight.


Infertile Couples Need the Option of Surrogacy; Regulate the Practice
To the Editor:
"Making Money by Making Babies" (editorial, June 10) assumes that the only alternative to the "crass commerce" of surrogacy is to outlaw the practice.
You ignore regulating surrogacy, as New Hampshire and Florida have effectively done.
In those states the birth mother has the right to control all aspects of her pregnancy and may for a period following childbirth rescind her agreement to give up the child, as she would in adoption.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.62
3.87
5.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.62
3.61
5.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.71
5.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.72
6.71
8.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
7.77
8.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.69
8.70
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.51
6.52
7.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Some Changing Styles Have Coach Perplexed
On the fourth straight day of 100-plus degree temperatures, Joe Byrd, the United States Olympics boxing team coach, sat in his hotel room with a somewhat worried look on his face.
But it was not the heat that was bothering him.
In fact, he said, the temperature was actually a training aid.


VATICAN PREPARES A NEW CATECHISM
The Vatican announced today that it had completed a new and long-awaited "universal catechism" designed to guide the world's 980 million Roman Catholics in presenting church teachings.
Pope John Paul II approved the catechism's text on Thursday, Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, the Vatican's leading doctrinal arbiter, said.
But the 450-page document will not be published for another six months, Cardinal Ratzinger told reporters, because it had not yet been translated into the major languages used by Catholics.


Johnson Drops Suit Against HBO
VANCE JOHNSON, a wide receiver for the Denver Broncos, who sued Home Box Office for showing him naked on television, has settled his lawsuit out of court, his lawyer said yesterday in Denver.
The lawyer, SCOTT ELDREDGE, said he was not permitted to disclose terms of the settlement because of a confidentiality agreement with HBO but "it is a satisfactory and fair one."


Navy Chief Quits Amid Questions Over Role in Sex-Assault Inquiry
Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d resigned today amid questions about his involvement in a scandal stemming from the assault of 26 women, including 14 female officers, at a convention of naval aviators last year in Las Vegas, Nev.
The Navy Secretary, who attended the Tailhook Association convention but said he saw no misconduct, had come under growing criticism from Congress in recent days for the Navy's handling of the inquiry, which Mr.
Garrett last week turned over to the Defense Department inspector general.


Lindros Hearing Still Going and Going
The ERIC LINDROS trade hearings dragged into the night, with no decision expected until Monday at the earliest.
The Quebec Nordiques, who drafted the 19-year-old Lindros in 1991, and the two teams that claimed to have traded for him -- the Philadelphia Flyers and the Rangers -- were to decide whether to begin making their final arguments and prepare to leave the downtown Montreal hotel where hearings began last Monday.
Ranger executives said they planned to fly home on a private jet as soon as the hearings ended.


Era in Los Angeles Ends as Chief Quits
Once again taking Los Angeles by surprise, Police Chief Daryl F. Gates cleaned out his desk on schedule and left office quietly today, concluding a stormy 14-year tenure that ended with his greatest failure, a riot.
"I think I've done an outstanding job," he said as walked out of his office for the last time.
Some of his subordinates, crowding around him in the corridor, shouted, "We love you, Chief."


In Surprise, M.T.A. Bans All Tobacco Advertising
Despite warnings that such an action might be unconstitutional, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday banned tobacco advertising in its subways, buses and commuter railroads.
The ban, which will go into effect as early as Jan. 1, could cost the agency $4.5 million in advertising income, officials said.
The agency's annual budget is $3 billion.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Gov. Bill Clinton
TUESDAY: 7-8 A.M., NBC, "Today."
(Channel 4 in New York.)  Ross Perot
MONDAY: 10-11 P.M., ABC, interview.
11:30 P.M.-midnight, ABC, call-in session.
(Channel 7 in New York.)


General Mills reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


At 95, an Otorhinolaryngologist Says Goodbye
NEXT Tuesday Dr.
Ann S. Belcher will arrive at her office at 8 A.M. for the last time.
The 95-year-old ear, nose and throat specialist will see patients who over the years have included Jacqueline Onassis and clerks at nearby shops.
Around 4:30 P.M. she will leave the office she has occupied for 65 years and take the bus to her apartment, as always.
The news is that Dr.
Belcher is retiring.
Though she has given patients the names of three fine otorhinolaryngologists, she will be missed, sometimes sorely so.


Reynolds Loses His Last Claim to Olympic 400
Butch Reynolds's dramatic quest to compete in the Barcelona Olympics, a rugged journey through thickets of legal obstacles and bureaucratic opposition, ended sadly for him today as he finished fifth in the 400-meter final at the United States Olympic track and field trials.
While his placement earned him a nominal position on the team as an alternate, it removed any meaningful claim he had to gaining entry into the event as one of the first three finishers or onto the 1,600-meter relay team, which is generally comprised of the first four finishers in the 400.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Amsterdam Avenue between 72d and 75th streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the District 7 street fair.
TOMORROW Lexington Avenue between 34th and 23d streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. for the Lexington Avenue street fair.
Fifth Avenue between 59th Street and Washington Square will be closed beginning at 11 A.M. for the Gay Pride parade.
The parade begins at Columbus Circle, travels across 59th Street to Fifth Avenue, down to Washington Place West, to Waverly Place, and then to Christopher Street, where a street fair will be held between Hudson and West streets.


Radyne reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
An angry American steel industry has decided to seek tariffs totaling billions of dollars on imports from Japan, the European Community, Canada and more than a dozen third world countries.
The companies plan to file nearly 100 suits on Tuesday -- the day Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan is scheduled to visit President Bush and before the economic summit meeting  [ Page 37. ] The Economy
Personal income grew just three-tenths of 1 percent and consumer spending rose five-tenths of 1 percent in May, but analysts said the increases would not be enough to spur a dull economic recovery.  [ 37. ]


Folksy Rodale Emerges as Hard-Driving Marketer
People who believe in an all-natural approach to raising plants and living were once considered woolly radicals, too eccentric to see the advantages of banishing weeds and bugs with good, dependable chemicals.
Now, they are seen as the earth's best friends, in the middle of a mainstream whose fountainhead is Rodale Press Inc.
Founded in 1942 by J. I. Rodale, a quirky former New Yorker who became convinced that the liberal use of compost created healthy soils that produced healthy plants for healthy people, Rodale has long preached the anti-pesticide gospel in magazines like Organic Gardening and Prevention.


No Way, or Any Day?
Two weeks ago, as 6-year-old Cesar Sandoval lay unconscious in a hospital bed, shot in the head when his school bus was caught in a crossfire between armed teen-agers in New Haven, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. issued a call for a special session of the legislature to rethink the state's gun laws.
Mr.
Weicker's proposals, mainly aimed at stemming the flow of guns into the hands of children, were fairly modest and even gained the support of some of the hunters' groups that generally oppose all gun-control laws.
Easy passage was predicted.


Credit Market Awaits New Economic Data
Prices of Treasury securities were basically unchanged in very slow trading yesterday, as dealers chose to close their books and wait for a series of important economic reports next week.
Selling pressure arose early in the session, as some traders chose to take profits after the market's solid price gains earlier in the week.


Digital, Selling a Chip, Agrees to Buy Into Olivetti
The Digital Equipment Corporation said today that it would spend more than $300 million over the next three years to buy 10 percent of Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company, the troubled Italian computer maker.
Digital, the nation's second-largest computer company after the International Business Machines Corporation, has stumbled badly in recent years, as the market for its VAX line of minicomputers was eroded by ever-more-powerful products.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  PRESSING FOR ACCESS TO POLICE RECORDS
District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn, who was New York State's special prosecutor for the criminal justice system for four years, said that after his former office was abolished in 1990, the New York City Police Department stopped providing prosecutors with records that he described as vital in building cases against corrupt police officers.
Page 27.
OFFICER ARRAIGNED ON MURDER CHARGE
A New York City police officer, Robert Cabeza, was arraigned in the 1991 killing of a liquor store owner and pleaded not guilty.
But if he is convicted, it will not be the Internal Affairs Division that cracked the case, despite having trailed the officer or had suspicions about him for at least two years.
Page 27.
Putting the Mayor's plan for civilian scrutiny of the police in perspective.
News analysis, Page 27.
CHANNEL 13 SCRAPS PHONE CAMPAIGN
An experimental fund-raising campaign by telephone, used two years ago by Channel 13, proved to be a mistake and was discontinued after a test, the station's president said.
Page 29.
REGION  COURT UPHOLDS BAN ON BEGGING
The United States Supreme Court upheld the Port Authority's ban on begging in the terminals of the three main New York-area airports, but said the First Amendment gives people the right to hand out pamphlets there.
Page 1.
LOBBYING IN ALBANY FOR LONG ISLAND
A delegation of government leaders from Nassau and Suffolk counties went to Albany to lobby for borrowing plans to balance their budgets and to save Long Island homeowners from property-tax increases.
Page 26.
WILL NEW YORK VOTE ON DEATH PENALTY?
After ignoring years of challenges from Governor Cuomo to let the people decide once and for all whether to reimpose the death penalty in New York State, the State Senate approved a bill that its members said would do just that.
But the Governor complained that the measure did not provide for precisely the kind of referendum he had been seeking.
Page 26.
TRANSPORTATION FUNDS IN THE BALANCE
A city vs. suburbs, highways vs. mass transit standoff between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and New York City's suburbs has put hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal transportation aid at risk.
The impasse arose when the Metropolitan Transportation Authority vetoed a regional five-year plan for spending the more than $1 billion a year that the region is due from the Federal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act.
Page 28.
WARMUS GETS MAXIMUM SENTENCE
Carolyn Warmus begged for leniency, declaring she did not kill her lover's wife, but a judge sentenced her to the maximum term for intentional murder.
The 28-year-old Ms.
Warmus, who is appealing her conviction for murder in the second degree, would not be eligible for parole for 25 years.
Page 28.
University of Bridgeport will remain accredited.
Page 28.
About New York by Douglas Martin Page 29  Religion Notes by Ari L. Goldman Page 29


Farmers Blockade Euro Disneyland in Subsidy Protest


Infertile Couples Need the Option of Surrogacy
To the Editor:
"Making Money by Making Babies," your June 10 endorsement of a bill in the New York State Legislature to make paid surrogacy illegal, asks if paid surrogacy is "protected by some fundamental right to reproduce, or is it ultimately an ignoble form of commerce." Those who understand how surrogacy works believe it is not ignoble or commerce.
It is, instead, a new and wonderful alternative for infertile couples.
When engaged in and monitored by a team of professionals, surrogacy allows infertile couples to have a biologically related child thanks to the sacrifice in time and inconvenience by a surrogate.
Payment to the surrogate is simply fair compensation for this.
It would be dehumanizing not to pay her.


Patents; Eyeglasses Augmented By Computer
RONALD SIWOFF, an optometrist described the vision of a person whose optic nerve has been damaged: If anything at all can be seen, the colors are likely to be shades of gray; edges and outlines are probably blurry, and details might well be invisible.
Ordinary eyeglasses cannot help, because the problem is not with the eye but with the limited amount of light information that reaches the brain.


Friendlier Skies in Europe?
The European Community's decision to deregulate air travel is good news for European and American travelers alike.
After taking hold in the U.S. in the 1970's, the idea has now spread to Europe.
Ultimately, European and U.S. carriers may compete in each other's markets.
Air France might fly between Chicago and Dallas, Delta between Frankfurt and Berlin -- bringing quality service at low prices to all.
But that attractive prospect remains a long time away.
For the near future, the European decision will be strictly local.
Starting next year, European carriers will be free to set their own fares.
By 1997 Air France, British Airways, Alitalia and other national carriers will be allowed to compete for passengers anywhere in the European Community.


Summerall's Struggle With Alcohol
Friends urged Pat Summerall to get help.
So did his bosses and co-workers.
But Summerall's need to confront the alcoholism that threatened his life and career was crystallized in a letter from his daughter.
"She said, 'I'd always been proud we'd had the same last name, but now I can't say that.' " said Summerall, his eyes misty.


British Succession Offers a Ray of Hope
To the Editor:
Re "Beds of Nails" (Op-Ed, June 13) by Anthony Burgess: Oliver Cromwell, lord protector of England, died, not in 1660, but on Sept. 3, 1658.
Mr.
Burgess writes of "the hereditary principle (borrowed from the monarchy), which would have placed the incompetent Richard Cromwell ('Tumbledown Dick') in the office of his father."


WTD Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Boitano Leaning Toward Lillehammer
The International Skating Union has said professionals can compete with amateurs in figure skating at the Olympics.
And BRIAN BOITANO seems ready to say yes to Lillehammer, Norway, in 1994.


It's Royal Copenhagen: Denmark Stuns Germany
Denmark, invited here only after Yugoslavia was banned from international competition, captured its first major soccer championship by beating Germany, 2-0, tonight in the final of the European championship.
The title completed a bizarre journey for the Danes.
They were not invited to this tournament until May 31, they did not assemble for practice until nine days before their opening match with England and they were last in their four-team group heading into the final first-round game against France a week ago.


Sudan Points Up the World Hunger Crisis; Islamic Persecutions
To the Editor:
As a member of the Sudanese Human Rights Organization, I commend your reporting on the Sudan and would draw your attention to the suffering of the Sudanese under the repressive rule of the Islamic fundamentalist Government in Khartoum, which was supported by Iran.
The fundamentalist Government banned political parties and trade unions, and has detained hundreds of politicians and trade unionists.
It imposed Islamic laws and moved to establish religious apartheid.
In the name of holy war, the Sudanese army and the new popular defense force have massacred tens of thousands of southern Sudanese and the Nuba people of South Kordofan province.


U.S. Presses Ousted Haitian Chief To Negotiate a Return From Exile
In a push to end a nine-month political standoff, the United States has begun urging Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to meet with the country's army-backed Prime Minister to negotiate his return from exile and the lifting of an international embargo.
While the new approach falls short of outright recognition for the recently formed Government of Prime Minister Marc L. Bazin, the pressure on Father Aristide to negotiate represents a strong shift from recent statements supporting the exiled President's right to choose his own prime minister.


Morgan's Foods reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Jazz in Review
Harold Mabern  Pianist Equitable Auditorium Manhattan
When Harold Mabern was working his way up as a young pianist in Memphis, "the club owners didn't want to hear no be-bop," he told the audience at the Equitable Auditorium on Wednesday afternoon.
"Just blues and boogie-woogie." Years later, the blues and boogie-woogie are still ingrained in his music, which rides along on the oom-pah power of his left hand.


Bush's Greatest Glory Fades As Questions on Iraq Persist
President Bush may have reached the pinnacle of his political career on March 7, 1991, when he addressed a joint session of Congress and basked in a three-minute standing ovation from lawmakers who waved small American flags and even chanted his name in admiration of his handling of the Persian Gulf war.
He had skillfully forged an international diplomatic and military coalition that had driven the Iraqi Army from Kuwait.
His approval rating had soared to nearly 90 percent in several polls and even the Democratic Speaker of the House, Representative Thomas S. Foley, introduced Mr.
Bush that night by giving him "our warmest congratulations on the brilliant victory of the Desert Storm operation."


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voices -- Atlanta; On Political Expediency and the Price of War
Political experts, local officials and ordinary voters in several cities were asked to appraise President Bush's handling of the Persian Gulf war.
Charles W. Scott
60 years old; retired Army colonel who is now a consultant and lecturer on the Middle East; one of the American hostages in Iran in 1979-80
In the broadest sense, the Persian Gulf war was a tremendous military victory in terms of logistics, tactics and strategy.


Revelation in Tyson Case Leaves Mixed Opinions
A day after the Rhode Island Supreme Court indicated that the victim in the Mike Tyson trial may have committed perjury, opinions were split yesterday on what effect the finding might have on the future of Tyson, who is serving a six-year sentence for rape.
As a result of the finding, Judge Patricia J. Gifford, who presided over the criminal trial in Indianapolis, was sent an agreement signed before the rape trial by the victim, Desiree Washington.
The court said that the agreement was to pay a Rhode Island lawyer a percentage of any money she might recover in a potential civil suit against Tyson.


Shamir Is Said to Admit Plan To Stall Talks 'for 10 Years'
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir was quoted in a published interview today as saying he wanted to drag out peace talks with the Palestinians for a decade while vastly increasing the number of Jewish settlers in Israeli-occupied territories.
Had he held on to his office instead of being defeated this week in Israel's national election, Mr.
Shamir reportedly said, "I would have conducted negotiations on autonomy for 10 years and in the meantime we would have reached half a million people" in the West Bank.


Pavarotti to Perform
Luciano Pavarotti, the tenor, will perform with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra at 8:30 tonight at the Atlantic City Convention Center.
The performance, which is also to feature the flutist Andrea Griminelli, is to be conducted by Leone Magiera.
Tickets: $25 to $150.
Information: (800) 736-1420.


The Enduring Cost of Rent Control
An "enduring monument to economic illiteracy," Vice President Quayle called rent control in his latest speech bashing New York.
On this subject, at least, he's got it right.
Rent control remains one of New York City's more galling and costly policies.
It has been in effect ever since World War II -- and hasn't made sense for most of that time.
It purports to help the poor afford housing.
Instead, it does serious damage, speeds the destruction of older housing, reduces the city's property tax revenues and discourages the construction of new rental apartments.
That hurts the poor and middle class by keeping housing at a costly premium.


Turkey Seeks Security Advantage In Region's New Ex-Soviet Nations
The gathering of leaders of 11 nations of the Balkan Peninsula and the former Soviet Union was described this week by Turkish and other participants as a Turkish initiative to draw advantage from the collapse of Communism and its founder state.
The meeting concluded Thursday with a declaration for economic cooperation and good neighborliness.


Guggenheim Branch's Inaugural Exhibition Spurs Protest


Sandpaper II: Leary Pure But Rough Finish for Yanks
With umpires, television cameras, an opposing manager and curious Yankee fans playing detective, Tim Leary seemed to be squeaky-clean last night.
The pitcher who was the center of a protested game last Sunday, when the Orioles contended he was scuffing baseballs, delivered a fine seven-inning stint against the White Sox as the Yankees returned from a 14-game, 14-day road trip.


Job for D'Amboise
To the Editor:
Having just seen Jacques D'Amboise's National Dance Institute in performance at the Majestic Theater in Brooklyn, I must express how thrilled I was to see hundreds of children of all races and creeds dancing together.
When "Take the A Train" began, I saw the true American rainbow of races tap dancing together: it sent goose bumps down my spine.


Frost Stays Steady, Still Leads
David Frost, attempting to emerge from the worst slump of his career, completed his best consecutive rounds of the year today to take a one-shot lead after two rounds of the Buick Classic.
Frost shot a three-under-par 68 for a 36-hole total of seven-under 135 on the 6,779-yard Westchester Country Club, which despite its relative lack of length remained difficult to handle as wind and high rough made par a respectable figure.


SERBS TOLD TO END SIEGE OF SARAJEVO OR RISK U.N. FORCE
The Security Council today gave Serbian forces 48 hours to stop fighting in Sarajevo and put their heavy weapons under United Nations control.
Diplomats said failure to comply could lead to some kind of military action.
In a statement issued in the name of Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Serbs were told that if they did not comply, the Security Council would meet on Monday "to determine what other means would be required to bring relief to the suffering people of Sarajevo."


Big U.S. Steelmakers to Seek Billions in Tariffs
An angry American steel industry has decided to seek billions of dollars in tariffs on imports from Japan, the European Community, Canada and more than a dozen third world countries.
The six large American integrated steel producers plan to file nearly 100 trade complaints on Tuesday seeking protection from foreign competition -- on the day Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan is scheduled to arrive here on an official visit and a week before President Bush meets with the leaders of the seven leading industrial democracies in Munich, Government and steel industry officials said.


Senate Offers Referendum On Sentences
After ignoring years of challenges from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to let the people decide whether to reimpose the death penalty in New York State, the Republican-controlled State Senate today reversed course and approved a bill that its members said would do just that.
But Mr.
Cuomo immediately complained that the measure did not provide for precisely the kind of referendum he had been seeking.
And Democrats who control the Assembly appeared all but certain to refuse to let the measure even come up for a vote, meaning that the people probably will not have a say in the matter after all, at least not this year.


Harry L. Case, Ford Foundation Official, 84
Harry L. Case, a former official at the Ford Foundation and the Tennessee Valley Authority, died on Wednesday at his home in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 84 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
An article on the Law page yesterday about defense lawyers' possible response to a Supreme Court prohibition on excluding jurors because of race misidentified an organization of black lawyers.
It is the National Conference of Black Lawyers, not the National Black Trial Lawyers Conference.


Hillhaven Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Uncharted Territory Ahead as Trains Roll Again
Railroads around the country moved quickly to resume normal service today, ending the two-day chokehold on industries that rely on the rails and the threat of no service for tens of thousands of commuters in the Northeast.
Just after 1 A.M. today, President Bush signed into law binding arbitration that was approved by Congress late Thursday night.


Unico American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Decline Seen in Police Corruption Effort
The Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, who was New York State's special prosecutor for the criminal justice system for four years, said yesterday that after his former office was abolished in 1990, the New York City Police Department stopped providing prosecutors with records that he described as vital in building cases against corrupt police officers.
The records, informally known as corruption logs, are daily records of misconduct complaints that come from civilians, other officers, investigators and anonymous sources into the department's Internal Affairs Division.
Mr.
Hynes said the logs were important six years ago in helping develop cases against more than a dozen officers in Brooklyn's 77th Precinct who were accused of stealing money and drugs from crack houses.


Pricor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Guidepost
Ask several appliance-store salesmen for the best air conditioner, and you're likely to get the same answer: the bigger, the better.
But like shoes, air conditioners should be fitted -- to the room, location and use.
Also, a highly efficient machine can make utility bills less painful.
ROOM SIZE AND B.T.U.'s
An air conditioner's cooling capacity is measured in British thermal units, or B.T.U.'s. (A B.T.U. is the amount of heat needed to increase the temperature of a pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit.) Here is a guide for determining the B.T.U. size of an air conditioner, based on the square footage of the room to be cooled and the thickness of the exterior wall. (A thick wall is one that is over eight inches thick, or heavily insulated.)
Square Footage
Thick Outside Wall
Thin Outside Wall
100
4,550 B.T.U.'s
5,300 B.T.U.'s
150
5,700
6,800
200
6,650
8,100
250
7,550
9,300
300
8,300
10,400
500
11,000
14,500
SPECIAL FACTORS Adjust the B.T.U. size if any or all of these factors apply. (If the room is a kitchen, adjust the B.T.U. size after adding 4,000 B.T.U.'s.): Factor Ceiling over 10 feet  Heavily shaded room  Room faces west  Room faces north  Multiply B.T.U. size by: 1.1 0.8 1.1 0.9 EFFICIENCY RATING Federal law requires every new air conditioner sold to have a tag showing its energy-efficiency rating.
A rating of 9.5 and over is considered very efficient.
During an average operating season, a 10,000-B.T.U. air conditioner with a rating of 11.6 will cost about $66 to operate in the New York City area.
A similar unit with a rating 0f 9.0 will cost $86. (Source: Con Edison)


Albany Session Limps to an Unproductive Close
A legislative session that once held great promise now appears to be dwindling to an anticlimactic close, with state lawmakers failing so far to agree on many of the most critical issues facing the state, from economic development to Medicaid to environmental protection.
With the Senate and Assembly planning to recess within days, legislative aides and Cuomo administration officials said today that a proposal to have the state take over local Medicaid costs was close to death.
The same was true of a bill intended to discourage adolescent smoking by limiting vending machines and requiring antismoking advertising in public places where cigarette ads are displayed.


Jazz in Review
Modern Jazz Quartet  Carnegie Hall
The Modern Jazz Quartet, in celebrating its 40th anniversary on Wednesday evening at Carnegie Hall, carried the JVC Jazz Festival back to its origins and beyond.
George Wein, the festival's producer, warmly introduced the group and described its appearance at the first Newport Jazz Festival, in 1954.
As now, Milt Jackson played vibes and Percy Heath bass, but the pianist was Horace Silver and the drummer Kenny Clarke.
The pianist John Lewis, who has provided so much of the quartet's repertory throughout its four decades, was in Newport, though only to accompany Ella Fitzgerald, and the drummer Connie Kay signed on a year later.


Bush's Greatest Glory Fades As Questions on Iraq Persist
President Bush may have reached the pinnacle of his political career on March 7, 1991, when he addressed a joint session of Congress and basked in a three-minute standing ovation from lawmakers who waved small American flags and even chanted his name in admiration of his handling of the Persian Gulf war.
He had skillfully forged an international diplomatic and military coalition that had driven the Iraqi Army from Kuwait.
His approval rating had soared to nearly 90 percent in several polls and even the Democratic Speaker of the House, Representative Thomas S. Foley, introduced Mr.
Bush that night by giving him "our warmest congratulations on the brilliant victory of the Desert Storm operation."


Sharks' General Manager Resigns
JACK FERREIRA, 48, resigned yesterday as general manager of the San Jose Sharks.
The resignation was part of a "reorganization of hockey operations," the Sharks said in a statement.


Hold the Phone! Mets Try to Explain
Manager Jeff Torborg apologized for any appearance of an organizational cover-up.
Bobby Bonilla didn't apologize for anything.
Other Mets had their suspicions about the right fielder and the manager and their roles in Thursday's tragedy of errors at Shea Stadium.
Welcome, then, to Mets, lies and videotape.


South Bronx Begins to Shed Image of a Land Without Hope
To the Editor:
"A Bank Shows It Can Profit and Follow a Social Agenda," your May 24 front-page article on Chicago's South Shore Bank, sheds light on one model for revitalizing economic opportunity in blighted neighborhoods.
However, having been involved in economic development in the South Bronx since 1971, I was dismayed to read that South Shore's strategy "would not work in the South Bronx, or other areas so distressed that neighborhoods have gone to demolition." This statement unfortunately perpetuates a persistent stereotype of the South Bronx as beyond hope, which clearly contradicts the progress being made here.


Namic U.S.A. Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sudan Points Up the World Hunger Crisis
To the Editor:  I write to express the combined voice of the world's largest Roman Catholic, Protestant and Jewish overseas relief and development organizations in response to "Trek to Misery by 12,000 Pawns in Sudan War" (front page, June 10), about the young refugees who have made a 1,000-mile, four-year, barefoot odyssey from the Sudan to Kenya.
Your article provides just a glimpse of the structural violence, both endemic and epidemic, that threatens the world's poorest citizens.
It is endemic, as every night more than one billion people throughout the third world go to bed hungry, most of them women and children.
It is epidemic, as the worst drought of the century puts some 30 million lives at risk in South and Southeast Africa this year alone.


WSMP Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 22


Quotation of the Day
"The tradition of our Navy mandates that senior officials bear the ultimate responsibility for their command." -- H. LAWRENCE GARRETT, resigning as Navy Secretary.  [ 1:3 ]


Bridge
None of the pairs who contested the Epson Worldwide Pairs in the New York metropolitan area a week ago achieved a top ranking, but one pair came close.
Marla Chaikin of Sea Bright, N.J., and Bill Esberg of Elberon, N.J., scored almost 72 percent playing North-South Saturday afternoon, which left them half a percentage point, or about one eighth of a board, behind the North American winners for that session.
Other New Jersey winners were: Friday N-S, Theodore Bayer of Freehold and Henry Malek of Point Pleasant, 67 percent; Friday E-W, Art Hoffman of Maplewood and Marty Robins of West Orange, 68 percent; Saturday E-W, Volkert Veeder of Toms River and Bud Swayne of Surf City, 70 percent.
Stretching to Game
"I do not think that that 10 tricks can be made, except with considerable help from the defense," stated Zia Mahmood in the official commentary on the diagram.
Chaikin did receive the considerable help and made 10 tricks, which was just as well since her partner, as shown, had stretched his values considerably to reach the game.


Mr. Bush Fights the Right to Life
Before the extraordinary essayist M. F. K. Fisher died this week she was unable to walk or use her hands to cook or write.
Like a million Americans, she had Parkinson's disease.
Still, Mrs.
Fisher may have thought herself fortunate.
She was not among 4 million other Americans who are afflicted with Alzheimer's disease in their old age.
By vetoing a law to lift the Administration's ban on fetal tissue research, President Bush has done the victims a grave disservice.
Fetal tissue holds great promise for their treatment, as it does for sufferers from childhood diabetes and Huntington's chorea.
But that promise won't be realized on Mr.
Bush's watch.


Summerall's Struggle With Alcohol
Friends urged Pat Summerall to get help.
So did his bosses and co-workers.
But Summerall's need to confront the alcoholism that threatened his life and career was crystallized in a letter from his daughter.
"She said, 'I'd always been proud we'd had the same last name, but now I can't say that.' " said Summerall, his eyes misty.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for 13wks to May 30


Looking Beyond This November


Clinton Meets With Members of His Supporting Cast


Florio Vetoes Budget Plan In New Jersey
Just hours after the Republican-controlled Legislature approved a sharply reduced budget of $14.6 billion, Gov.
Jim Florio vetoed it tonight, setting the stage for a possible attempt to override.
"I cannot sign a budget that would force state government to renege on its responsibilities, and turn its back on our people," Mr.
Florio said in his veto message, which was delivered to legislative leaders at 11:40 P.M.
"This budget is fiscally unsound. It ignores the needs of real people. And it fails to invest in our citizens' future."


Core Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Your Taxes; I.R.S. Pursues One of Its Own
BEVERLEY P. ADDISON'S problems with the Internal Revenue Service began when the agency dismissed her as a revenue agent in 1985, supposedly for unacceptable job performance.
Only later did the I.R.S. send her a bill for back taxes.
She challenged the agency on both matters, with varying degrees of success.
The Merit Systems Protection Board, which protects civil servants from unfair dismissal, quickly gave her back her I.R.S. job.
And last week the United States Tax Court said some of the tax deductions that the I.R.S. had challenged were proper.
On some other counts the court upheld the agency.


Reynolds Loses His Last Claim to Olympic 400
Butch Reynolds's dramatic quest to compete in the Barcelona Olympics, a rugged journey through thickets of legal obstacles and bureaucratic opposition, ended sadly for him today as he finished fifth in the 400-meter final at the United States Olympic track and field trials.
While his placement earned him a nominal position on the team as an alternate, it removed any meaningful claim he had to gaining entry into the event as one of the first three finishers or onto the 1,600-meter relay team, which is generally comprised of the first four finishers in the 400.


Big Question on Reviewing Police Conduct: What Is True Civilian Control?
When New York City was embroiled in its last great battle over establishment of a civilian-controlled board to investigate cases of police brutality the issue seemed a matter of first-grade arithmetic:
The board established by Mayor John V. Lindsay in 1966 was composed of four civilians and three police officers.
Thus, in a major break from past practice, the board, which was crushingly rejected in a public referendum, was deemed to be under the dominance of civilians rather than the police.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Food Lion Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Shorewood Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Clues to Bullet's Path Sought in Newark Shooting
Investigators are examining evidence that the bullet that critically wounded Howard Caesar on June 9 ricocheted before striking him in the side.
Mr.
Caesar, 17 years old, was suspected of stealing a car.
Evidence that the bullet ricocheted could suggest that it was not deliberately aimed at Mr.
Caesar.
Last Sunday, James F. Mulvihill, the acting Essex County Prosecutor, watched as eight investigators chipped away at concrete in the wall and the steps at the entrance to West Side Park, the area from which the shot that struck Mr.
Caesar came.


At 95, an Otorhinolaryngologist Says Goodbye
NEXT Tuesday Dr.
Ann S. Belcher will arrive at her office at 8 A.M. for the last time.
The 95-year-old ear, nose and throat specialist will see patients who over the years have included Jacqueline Onassis and clerks at nearby shops.
Around 4:30 P.M. she will leave the office she has occupied for 65 years and take the bus to her apartment, as always.
The news is that Dr.
Belcher is retiring.
Though she has given patients the names of three fine otorhinolaryngologists, she will be missed, sometimes sorely so.


Interspec Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Playing It Safe on Delivery After the Rail Strike Ends
For the last few days, Doug Ely has been the most important person at his company.
Normally, the fast-talking 38-year-old traffic manager for Kransco, a toy maker based in San Francisco, toils in the background.
He has the job of lining up trucks and rail cars to deliver raw materials to plants and to ship flying disks, body-surfing boards and children's electric cars to hundreds of stores.


Corrections
Because of a computer transmission error, an article yesterday about effects felt in Serbia from the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina described the drop in the value of the currency incorrectly.
While inflation has sometimes climbed at a rate of more than 10 percent a day, in the three weeks since sanctions were imposed the value of a 5,000-dinar note dropped to $2.70 from about $5.50, not $550.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a decision by the International Trade Commission that tariffs should not be imposed on imported Japanese mini-vans referred incorrectly to a court that hears appeals of decisions by the Court of International Trade.
It is the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, not the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.


Hearts Heavy, Arms Light, They Are Fighting On for Sarajevo
All was deathly quiet on Thursday night on the northern front of Sarajevo's war.
In what used to be a children's ward of the Jezero hospital, blasted by rocket and artillery fire into a purgatory of fire-blackened toys, twisted bed frames and shattered glass, Bosnian Government sentries stood still, peering silently into the pitch blackness outside.
Less than 50 yards away, in bunkers dug beneath a line of poplar trees, Serbian nationalist troops stared back.


Pacific National Financial reports earnings for Year to March 31


John J. Astor 5th, 79; Son of Builder of Hotel
John Jacob Astor 5th, a descendant of one of America's most fabled merchant princes, died yesterday at his home in Miami Beach.
He was 79 years old.
His death was reported by two of his cousins, R. Thornton Wilson, and Stephen Spencer, who said they did not know the cause.


Executive Changes
CHASE LINCOLN FIRST, Rochester, a unit of Chase Manhattan Corp., named David C. Clark executive vice president.
COUNTRY AMERICA, New York, a magazine published by Meredith Corp., named Gail C. Healy publisher.


Joy Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Fund-Raising Test by Channel 13 Proves Costly
An experimental fund-raising campaign by telephone, used two years ago by Channel 13, New York's primary public television station, was discontinued after a year because the program's expenses were too high in relation to the amount of money raised, officials at the station said yesterday.
Dr.
William F. Baker, the president of Channel 13/WNET, said that the station had used Facter Fox and Associates, a Los Angeles-based fund-raising company, for the telemarketing test and that it had proved "unacceptable."


Singapore Fund Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Men's Team Aims for a Golden Beginning
They came.
They practiced.
They played golf.
And then yesterday, on the final day of workouts in La Jolla, Calif., the United States men's basketball team departed for Portland, Ore., their first step toward an anticipated Olympic gold medal later this summer.
PATRICK EWING was with them, but he didn't practice yesterday after suffering a dislocated right thumb in Thursday's practice.
Coach CHUCK DALY gave Ewing's playing time to KARL MALONE and CHRISTIAN LAETTNER , although DAVID ROBINSON is likely to be the starter Sunday against Cuba.


CHRONICLE
While her peers scoop ice cream or work as camp counselors, ANNA STOESSINGER, a 17-year-old who just completed her junior year at the Trinity School in New York, will be rubbing elbows with and doing errands for the President of Czechoslovakia.
Miss Stoessinger leaves tomorrow for Prague, where she will work for President VACLAV HAVEL and one of his advisers, OLDRICH CERNY, in an office in the Prague Castle, two doors down from the President's office.
She will handle a variety of duties, including editing and typing letters, taking phone calls, escorting visitors, writing synopses of articles from English language newspapers and serving tea.
She has been collecting books to ship to various institutions in Czechoslovakia for English-language teachers and will take with her the complete works of Freud.


Lendl Continues Quest to be Lion of the Lawn
Cranky, crafty Ivan Lendl did not literally invite 21-year-old Sandon Stolle to sit on his knee and listen to an early bedtime story as the evening shadows gathered on Wimbledon's Court One.
But by the time he had forced the youngster into a fifth set today, the self-described old-timer was into a full-scale exposition of tennis' version of "The Turn of the Screw."
The outcome was a 6-3, 1-6, 2-6, 6-3, 7-5 come-from-behind victory for the 32-year-old Lendl, who is still suspicious enough of grass to repeatedly scour it between points with his sneaker soles but who also continues to crave the single Grand Slam title that has eluded him in 12 prior visits.


Half-Century After Death, a U.S. Farewell to Paderewski


Braggs Helps Reds Cool Down Braves
Reds 7, Braves 4
CINCINNATI, June 26 (AP) -- Glenn Braggs opened a weekend showdown for first place in the National League West with a first-inning grand slam, sending the Cincinnati Reds to a 7-4 victory over the Atlanta Braves tonight.
The Braves lost for just the fourth time in 25 games, slipping two games behind the division-leading Reds.
Cincinnati has been atop the West Division every day in June.


Review/Music; The Art of Translating Knowledge Into Feeling
If anti-expansion is the coming watchword for concert music in this country, then the 15-year-old Bargemusic series offers a working prototype.
Here, floating at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge, an intimate, comfortable old vessel rocks gently in the East River tide as emerging young artists offer chamber music to small audiences.
Global aspirations seem far away at this sheltered corner of the Brooklyn waterfront.
One of Bargemusic's formats is the dinner-plus-music evening that happened on Thursday.
A quartet of excellent young players, all at the beginning of their career tracks, played pieces by Beethoven, Dohnanyi and Dvorak.
The Dohnanyi Serenade for Violin, Viola and Cello in C was the least known of the three.
Its five movements stem from the turn of the century, yet their roots lie in the late Classicism of Beethoven or Schubert.
The Scherzo adopts a fugal stance; the finale is a tightly energetic Rondo reminiscent of a Beethoven "Razumovsky" Quartet.
It is the exuberance, the expansions of modulation and especially Dohnanyi's add-on sentences that bring the trio into its own period.
Nai-Yuan Hu, the violinist; Misha Amory, the violist, and Ronald Thomas, the cellist, played it with a mix of fierce exactitude and tenderness.


Albany's Parting Shots
The New York State Legislature is, as usual, bogged down in partisan politicking as lawmakers move toward summer recess.
Negotiations over important bills are further complicated by the need to agree on a reapportionment plan ordered by the Justice Department.
Here, in any case, are measures that deserve last-minute attention.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Hardly Laissez-Faire; Perot Says Strong Government Action Could Restore Industries to Strength
In his muscular rhetoric about making America's economy stand tall again, Ross Perot sounds more activist about the economy than many liberal Democrats, promising a far more interventionist role for the Government to make American industry more competitive.
"I don't want to live in a country that can't make its own television sets," he told The New Republic recently.
"It's just bizarre that we can't make consumer electronics. Those are industries of the future. If we forfeit whole industries from this country, we will have a third-world-nation standard of living."


Highways vs. Mass Transit Impasse Imperils $1.6 Billion in Annual Federal Aid
A city vs. suburbs, highways vs. mass transit standoff between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the Long Island and lower Hudson Valley suburbs of New York City has put hundreds of millions of dollars in Federal transportation aid at risk.
The impasse arose Thursday when the Metropolitan Transportation Authority vetoed a regional five-year plan for spending the $1.6 billion a year that the region is due from the Federal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991.
The act requires regional unanimity on spending plans.


After First Day, Decathlon Results Not as Advertised
Two months ago, Dan O'Brien suffered a stress fracture of his right fibula.
Two weeks ago, although he and his coaches had never disclosed it, he sprained his left ankle.
So instead of training three times a day, he has been training once every other day.
He estimates he is at 80 percent efficiency.
At 80 percent, he was a medical miracle this afternoon and night as the decathlon began in the United States Olympic track and field trials.
He totaled 4,698 points for five events, a world record for the first day of this two-day, 10- event test.


Ex-U.S. Envoy Says Yeltsin Misspoke on M.I.A.'s
The American co-chairman of the commission searching for missing Americans in Russia said today that President Boris N. Yeltsin "misspoke" when he said American prisoners of war might still be there.
"It's clear to me that he misspoke, because we have found nobody here that will tell us that Mr. Yeltsin's information was correct based on solid information," Malcolm Toon, a former United States Ambassador to Moscow, told reporters here.
"I think he was acting genuinely, but I think he misspoke."


CORRECTIONS
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about a concert offered by a pianist as a way to sell his Rockland County home misstated the date.
It will be July 12 in New Hempstead, N.Y.
Information and directions are available at (914) 354-0534.


Noted With Pleasure
What We May Be
Lewis Thomas offers us solace in the midst of the world's problems with the thought that we are, in evolutionary terms, still youngsters.
This is from "The Fragile Species" (Robert Stewart/ Scribners).


A Rockefeller May Take On D'Amato in Primary
A new wrinkle may well be added to the race for United States Senator from New York with word from Laurance Rockefeller, the 47-year-old nephew of the late Nelson A. Rockefeller, that he is strongly considering a primary challenge against Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican incumbent.
Mr.
Rockefeller, an environmental lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council, has never run for public office.
But he is not exactly a political neophyte, having worked on several campaigns for his uncle.
And as a Rockefeller, he would certainly have fewer problems with name recognition and fund raising than the average political newcomer.


Excerpts From Interview With Clinton on Goals for Presidency
Following are excerpts from an interview with Gov.
Bill Clinton in the Governor's Mansion here on Thursday.
The questioners were R. W. Apple Jr., B. Drummond Ayres Jr., Thomas L. Friedman, Steven Greenhouse and Gwen Ifill of The New York Times.
Some questions have been edited or paraphrased because of space limitations.


Telecommunications' Ubiquitous Man of Influence
Ervin S. Duggan had a confession to make at last November's meeting of the Federal Communications Commission.
In introducing a new senior aide, Commissioner Duggan said he had to admit that, yes, indeed, he had hired the adviser from the Washington law firm of Wiley, Rein &amp; Fielding.
He said he knew that two of his colleagues had also hired top aides from the same firm, and he knew that the F.C.C.'s current general counsel and even one of his fellow commissioners came from the Wiley, Rein fold.


Christina Engstrom, John C. Martin
September wedding plans for Christina Diane Engstrom and John Conroy Martin, the son of Judge and Mrs.
John S. Martin Jr. of Rye, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Engstrom of Easton, Md.
Miss Engstom, 22 years old, and her fiance, 22, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She teaches social studies at Yazoo City (Miss.) High School.
Her father is a senior financial consultant with Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in Easton, where her mother, Dr.
Fayette Engstrom, is a pediatrician in private practice.


Lausanne
As top athletes from all continents are warming up to compete for gold medals in Barcelona, scores of international sports officials in the lake city of Lausanne, Switzerland, are already at work planning the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta.
The preparation, financing and marketing of the Olympics require an organizational effort comparable to mounting a world's fair or a space program -- and it's all done in this pleasant city on the north shore of Lake Geneva.
Lausanne proudly calls itself the Olympic City, displaying in its official logo the five linked rings superimposed on the outline of its 700-year-old cathedral.
The headquarters of the International Olympic Committee is in a 19th-century chateau and an adjacent steel-and-glass structure in the western lakeside suburb of Vidy at 9 Route de Vidy; telephone 6216111.
The founder of the Olympic Games of the modern era, the French educator Baron Pierre de Coubertin, is buried at the Montoie Cemetery nearby.


The Man From Texarkana
"You can talk about I.B.M., E.D.S., the Naval Academy -- they all had an influence on Ross," a longtime business associate says.
"But none of that really matters. Ross was formed before he left Texarkana."
Ever since childhood, Ross Perot has been driven by a powerful impulse to rescue people and things.
In his very first rescue mission, at the age of 12, he surrendered his own name and took that of his dead older brother to assuage his father's grief.


Susan G. Flinn, Vincent E. Fultz
Mr. and Mrs.
Macdonald Flinn of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Greenleaf Flinn, to Vincent Edmund Fultz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Fultz of Mayfield Village, Ohio.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Flinn, 26 years old, is an account service manager at Goble &amp; Associates, a Chicago advertising agency.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.


Paul de Man: The Plot Thickens
To the Editor:
David Lehman's excellent essay on Paul de Man provides a sad but necessary reconstruction of deconstruction.
I have always been suspicious of critics who claim that they know more than an author could have intended.
While it is in the nature of great literature that it takes on a life of its own, and while good critics may perceive different things from what an author intended, criticism is not epistemologically superior to writing, as deconstructionists haughtily claim.
Many psychoanalytic literary critics promote a similar fallacy.


Susan Baer and Mayo Noerdlinger
Susan Kathleen Baer, a daughter of George Baer of Newport, R.I., and Martha Nagle of Oklahama City, was married yesterday to Mayo Andrew Noerdlinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor S. Noerdlinger Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
George H. Back performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Cathedral in Oklahoma City.
Mrs.
Noerdlinger, 25 years old, is an assistant to the guidance counselor at the Chapin School in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is a professor of maritime strategy at the United States Naval War College in Newport.
Her mother is an assistant vice chancellor for the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education in Oklahoma City.
The bride's stepmother, E. Kristina Baer of Newport, is an editor and writer.


Infielders in Love
THE DREYFUS AFFAIR
A Love Story. By Peter Lefcourt. 290 pp. New York: Random House. $20.


Mutual Funds; A Double Pinch of Rates and Fees
Adjustable rate mortgage funds were developed to give investors relatively high and steady yields.
But with A.R.M. rates trending down, fund yields have been slipping, too, cutting into their traditional advantage over short-term income funds.
The A.R.M. funds have lost more than one-half of a percentage point in yield in the last three months, compared with milder declines in short-term Government and high-quality corporate bond funds and a gain in short-term Treasury funds.


Mongols to Elect New Parliament With China Watching the Results
Mongolians go to the polls Sunday, in some areas by horse or camel, to vote in sharply contested parliamentary elections that are in part a referendum on the pace of the nation's transition to democracy and a market economy.
The campaign is a triumph of pluralism, with a dozen political parties representing the interests of everyone from shepherds to capitalists.
But many Mongolians say they have lost the enthusiasm that they felt for the first competitive election, held two years ago in the aftermath of the democratic revolution that ended seven decades of Communist rule.


Son of Privilege, Son of Pain: Random Death At Yale's Gates
When the trial in the slaying of Christian Prince on the Yale campus ended late last month and the courtroom emptied, few of the central figures were satisfied with the outcome, not even the jurors who had handed down a mixed verdict in a case that had cut this city and the university to the bone.
The family of James Duncan Fleming, the 17-year-old defendant, expressed relief that he was acquitted on a charge that he intentionally murdered Mr.
Prince in the early morning hours of Feb. 17, 1991, but expressed sadness that he had been found guilty of conspiring to rob the 19-year old Yale sophomore.
"I wish they hadn't found him guilty on any count," the accused man's father, James Fleming Sr., said.
"My family and I want him home." Not Their Tragedy Alone
The family of the victim was not consoled by a verdict that left unanswered the question of who killed their son, even though the prosecutor said the defendant would be retried on two charges the jury deadlocked on: felony murder and robbery.


Topics of The Times; Stamp of Disapproval
"Watch what they do, not what they say," is good advice for judging politicians, especially on issues that involve re-election.
Consider Representative John Doolittle's two-faced approach to the Congressional free mailing privilege known as franking.
Mr.
Doolittle, a California Republican, gained a measure of renown this year as one of the "Gang of Seven" -- G.O.P. freshmen who denounced Congressional perquisites, including the unfair advantage enjoyed by incumbents who mail letters at taxpayers' expense.


Jo March's Literary Career
To the Editor:
It was with great pleasure that I read Perri Klass's essay "Stories for Girls About Girls Who Write Stories" (May 17).
All of the books she discusses, particularly L. M. Montgomery's Anne and Emily books, Louisa May Alcott's "Little Women" and Maud Hart Lovelace's "Betsy-Tacy" stories, were among the most important and influential books that I and my female friends (all college age now) ever read.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: A Casualty Report; AIDS, Fatally Steady in the U.S., Accelerates Worldwide
The World Health Organization estimates that 10 million people are now infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, and up to 40 million will be by the year 2000.
Sub-Saharan Africa, where the virus may have originated, is the hardest hit.
Veneral diseases that cause sores ease the spread of the virus through heterosexual sex.
In many east and central African cities, more than 10 percent of all young adults are infected.
Up to 500,000 African children have been born infected, and as many as 10 million who are not may be orphaned in the 1990's.


The Executive Life; Post-Riot L.A.'s Gun-Toting Liberals
For many Hollywood executives weighing the post-riot world of L.A., guns have suddenly become more than the controversial centerpieces of some of their blockbuster films.
Strong defenders of big-screen violence are now pondering how to defend themselves against the real kind.
Many entertainment executives, not unlike other Californians, have been buying guns.
And those who don't own them have been consulting those who do.


Charleston
To the Editor: On May 10 I boarded my flight home, opened the Travel section of The Times I had purchased at Charleston's airport and discovered -- What's Doing in Charleston! (May 10) Too late for me.
My friend and I did manage to have a very good time in that charming South Carolina city.
I would like to point out a couple of minor irritants: Charleston cabs do not cruise.
Visitors dependent on public transportation, as we were, can travel comfortably in the day on the Dash shuttle.
These run frequently.
All-day passes, purchased only at the Visitors Center, cost $1.
In the evening we were dependent upon taxis.
When the cab dispatcher's promise to us of a taxi "in a few minutes" translated into the better part of an hour on two consecutive evenings, she left two annoyed Yankees late for dinner reservations.


LOW-COUNTRY COMFORT
Alex Ward's Food column "Low-Country Comfort" (June 7) was a delight.
Wonderful, simple recipes, one for biscuits with only three ingredients and the others all easy to make.
Not much time spent here following difficult directions and, wonder of wonders, not one clove of garlic on the whole page.
CLAIRE D'ESPOSITO
Bushkill, Pa.


Swing Band Strikes Up Arts Series
THE singer Jose Feliciano and the Eastern Connecticut Symphony Swing Band will perform at tonight's grand opening celebration of the Levitt Pavilion in Westport.
The 8 P.M. concert is a fund-raising benefit (admission is $5), for theperforming arts center, with two more similar evenings to follow: the Silver Streaks on Saturday at 8:30 P.M., and David Clayton-Thomas with Blood, Sweat and Tears on Aug. 7 at 9 P.M.
But the nearly 50 other Pavilion concerts are free of admission charge, which makes it the largest festival of such public events in the state.
There are exceptions, but for the most part one can find children's or family programs on Wednesday evenings, and Thursdays are reserved for classical or dance recitals.
Pop, folk and country groups tend to arrive on Fridays, rock and blues bands are Saturday staples and most Sundays are for jazz.
Mondays are dark, as the Pavilion will also be this Thursday and Friday so as not to compete with fireworks displays in nearby communities.
Tuesdays serve as a kind of catch-all opportunity to enjoy dance companies, military bands, jazz groups, even an amateur night.


THE ISLAMIC WAVE
There is a note of hysteria creeping into the West's response to "The Islamic Wave." That phrase sounds all too similar to "The Red Scare" and "The Yellow Peril." And we are responding in the same way, with the same kind of nameless fear that somehow our way of life is being threatened.


Lois C. Duke, Nicholas Niles 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Duke of Wilton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lois Christina Duke to Nicholas Niles 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Niles Jr., of Fairfield, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Duke, 23 years old, is a sales assistant at the Good Food Store in Darien, Conn.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is a director, a senior vice president and general counsel of the Pittston Company, in Stamford, Conn.


Sixth-Grade Graduation Ceremony: Moment for Pride on Treacherous Path
Lakeshea Hill, a graduating sixth grader, gave her teacher the best farewell gift she could afford.
It was the message she scribbled across the blackboard of Room 412 last week.
It said in part: "I know we gave you a hard time but I'm going to miss you. You taught me to believe in myself."
Believing in yourself is a victory at Public School 158, a five-story red-brick building in East New York, Brooklyn, surrounded by vacant lots, boarded-up buildings and dusty bodegas -- a school full of dreams in a neighborhood of grim statistics.


Sarah Griffin, Newell Thompson
Sarah Moorehead Griffin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Q. Griffin of Hopewell, N.J., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Newell McLain Thompson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Thompson Jr. of Hopewell.
The Rev.
Leslie Smith performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Thompson teaches in the lower school at the Collegiate School in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father is a partner in Wilmerding, Miller &amp; Co-Partners, a private investment firm in Princeton.


DEFIANTLY INCORRECT
John Callahan's work is a welcome antidote to the intellectual poison of the so-called politically correct movement, one of the more devitalizing forces in American culture and language ("Defiantly Incorrect," by Timothy Egan, June 7).
The P.C. movement has elevated euphemism from social palliative to socio-political fetish.


Streetscapes: Garden Apartments; Waiting in Queens For Historic Status
RESIDENTS of the garden apartments of Jackson Heights are hoping that the Landmarks Preservation Commission will soon vote for the designation of the core of the community as a 36-block historic district, protecting their homes from demolition.
But there are problems with the unusual buildings that may baffle even the most energetic preservation strategies.


Pictures of an Accessible Russia Capture a Fleeting Moment
ARTISTS have traditionally forgathered in countries not their own.
Depending on the time, they went to Germany, Italy or France -- wherever the art action was.
But since World War II their reasons for relocating have been more often political and economic than esthetic and, seemingly, most have come to the United States.
As a rule of thumb, political trouble abroad augurs a new influx into American galleries.
Cuban artists have been among the most visible, Romanians among the most recent.
Yet, the emphasis is still on the Russians, who first became noticeable in the 1970's.
Not long ago, two large collections of Russian art were bestowed on Rutgers University's Zimmerli Art Museum in New Brunswick, N.J., prompting plans to establish a Russian studies center.


Surprises at State Museum
NO art institution has escaped the financial drought, but the State Museum here may be suffering more than most.
Being an arm of the Department of State, it does not qualify for grants from the State Council on the Arts (another arm), but, rather, receives its money directly from the Legislature.
And what government body has art on its mind these days?
But, though becalmed, the museum is not sitting on its hands.
For some time now, the Bureau of Fine Art, a Gallic-sounding term that covers the museum's curator, Zoltan Buki, and assistant curator, Alison Weld, has been reinstalling the collection, which is surprisingly rich considering that the bulk of it has been acquired over the last three decades.


Business Diary/June 21-26
THE ECONOMY While the Other Guys Brawl, Clinton Sneaks In a Platform


IN YOUR FACE
The world's final battle may be waged not over political boundaries or patriotic causes, but over which ethnic group originated the latest slang term.


Gail E. Leopold, David Jon Pester
Miriam L. and James F. Leopold of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gail Eileen Leopold, to David Jon Pester, a son of Dorothy and Monroe Pester of Roslyn, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Leopold, 26 years old, is an associate at Rosenman &amp; Colin, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is a partner in the New City, N.Y., law firm of Leopold &amp; Sipper.
Her mother is an independent researcher of real-estate titles in New City.


Understatement
To the Editor:
The article "Subtitles Have the Last Word in Foreign Films"  [ June 7 ]  reminded me of my favorite subtitle story, which dates back to the old days of movie censorship by the Hays Office.
It involved a French import that featured a steamy love scene in a hay barn.
As the lovers panted and petted, they kept up a ceaseless stream of French chatter -- not one word of which was translated on the screen.
Finally, as the audience squirmed in frustration, a lone subtitle appeared: "It's nice here in the hay."  SUSAN M. SEIDMAN East Hampton, N. Y.


McCarthyism's Effects In New Jersey
May I add a postscript to the perceptive account of the shadow cast on New Jersey at midcentury by McCarthyism.
It was, as Marc Mappen recounts in "Jerseyana," a "shameful time." With the cold war as a backdrop, the anti-Communist crusade at home became an instrument to discredit distasteful policies, suppress dissent and purge opponents by impugning their loyalty.
In this atmosphere, we were all victims.


Heritage to Sing About: Male Choirs of Wales
EVEN if one has driven often in Britain, getting behind the wheel of a tiny stick-shift car again, with all the gears and levers and directions backward, can still seem a shock.
Add to that night-time and street signs in an unfamiliar language, and you have a recipe for confusion.
That explains why I was late for my visit to a Thursday-evening rehearsal of Cor Meibion Mynydd Mawr, one of Wales's renowned male choirs.
I had set out boldly from Cardiff toward the tiny town of Tumble (it's called by its English name, but also known in Welsh as Y-Tymble), some 60 miles northwest of the Welsh capital.
The first 40 miles on the M4 motorway were easy enough, even with the gathering darkness and gigantic trucks hurtling by on the right and more confident and aggressive passenger cars determined to pass me on my blind side.


Blyth D. Taylor Charles P. Lord
Blyth Denison Taylor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Taylor of Toronto, was married yesterday in Middlebury, Vt., to Charles Prior Lord, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles P. Lord of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Sarah B. Taylor, a Presbyterian minister who is the bride's aunt, performed the ceremony at Mead Memorial Chapel.
Mrs.
Lord, 24 years old, graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a managing director of Bruns Fry Limited, a Toronto investment bank.
Her mother, Lyn Taylor, is the owner of Taking Stock, a video recording service in Toronto.


Julia Scott Oddy, Steven R. Inglis
Carmel K. Oddy of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Julia Scott Oddy to Dr.
Steven Ralph Inglis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan E. Inglis of Rye, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Oddy, 29 years old, is the public relations director of Paul Stuart Clothiers in New York.
Her mother is the manager of the women's department at Burberry's in New York.


Three Views Of Diana
Diana in Private: The Princess Nobody Knows by Lady Colin Campbell (St. Martin's Press, $19.95, 243 pages).
AUTHOR'S CREDENTIALS: According to the jacket, "through her former marriage to Lord Colin Campbell, son of the 11th Duke of Argyll, Lady Campbell is connected to most of the royal houses of Europe as well as the British royal family."


Jean Janson, Davis Fulkerson
Ellen G. Janson and Richard H. Janson, both of Shelburne, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jean Ellen Janson to Davis Rand Fulkerson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan W. Fulkerson of Weston, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Janson, 25 years old, is a candidate for a master's degree in historic preservation and city planning at the University of Pennsylvania.
She graduated from Williams College, as did her fiance.
Her father is a professor of art history at the University of Vermont in Burlington.


Guns Are a Health Hazard
Physicians have now added their strong voices to the chorus of alarm over rising gunplay in America, especially among young people.
Such violence has gone from being a crime problem to a public health emergency, they say.
Their urgency and their perspective lend welcome weight to the fight to reduce the bloodshed by reducing the guns.
Last August, editors of the Journal of the American Medical Association invited research papers on "interpersonal violence." The result was an avalanche of 131 articles.
The first 12 accepted for publication are published in the current issue.


High Grades For Big Bird
To the Editor:
"Getting Big Bird off the Dole"  [ June 14 ]  is Laurence Jarvik's most partisan attack to date on "Sesame Street." While he pretends that he and his fellow conservative Republicans are supporters of Big Bird, this latest essay is just another in a seemingly endless chain by Mr.
Jarvik attacking the program, its producer, Children's Television Workshop -- and now Senate Democrats.
In each attack, Mr.
Jarvik has selectively used and misconstrued the facts to serve his ultimate goal: the defeat of public television.


Sex Without Fear
WOMAN OF VALOR
Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America.
By Ellen Chesler.
Illustrated. 639 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


At the Turn of the Century, Children, Mothers and Others
Women have had a place in photography from the moment of its creation, when Constance Talbot, wife of the English photography pioneer, both took and developed photographs.
A mere 25 years later, in the 1860's, Julia Margaret Cameron proved herself a master (if you'll excuse the expression) on a par with other masters of the medium.
But photography was expensive, messy and cumbersome, and required some dabbling about with chemicals; not many women felt the call.
With the invention of dry plates, flexible film and hand-held cameras by the late 1880's, everyone suddenly became a photographer, with women jumping in as eagerly as men.
Advertising emphasized the user-friendly nature of the new cameras.
"You press the button, we do the rest," Kodak said, and its ads early on featured women photographing, as if to say that taking pictures was so simple even a woman could do it.


Update; Episcopal Parochial School To Reopen on Long Island
An exclusive parochial school closed last year by the Episcopal Diocese of Long Island will start to reopen in the fall of 1993, according to a timetable drawn up by the New York State Attorney General's office.
The diocese, citing financial considerations, had closed the 100-year-old St.
Mary's-St.
Paul's School in Garden City, planning to sell or lease the school's 49 grassy acres.
But in a emotional battle, parents, alumni and teachers contested the diocese's right to close the school, which served grades 6 through 12, and tried to take control of it.
They contended that closing the school violated the conditions of the trust under which Mary Clinch Stewart, a wealthy matriarch, had bequeathed the land for St.
Paul's in 1885.


Update; A Year After Killing, Neither Recovery Nor Trial
It has been more than a year since Alexis Ficks Welsh, a 30-year-old former Rockette, was stabbed to death with a carving knife while walking her dogs on the Upper West Side.
Her widower, Christopher Welsh, continues to grapple with the brutality of her killing.
"Let's just say it's day to day," Mr.
Welsh's twin brother, Todd, said last week.
"His understanding of what this tragedy means to him is going to be a slow, painful process."


Concrete Work, Big or Little, Requires Special Materials
MOST minor flaws in concrete, like flaking, pitting, cracks and chipped corners, can be repaired easily if one knows which mending materials to choose and how to apply them.
Flaking or scaling, in which the surface of concrete sloughs off like peeling paint, usually results when concrete is smoothed excessively during pouring.
If the problem is minor -- that is, leaving the surface still virtually smooth -- sweep, vacuum and scrub the concrete with a wire brush and a solution of strong household detergent and water.
Repeat the procedure with a fiber brush and then rinse with clean water.


Improving the Chances of a Timely Flight
YOU may drive the cab with your stomach muscles to get to the airport on time, as my mother used to say, and rush on board at the last minute but still get to your destination late, if the plane doesn't take off when it's supposed to.
Being on time is the air traveler's main concern, miles ahead of comfort, food and intact luggage, as complaints to the Government and to this department show.
One of the few ways to reduce the likelihood of delay and anxiety is to plan to get out of town when your airport is less burdened, or select a nonstop flight due to land when the destination airport can get planes on the ground promptly.
Anytime the plane makes a stop on its way to your destination, or you change flights, you increase the possibility of delay.


Anne Hughes, C. J. Walsh
Anne Marie Hughes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Hughes of the Bronx, was married yesterday to Christopher John Walsh, a son of Dennis J. Walsh of Carmel, N.Y., and Ann M. Ferguson of Yonkers.
Msgr.
Joseph Devlin performed the ceremony at St.
Frances de Chantal Roman Catholic Church in the Bronx.
Mrs.
Walsh, 25 years old, is a certified public accountant with Maxwell, Schmerler &amp; Company in White Plains.
She graduated cum laude from Herbert H. Lehman College of the City University of New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a superintendent for the New York City Transit Authority in New York.


Sylvie Otten, Kurt Sollod
Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Otten of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sylvie Otten, to Kurt Anthony Sollod, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert E. Sollod of Shrewsbury, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Otten, 24 years old, is an account manager for Waring &amp; LaRosa, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the manager of application software development for the Latin American unit of the International Business Machines Corporation in Mount Pleasant, N.Y.
Her mother, Evelyne B. Otten, is a travel agent with K. L. Travel Inc. in Scarsdale.
Ms.
Otten's grandfather, Louis Otten, is a retired judge of the New York State Family Court.


Focus: Spring Island, S.C.; Development With an Environmental Bent
Here among moss-draped live oaks and unspoiled ponds, a new style of island development based on strict environmental standards is being tested, and developers around the nation are watching to see if it succeeds.
"When I came to this island, I knew I had to find a way to spend the rest of my life here," said Jim Chaffin, one of the owners.
"Not having $17 million to spend on my personal island, I knew we would have to do some sort of development."


Brazil's President Damaged by Corruption Inquiry
Mounting corruption accusations in Brazil's Congress have so damaged President Fernando Collor de Mello that many journalists and politicians have begun to predict one of only two outcomes: that Mr.
Collor will resign or, more likely, that he will cling to power as a severely weakened leader until his term runs out almost three years from now.
There have been no criminal indictments, no street demonstrations, and no violence in Brazil's five-week political crisis.
But a steady avalanche of press reports and testimony before a congressional inquiry is crippling the political effectiveness of a man elected in 1989 as a corruption fighter.


Debunking Some Myths on Dethatching
GRASS clippings do not increase thatch.
This fact is the kind of information to cut out and fasten to the refrigerator door.
Or at least it may help to settle some family arguments.
Thatch is an accumulation of organic materials such as grass roots (rhizomes), dead grasses and grass sheaths.
It just sits there and does not decompose unless it is removed by dethatching machines that slice through this accumulation.
Thatch, which smothers the grass and inhibits growth, is sometimes caused by applications of too much fertilizer.


To Dance, To Dodge
Awards night for the Glaucoma Trust, preview night for Ms. Ciccione.


Hyatt Program For Teen-Agers
Teen-agers vacationing with their parents at Hyatt resorts can join other young people in the activities of "Rock Hyatt," a new program offering day and evening amusements for children aged 13 to 17.
Seventeen Hyatt resorts in the United States and the Caribbean are furnished with rock zones, areas where teen-agers may congregate, listen to music, watch videos and play arcade games.
Rock zones are staffed with rock concierges, adults available to answer questions and take reservations.
Admission to the zone is free and hours of operation depend on the resort.
The program also features sightseeing excursions, sports and social activities.
Prices range from no cost for beach volleyball in Scottsdale to $45 for a full day quided jeep tour around Aruba.
An adult accompanies all the excursions and activities.


Cynthia Vimond, Jason Brandt
Cynthia Dene Vimond, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund G. Vimond Jr. of Bedminster, N.J., was married yesterday to Jason Brandt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse E. Brandt of New York.
The Rev.
Dorothea A. Maloney, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Brandt, 27 years old, is a senior administrator at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College, as did her husband.
Her father is a business broker and consultant in Far Hills, N.J.
Her mother, Pamela J. Vimond, is a broker at Ned Ward Realtors in New Vernon, N.J.


Deborah Dzierzeski, W. T. Wardwell
Deborah Leigh Dzierzeski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Dzierzeski of Southborough, Mass., was married yesterday to William Thomas Wardwell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Wardwell of New York.
The Rev.
Michael B. Conti performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Anne's Church in Southborough.
Mrs.
Wardwell is a vice president in the research department of Dain Bosworth, a brokerage firm in Seattle.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a management analyst for the Defense Department at Hanscom Air Force Base in Massachusetts.
Her mother, Frances J. Dzierzeski, is a real estate broker with Wayside Properties in Sudbury, Mass.


Correction
An article on June 7 about Genoa referred incorrectly to the status of the Hotel Plaza.
It is now fully open, although all or part of it has been closed for renovation since April 1991; guests were housed in the former Hotel Eliseo, an adjacent building now joined to the Plaza.


As Trucks Roar By, a Tour Opens Children's Eyes to Nature
SUZANNE JOHNSON held a ladybug in her hand, and she was besieged by a gaggle of shouting children, all trying to get a better look at the insect.
A few hundred feet away, on the New Jersey Turnpike, 18-wheelers whizzed by, spewing exhaust fumes.
Ms.
Johnson is a 23-year-old guide at the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission's Environment Center, and she was taking 17 first graders from Public School 11 in Passaic on a nature tour of the marshlands around the center.


New York Taxis
Part of this letter was omitted in some copies of the Travel section last week; it is reprinted here in full.


Kal Daniels Traded to Cubs
The Chicago Cubs acquired KAL DANIELS from the Los Angeles Dodgers for a player to be named.
Daniels, an outfielder who has played first base, was marked for reassignment June 19, and the Dodgers had until the end of the month to send him to the minors, trade him or release him.


Your Sister Wears Combat Boots!
KILLER legs and cruel shoes. The two seem to go together now like cashmere and pearls.
In the stomping grounds of style, some of the latest leg fashions involve the kind of construction shoes and combat boots that traditionally have been the very antithesis of chic.
Instead of the slender pumps that have always been worn for elegant situations and dancing, there are ridged soles and steel toes.
Models now wear Timberland hiking shoes to discos.


Ronit Yisraeli, Jeffrey Michels
Ronit Yisraeli, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Meir Yisraeli of Jerusalem, was married on June 21 in New York to Jeffrey Edward Michels, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley E. Michels of New York.
Rabbi Lawrence Sebert performed the ceremony at the Conservatory Garden in Central Park.
Ms.
Yisraeli, 27 years old, graduated from Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Mr.
Michels, 28, is a lawyer in New York.
He graduated from Union College and the Brooklyn Law School.
His mother, Molly Michels, is a special-education teacher in New York.
His father is a member of the New York City Council.


He's Never Been Happier, or More Glum
Eddie Murphy glides in, looking like he wants to slug someone.
Black wraparound sunglasses.
Black jeans and black T-shirt with a picture of Sarah Vaughan.
Black cap emblazoned with the word "Yeah," the name of a song he wrote for his latest album.
A small gold hoop in his left ear.
With "Boomerang," his new romantic comedy about a playboy who gets his comeuppance, the 31-year-old actor hopes to change his fortunes.
His goal is to climb out of a professional slough and graduate from playing the street kid in male buddy movies to portraying more sophisticated leading men.
He also hopes to put some salve on a reputation rubbed raw by reports of lateness, ego trips, materialism and an Elvis-style entourage.


Why Consumers Are Borrowing Less
To the Editor:
Floyd Norris ("Will Somebody Please Borrow a Little Money?", June 14) asks why consumers are so reluctant to borrow and spend.
I believe there are two significant reasons that are seldom mentioned.


In East Europe, the Hapsburgs Get Revenge; What's in a Hyphen?
To the Editor:
I am disappointed at the reference to a Czecho-Slovakia in your June 13 editorial on Slovak separatism in Czechoslovakia.
The hyphen varies with the official title of the state, the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, as well as with your view that the future of both Czechs and Slovaks is best secured in a state endowed with one international personality.
Americans may consider the difference between Czecho-Slovakia and Czechoslovakia trivial.
But in Central European politics, the devil is in the detail, and supporters of democracy in Central Europe become suspicious when the hyphen pops up in the middle of "Czechoslovakia."


Ashley Theriot, Matthew McCall
Ashley Farrar Theriot, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques Theriot of Waccabuc, N.Y., was married yesterday to Matthew Birkelund McCall, a son of Mrs.
Clifford H. McCall of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Mr.
McCall.
The Rev.
Sandra Belcher performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Ridgefield, Conn.
Mrs.
McCall, 27 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Northwestern University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.


Stress Test; Once Again, Questions of Character
WHEN Robert S. McNamara went from running the Ford Motor Company to running the Pentagon, he impressed President Kennedy at first with his bluntness and managerial skills.
But Mr.
Kennedy soon realized that Mr.
McNamara's lack of political seasoning could be dangerous.
In 1963, the Defense Secretary blithely told Congress that the United States had sold some missiles to Canada hoping that, in the event of a war, the Soviets would divert a few missiles from America and send them winging toward Canadian targets.


Mary M. Roche, Gary R. Haag
Mary Margaret Roche, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard R. Roche of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday in Ossining, N.Y., to Gary Robert Haag, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Haag of Chatham, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles Cavanaugh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Maryknoll Seminary.
Mrs.
Haag, 30 years old, teaches home and career skills at the Briarcliff Middle-High School in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
She graduated from Marywood College and received a master's degree in elementary education from Manhattanville College.
Her father is the chairman of Heidrick &amp; Struggles, an executive recruiting firm in New York.


'Batman Returns' With a Capeload Of Angst and Ills
The story was sad and lurid, and if it had happened in New York City it would have been a natural for late-night television news.
"Abandoned baby found alive in sewer! Details at 11!" The anchorwoman would shake her head ever so slightly after reading this heartbreaking report.
In a follow-up, politicians would bemoan the lack of family values, and a child psychiatrist would foresee severe identity problems.
Lucky for us it didn't happen here.
It happened in Gotham City, the fun-house mirror version of New York that is the setting of "Batman Returns."


Concrete Work, Big or Little, Requires Special Materials
MOST minor flaws in concrete, like flaking, pitting, cracks and chipped corners, can be repaired easily if one knows which mending materials to choose and how to apply them.
Flaking or scaling, in which the surface of concrete sloughs off like peeling paint, usually results when concrete is smoothed excessively during pouring.
If the problem is minor -- that is, leaving the surface still virtually smooth -- sweep, vacuum and scrub the concrete with a wire brush and a solution of strong household detergent and water.
Repeat the procedure with a fiber brush and then rinse with clean water.


Miss Hamilton, Mr. FitzGerald
Catherine Howland Hamilton, a daughter of Charles K. Hamilton of Mount Hermon, Mass., and Margaret B. Howland of Marion, Mass., was married yesterday to Jeffory Martin FitzGerald, the son of Leda S. FitzGerald of Enfield, Conn., and the late Col.
Robert W. FitzGerald.
The Rev.
Ernest Cockrell, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Gabriel's Church in Marion.
Mrs.
FitzGerald, 25 years old, is an analyst at the New York City Office of Employment Services.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
Her father is an English teacher at the Northfield Mount Hermon School in Northfield, Mass.
Her mother is the director of visitor services at the Harvard University art museums.


A Shop For Those Who Dare
The new eponymously named Patricia Field store on the Avenue of the Americas, between Eighth and Ninth Streets, replaced a fusty men's store called Kaiser.
Sometimes, elderly fellows with their trousers up around their solar plexus still wander in by accident, looking for a tie.
They find themselves in the midst of Charles Atlases in ripped tank tops, drag queens in search of diva dresses, and college students with rings in their noses.
"Our customers are people who dress sexily, trendily, creatively," said the owner on a recent Sunday.
"In a way, it's a uniform."


Quest for Zoning
To the Editor:
New York City does not need a fundamentally new Zoning Resolution or an initial "master plan"  [ "The Quest for a New Zoning Plan," April 12 ] .
Rather, it needs an officially adopted set of objective master-planning principles to resolve any clash between private real estate interests and development regulations at a specific location.


N.F.L. Refrain: Take It or Leave It
A popular theme sounded last week by National Football League lawyers in the Freeman McNeil v. the N.F.L. antitrust suit about free agency in United States District Court in Minneapolis was that owners do not hold all of the chips and all of the leverage in negotiating contracts with players.
The N.F.L. lawyers maintained that if a player is unhappy with negotiations he can choose to sit out training camp and miss a few games.
This hurts the team in the standings and its relationship with fans, the league's lawyers argued.


How Two Suitors Pursued 'Sleeping Beauty'
"The Sleeping Beauty" awoke twice this spring.
Both the New York City Ballet at the New York State Theater and American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House had this classic in their repertories.
Each company, in its own way, revealed what a wonderful work it is.
Yet no one could confuse the productions.
Devoted dance fans might even argue vociferously over them because although each staging concerns the same bewitched princess, each emphasizes something else about the choreography that brings her to life.
"The Sleeping Beauty" is a ballet about fine manners, ill will, a curse, youthful hopes, a quest for beauty and the magic of a loving kiss.
It is also filled with parties.
There is a hunting party for vacuous sophisticates who would not be out of place at one of today's trendy social gatherings.
Other scenes show a christening and a birthday.
Although those festivities are blighted by the evil fairy Carabosse, the final wedding celebration proclaims that all wrongs have been righted.


Rates Are Just One Piece of the Puzzle
President Bush has again urged the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates.
It was still another reminder that the economic recovery remains sluggish despite short-term rates that have already been cut to their lowest level in 20 years.
Undoubtedly, a further move by the Fed would help the economy a bit by prompting cuts in the prime rate charged by banks, causing the banks to cut rates on deposits so low that consumers and businesses would have more incentive to spend or invest.


Lindros Officially an Ex-Nordique
The Quebec Nordiques no longer own the National Hockey League rights to ERIC LINDROS.
That much was clear when LARRY BERTUZZI, the Toronto lawyer hired by the N.H.L. to arbitrate the trade dispute involving the player, announced at 2:20 A.M. yesterday that he had finished his hearings and would render a decision next week.
"Either Philadelphia or New York will have an agreement with Quebec," Bertuzzi said.
"One of them will prevail."


Editors' Note
A review on May 31 about "Art of the Northeast," an exhibition at the Silvermine Guild Art Center in New Canaan, covered a number of works in the show.
It ended with a brief discussion of an oil seascape by John Harris.


Anne Applebaum, Radek Sikorski
Anne Elizabeth Applebaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey M. Applebaum of Washington was married there yesterday to Radek Sikorski, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jan Sikorski of Dwor Chobielin, Poland.
Judge Theodore Tannenwald, a senior judge of the United States Tax Court in the District of Columbia, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Sikorski, 27 years old, is an editor at The Economist in London.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in international relations from the London School of Economics.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Covington &amp; Burling.
Her mother, Elizabeth Applebaum, is a program coordinator at the Corcoran Gallery of Art.


A Casualty Report; Illness Can Be Delayed But No Cure's in Sight
SINCE the antiviral drug AZT became available in 1986, AIDS patients have seen further advances and many disappointments.
While a cure remains a distant dream, emerging drugs and treatment strategies should gradually give the H.I.V.-infected more and more years of healthy life.
The most dramatic gain has been in fighting pneumocystis pneumonia, which was once the major killer of AIDS patients.
Treatments have also been developed for other, though by no means all, of the infections that torment those with AIDS.


Florida Chefs
To the Editor: Having read the article by Cynthia Hacinli about Florida chefs ("Florida's Chefs Add Exotic Fish to Menu," May 10), I felt compelled to write on behalf of those chefs in Florida who live above the culinary recognition boundary, which seems to be around Palm Beach, Fla.
Our restaurant, Jordan's Grove in Maitland, , has been using wahoo, triggerfish, yellowtail snapper, hog snapper, sea trout, striped bass, cobia, dolphin and many other indigenous fish for many of the eight years we have been open.


Making a Difference; A Year of Shakeups And Quips at the N.R.C.
Marking the completion of his first year in office, Ivan Selin, chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, said last week that protests by citizen groups have helped move his agency in the right direction.
These are the organizations that are politely referred to by the neutral term "watchdogs," but given that most of the groups favor shutting down nuclear power plants, it was an out-of-character comment for a man in Mr.
Selin's job.
Mr.
Selin, however, has taken a different view of his job than some of his predecessors, who were energetic boosters to the point of being cheerleaders.
Mr.
Selin said that after insuring the safety of existing plants, his top priority is building public trust, part of which means listening more to the public.


Conversations/Margery Tabankin; Hollywood Takes Politics Seriously, But Wants a Little Respect
HOLLYWOOD'S liberals are in turmoil.
What to do?
"The Perot factor has everybody stupefied," said Margery Tabankin, executive director of the Hollywood Women's Political Committee, whose members include many of the powerful filmmakers, agents and performers in Hollywood who donate fistfuls of dollars to Democratic candidates who come out and ask -- even plead -- for funds.
As a Democrat, she's worried about the Clinton campaign.
"I guess I'm surprised at how long it's taking people here to get involved in it."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Rail Dispute: Vote to approve legislation to end a two-day nationwide railroad shutdown.
Approved 87 to 6, June 25.
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
House
1.
Veto Override: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill that would have lifted the Administration's ban on federally financed research on the use of tissue from aborted fetuses.
Failed, with 271 in favor and 156 opposed (14 votes short of the two-thirds needed), June 24.
2.
Foreign Aid: Vote on passage of a $13.8 billion foreign aid bill, the lowest total since 1977.
Approved 297 to 124, June 25.
3.
Rail Dispute: Vote to approve legislation to end a two-day nationwide railroad shutdown.
Approved 248 to 140, June 25.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
3. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
N
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
6. Dwyer (D) . . .
Y
A
A
7. Rinaldo (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
8. Roe (D) . . .
N
A
A
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
13. Saxton (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
14. Guarini (D) . . .
Y
N
A
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
2. Downey (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
4. Lent (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
5. McGrath (R) . . .
N
Y
A
6. Flake (D) . . .
A
Y
N
7. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
8. Scheuer (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
9. Manton (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D) . . .
A
Y
A
11. Towns (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
12. Owens (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
13. Solarz (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
15. Green (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
16. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
17. Weiss (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
18. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
19. Engel (D) . . .
A
Y
N
20. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
21. Fish (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
23. McNulty (D) . . .
A
Y
N
24. Solomon (R) . . .
N
N
N
25. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
26. Martin (R) . . .
N
Y
A
27. Walsh (R) . . .
N
Y
N
28. McHugh (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
29. Horton (R) . . .
Y
Y
N
30. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
31. Paxon (R) . . .
N
Y
Y
32. LaFalce (D) . . .
N
Y
N
33. Nowak (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


True Equalit


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SCOTTISH GAMES
The annual Round Hill Scottish Games, held on the Fourth of July for the last 68 years, will take place once again on Saturday in Cranbury Park in Norwalk from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
One of the oldest such events in the country, the games began in 1920 as an Independence Day picnic for the Scottish-born employees of a wealthy back country Greenwich resident, hence the name Round Hill.
By 1923 the games had become an annual custom, and over the years they grew into a public celebration.


Practice Run for Maxi-Boats
For maxi-yacht crews preparing for a race around the world, a 1,500-mile voyage is the equivalent of a pole vaulter jumping three feet.
But six world-class maxis are racing that distance, from Puerto Rico to New York City, as part of their training for the 1993-94 Whitbread Round the World Race.
The maxi-yachts weren't expected to arrive in New York until Tuesday.
But a fresh breeze accelerated the boats' progress, allowing four of the six 80-foot sailboats to reach port Friday.
Merit-Cup, from Switzerland, beat Safilo, of Italy, by a mere 300 yards at the finish line; nine hours later came Challenge America, of the United States, followed by La Poste of France.
Nastro Azzurro, of Italy, and ACY-Grassetto, from Croatia, arrived yesterday.
Chip Off the Old Deck
The Puerto Rico-to-New York run is part of the Grand Regatta Columbus '92, one of several events planned this year in commemoration of Columbus's discovery of the Americas.
The 6,500-mile, five-leg regatta began April 19 in Genoa, Italy, and is scheduled to end July 11 after a race from New York to Boston.
The winner of the series is eligible to win the San Pellegrino Trophy, a prize for the boat with the most points accumulated from each leg.
Merit-Cup is now the point leader.


Talking: Bankruptcy; Can Filing Protect The Home?
THE explosion of personal bankruptcies has created confusion about the fate of a debtor's residence.
Is bankruptcy a magic wand that can save a home from the onslaught of creditors, including the mortgage holder?
Or is it more likely to clean out a homeowner (and even a renter) of everything -- including the home and all its furnishings?
The reason so much misinformation is circulated, lawyers say, is that so many variables can affect the outcome.
Much will depend on the kind of debts burdening the person filing for bankruptcy, the chapter of the bankruptcy code being used and the state in which the home is situated.


Nancy Kalkin, Lincoln Miller
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Kalkin of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Beth Kalkin, to Dr.
Lincoln Paul Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd Miller of Great Neck, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kalkin, 27 years old, graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a buyer at Kalkin &amp; Company, a home-furnishings store in Paramus, N.J.
Her father is the store's president, and her mother, Joan Kalkin, is a vice president.


Breakfast Customer Kills Diner Owner
A man who had just finished breakfast with another man in a Brooklyn diner yesterday morning walked to the cash register and shot the owner to death without saying a word, the police said.
The killing took place at about 6:15 A.M. at the Quick Stop Luncheonette, at 630 Caton Avenue, just south of Prospect Park, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward J. Burns.
The victim was identified as Tony Denicola, 42 years old, of 106 Lama Court in Gravesend.


A Media Pioneer's Quest: Portable Electronic Newspapers
In A favorite dream, Roger Fidler envisions a row of commuters reaching into their briefcases on their ride to work.
Instead of pulling out the morning paper, each grabs a thin, tablet-sized computer and a pen.
With the flick of a switch, a newspaper front page appears -- in color and bright, crisp type -- on each battery-powered computer screen.
With a tap of the pen, the reader calls up stories, flips pages, turns a photo into a television news replay, or simply browses, scanning the sports pages, features, comics, even doing the crossword puzzle or making reservations from a restaurant ad.
The paper's cost?
About the same as the price of a newspaper subscription today.


BEST SELLERS: June 28, 1992
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
114
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
2
4
6
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) On a mission to Africa, Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
3
3
16
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student seeks to discover the truth about the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
2
4
DARK FORCE RISING, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.50.) An insane Jedi threatens Luke Skywalker in the second volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
5
1
SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $22.) Continuing the story of the crowd that frequents an ultrachic Beverly Hills store.
6
5
7
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones. (LP)
7
7
10
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
8
6
5
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
9
9
11
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) A couple in the Harlem of the 1920's learn again and again that life does not keep its promises.
10
15
2
DOUBLE DEUCE, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser joins his old friend Hawk to investigate murders in a Boston housing project.
11
14
2
POSSESSING THE SECRET OF JOY, by Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The struggles of an African woman to come to terms with the consequences of female circumcision.
12
13
3
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
13
10
17
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A retired general and a lawyer try to take possession of Nebraska. (LP)
14
8
10
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
15
11
7
THE LIVING, by Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Four decades in the lives of the motley residents of the 19th-century Washington Territory.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
5
5
DIANA IN PRIVATE, by Lady Colin Campbell. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
3
10
2
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
3
4
PEROT, by Todd Mason. (Business One Irwin, $16.95.) An unauthorized biography of Ross Perot, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.
5
2
8
HEAD TO HEAD, by Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) An economist considers the upcoming economic battle among Japan, Europe and the United States.
6
4
4
CHIEF, by Daryl F. Gates with Diane K. Shah. (Bantam, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who headed the Los Angeles Police Department for 14 years.
7
6
10
GIVE WAR A CHANCE, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.95.) Satirical essays on recent social and political developments.
8
8
22
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
9 *
9
32
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
10
11
6
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, by Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking, $27.50.) From childhood in New York to the White House: the first 49 years of a pre-eminent First Lady.
11
7
8
WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE, by William Greider. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A journalist's account of how powerful monied interests and elite groups dominate the Federal Government.
12
12
2
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $20.) Essays on the pleasures of living extravagantly during the high-flying 1980's.
13 *
1
A BRILLIANT MADNESS, by Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress tells how she learned to live with manic-depressive illness.
14
13
15
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
15
1
SAM WALTON: MADE IN AMERICA, by Sam Walton with John Huey. (Doubleday, $22.50.) The autobiography of the man who became the richest American by creating the Wal-Mart store chain.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
2
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
2
19
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $25.) Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
3
3
10
THE JUICEMAN'S POWER OF JUICING, by Jay Kordich. (Morrow, $15.) A program for staying healthy and trim by consuming fresh fruit and vegetable juices.
4
4
30
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
5
5
30
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
OCTOBER, EIGHT O'CLOCK and ON CLOWNS: The Dictator and the Artist, by Norman Manea. (Grove Weidenfeld, $18.95 each.) A collection of dreamlike stories and a volume of essays by a Romanian exile are imaginative reflections on his past -- a wartime childhood in German-run camps followed by an adolescence and adulthood under the Ceausescu regime.
CLOCKERS, by Richard Price. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) A big (599 pages) as well as bighearted novel about a black drug dealer and a white homicide detective whose paths collide in the mean slums of northern New Jersey.
IN MY FATHER'S HOUSE: Africa in the Philosophy of Culture, by Kwame Anthony Appiah. (Oxford University, $29.95.) In his formidable and sweeping critique, a Ghanaian-born Harvard professor calls the search for a unique racial destiny an "ennobling lie," and argues that Africans do not share culture, language, religion or even a common race.
THE INTERIOR CASTLE: The Art and Life of Jean Stafford, by Ann Hulbert. (Knopf, $25.) A literary biography of the polished fiction stylist who is perhaps more admired these days (especially for her distinctive and ironic stories) than read.
THE EVENING STAR, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) This entertaining novel with a somewhat ribald air reunites us with Aurora Greenway of "Terms of Endearment," who is now in her 70's, and her extended and highly dysfunctional family.
AFTER THE WAR, by Richard Marius. (Knopf, $25.) An old-fashioned blockbuster, richly packed with characters, follows a Belgian-educated Greek on a rather halfhearted quest to find his lost father in the American South after World War I.


Low-Skill Immigrants Hurt Job Market for Low-Skill Natives
To the Editor:
Obfuscation seems to have become a hallmark of the debate on the economic impact of immigrants.
"Immigrants Don't Take Jobs of the Poor" (letter, June 14) by Thomas J. Catapano, in response to Edward N. Luttwak's May 15 Op-Ed article, adds to the confusion.


Innovative Clinics Help Asian Immigrants Feel at Home
At a refugee clinic at San Francisco General Hospital, a Cambodian woman complaining of insomnia was offered sleeping pills and also encouraged to seek a blessing from a krou khmer, a native healer.
At the same clinic on a recent day, illiterate hill tribesmen from Laos are taught how to take their pills, which are taped to an index card under pictures of the sun and moon at different places in the sky.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton and Tsongas Agree to Keep Brown's Issues Out of Play
Gov.
Bill Clinton's camp struck a deal today with supporters of former Senator Paul E. Tsongas to keep former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. from forcing a convention debate on some of the Brown campaign themes.
The arrangement was intended to avert a fight next month at the Democratic National Convention on the kinds of trip-wire issues that have often divided and embarrassed the party in the past.


Wall Street; The Court, Tobacco and the Challenge for RJR
The stock market panicked and then, on second thought, pooh-poohed a Supreme Court ruling last week that makes it easier for some smokers to sue cigarette makers.
But suits are the least of the industry's problems, said David Goldman, an industry analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Company.
"The real problem is market share, and how much you have to spend to buy it," said Mr.
Goldman.
All producers are puzzling over how to cope with the decline in the cigarette-puffing population.
But the problem is especially keen for RJR Nabisco, which Mr.
Goldman recently removed from his firm's roster of recommended stocks.


Here's to a Safer Game on the Ice
To the Sports Editor:
The Mario Lemieux-Adam Graves incident has the potential to elicit a sea of change in the N.H.L.'s attitude toward mayhem on ice.
I remember my first hockey game and the visual thrill of the bright, bright skating surface.
In those days the ice was white, not red.
ERIC LASSER Fort Lee, N.J.


Tax Accord May Not Help New York City
Officials in the Capitol and City Hall said today that they have agreed on legislation aimed at softening the impact of a recent increase in property-tax assessments for residents of apartments, condominiums and cooperatives in New York City.
But the bill may be held hostage in the Republican-controlled Senate until the Democratic majority in the Assembly agrees to pass legislation aimed at bailing out the finances of Nassau and Suffolk Counties.


Navy Investigations: A Raft of Failures
AN INQUIRY into sexual assaults on 26 women at a 1991 convention of naval aviators in Las Vegas has been turned over to Pentagon investigators and become the latest embarrassing example of the Navy's inability to police itself.
Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d resigned over the affair on Friday, saying he took responsibility for "the leadership failure which allowed the egregious conduct" to occur.


'Stolen Continents'
To the Editor:
Brian M. Fagan's assault on "Stolen Continents: The Americas Through Indian Eyes Since 1492" (June 7) is so feebly engaged with my text that it is hardly a review at all.
When a reviewer makes accusations of inaccuracy, he should produce some evidence.
Mr.
Fagan does not.
When he asserts that I have used sources in an "uncritical" way, he should give examples.
He does not.
Instead, he blithely ignores every one of the primary sources that form the heart of "Stolen Continents." Indeed, he conceals that the book's purpose -- clearly stated in the prologue and apparent on almost every page -- is to quote Native American writings and speeches at length, ranging from Aztec eyewitness chronicles of the Spanish conquest to Mohawk accounts of the revolt in Canada two years ago.
Many of the early texts have come to light recently, and some have never before appeared in English.
Yet Mr.
Fagan claims I have presented "nothing new."


Caroline Gosse, S. P. Elmendorf
Anthony C. Gosse of Lewisburg, Pa., and Dey Erben Gosse of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caroline Ferebee Gosse, to Stephen Philip Elmendorf, a son of Richard A. and Louise Elmendorf of Silver Spring, Md.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gosse, 29 years old, is a trial lawyer with the civil division of the Justice Department in Washington.
She graduated from Princeton University and received her law degree from George Washington University.
Her father retired as an associate professor of English at Bucknell University, in Lewisburg.
Her mother is a dealer in rare books and art in New York.


A Shimmer in the Kitchen
Some time in the 1980's, the old stereotype of the brilliant chef as a florid, shouting and temperamental genius gave way to a new stereotype of the brilliant chef as a florid, shouting and temperamental genius who could attain fame on a par with, say, Luciano Pavarotti.
So it was that a tremor shook the faithful last week when Daniel Boulud, Le Cirque's executive chef since 1986, announced that he would leave that temple of gastronomy in September to open a Manhattan restaurant of his own.
Within 48 hours the restaurant's owner, Sirio Maccioni, had calls from at least 10 renowned chefs.
He put them off and left, on schedule, for a six-week vacation in Tuscany where his farm's kitchen is so big that it can comfortably seat 12 at a table near the stove.


JUNE 21-27: Congress; Democrats Outmaneuver A G.O.P. Spending Trap
When the House defeated the balanced budget constitutional amendment early this month, Congressional Republicans thought they had a great election issue.
Democrats killed the amendment, saying it was no substitute for making hard choices on every spending bill.
Swell, thought the Republicans; we'll use every appropriations bill to show that Democrats only give lip service to deficit reduction while they vote for big spending.
It hasn't worked out that way.


The Chills Turn Impossible Love to Dark Obsession
Martin Phillipps's life in pop music has been more of a love affair than a career.
Back in the early 80's, when his group, the Chills, were just a garage band, clanging away on electric guitars with a cheap organ wheezing in the background, Mr.
Phillipps already knew the power of pop to transcend the ordinary: "Come along baby, we'll live in my kaleidoscope world," he sang on a 1982 EP.
The kaleidoscope world wasn't so much a place or even a state of mind as it was the immense universe inside the song; music was the haven, a land where the most crippling emotional problems could be overcome through melody, harmony, chords and a rhyme.
By the time of the Chills' third album and major-label debut, "Submarine Bells," in 1990, love had become consuming passion.
A desperate account of a crumbling relationship, "Submarine Bells" offered only one moment of optimism, in the lead-off track "Heavenly Pop Hit." Against a melodic hook so bright and strong it could strangle, Mr.
Phillipps described the ecstasy of music: "I stand and the sound goes straight through my body/ I'm so bloated up happy I could throw things around me."


Concrete Work, Big or Little, Requires Special Materials
MOST minor flaws in concrete, like flaking, pitting, cracks and chipped corners, can be repaired easily if one knows which mending materials to choose and how to apply them.
Flaking or scaling, in which the surface of concrete sloughs off like peeling paint, usually results when concrete is smoothed excessively during pouring.
If the problem is minor -- that is, leaving the surface still virtually smooth -- sweep, vacuum and scrub the concrete with a wire brush and a solution of strong household detergent and water.
Repeat the procedure with a fiber brush and then rinse with clean water.


For Karpov, Defeat Only Serves as a Spur
SOME players swear off the game after a failure.
They cannot bear to look at the chess pieces.
But not Anatoly Karpov.
The former world champion has to drive out the demons of defeat by playing again as soon as he can.
That is what he has said, and he has always clung to his regimen.
So it is no surprise that after losing to Nigel Short in their semifinal match for title candidates in Linares, Spain, he would at once plunge into the Madrid International Tournament.
Linares finished April 28.
Madrid took place in May.


Cynthia Smith, Charles Wilson Jr.
Cynthia Ann Smith, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David M. Smith of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Charles Ernst Wilson Jr., the son of Mr.
Wilson and Marilyn L. Morrison, both of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
Wallace M. Alston Jr. performed the ceremony at the Nassau Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Wilson, 25 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in education from Northwestern University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Princeton.
Her mother, Marjorie Smith, is the executive director of the Princeton Y.W.C.A.


Ms. Corry, Mr. Farnsworth
John Corry of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter Janet Marie Corry to Ward Farnsworth Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ward Farnsworth Sr. of Winnetka, Ill.
The couple is to be married in September.
Ms.
Corry is also a daughter of the late Irmtraut Wolff.
She is a stepdaughter of Sonia Landau.
Ms.
Corry, 25 years old, graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father, formerly a culture critic for The New York Times, is a visiting professor in the School of Communications at Boston University.
Her stepmother was formerly the chairwoman of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting; she was also an Assistant Secretary of State.


God's Love Goes Catering
God's Love We Deliver has started a commercial catering division.
The nonprofit organization, which cooks and delivers meals to homebound people with AIDS, will funnel the profits from the new venture back into the charity.
Sean Driscoll, an owner of Glorious Food, a New York caterer, also sits on the board of God's Love We Deliver.
He said he doesn't see any conflict between the two.
"How can I go into competition with any company that has the word God in it?" he said.


Far From The Veranda In Zimbabwe
NAME: Angeline.
OCCUPATION: Model with the Elite agency.
HOME: Greenwich Village.


Times Editor Is Elected
Sandy Bailey, the deputy sports editor of The New York Times, today became president of The Associated Press Sports Editors.
Ms.
Bailey, who succeeds Jeff Wohler of The Oregonian in Portland, was named at the association's 19th annual convention.
Ms.
Bailey is the first woman to serve as president of the 535-member organization, which represents sports editors throughout the United States and Canada.


Exploring Interesting Restaurants Near the Expressway
THE Long Island Expressway is the Island's spine.
It starts at the Queens-Midtown Tunnel and crosses nearly all of Nassau and Suffolk Counties before it ends about 70 miles to the east.
Although 161,000 vehicles cross the Queens-Nassau border and 146,000 pass the Nassau-Suffolk line daily, few travelers think of the expressway as a route to fine restaurants.
But that is exactly what it is.





Ontario's Lode of Black History
"FAREWELL, old master/Don't come after me/I'm on my way to Canada/Where colored men are free," they sang, along with "Follow the Drinking Gourd," their code name for the Big Dipper, which, like the North Star and the moss on tree trunks, pointed north toward freedom.
Scarred by shackles and bullwhips, hunted by slave catchers and hounds, they moved mostly at night along secret routes, from places like Tennessee, Missouri and Mississippi, Virginia and the Carolinas.


The New World Cops
WANTED: Small, highly mobile army, able to respond overnight to civil disorder.
Must be able to enforce cease-fires, cope with natural disasters, facilitate relief and deal impartially with all belligerents.
Reply to United Nations, N.Y.
That in essence is the notice United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has now posted in a remarkable report to the Security Council.
He speaks for a world that, if it is to have peace, must also have peace officers.


Weinberger Case Livens Debate on Counsel Law
The perjury indictment of Caspar W. Weinberger and the long-running investigation of the Iran-contra scandal has heated up the broader debate over the fate of the independent counsel statute, one of the most significant legislative changes of the post-Watergate era.
The law will automatically expire on Dec. 15, unless Congress intervenes to renew it -- an action that appears to be highly uncertain because of intense Republican opposition and the ambivalence of Democrats in the House.


When God Got Tired of Americans
HUMANS
By Donald E. Westlake. 355 pp. New York: The Mysterious Press


Miss Mendelson, Kevin P. Daly
Ann Cathleen Mendelson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Mendelson of Rye, N.Y, was married yesterday to Kevin Patrick Daly, the son of Bernard J. Daly of North Palm Beach, Fla., and Gail H. Daly of Bronxville, N.Y.
Msgr.
Donald Pryor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye.
Mrs.
Daly, 25 years old and known as Cathleen, is the promotion projects manager for Allure magazine in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is the president of Champlain Asset Management Ltd., an investment company in New York.
Her mother, Joan E. Mendelson, is the owner of Hilltop Interiors, an interior design company in Rye.


IN YOUR FACE
The expression "in your face" may appear to have come in vogue only recently because it is used so frequently by white television commentators and sports writers who want to appear hip, but it has been around longer than the slam dunk (On Language: "In Your Face," by William Safire, May 31).


Heidi Raker, Stuart M. Goldstein
Mrs.
Marcia L. Raker of Longmeadow, Mass., has announced the engagement of her daughter Heidi Raker to Stuart Marc Goldstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Werner Goldstein of River Edge, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Raker, 30 years old, is the owner of Heidi Raker Public Relations in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is also a daughter of Joseph A. Schwartz of East Greenwich, R.I.
Mr.
Goldstein, 32, is a securities analyst at Constable Partners in New York.
He graduated from Syracuse University.


Heaven Only Knows
To the Editor:
Caryn James rightly laments the sugary stereotype of nuns that produces such tripe as "Sister Act"  [ "Movies Turn Convent Life Upside Down," June 7 ] .
Unfortunately, she can only offer anti-Catholic films ("Nuns on the Run," "Dark Habits") as an antidote.
Her satire on a disabled nun deepens the bias.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
INSIDE THE WHALE
And Other Animals.
By Steve Parker.
Illustrated by Ted Dewan. 48 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $16. (Ages 7 to 10)


DEFIANTLY INCORRECT
My 21-year-old son became a paraplegic four years ago, but he is not "humor impaired." We love John Callahan.
He's the best "sit-down" comic we know.
KATHY GERBIC
Middlesex, N.Y.


Susan A. Lukens, John C. Stone 3d
Susan Atkinson Lukens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan W. Lukens of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday in Greensboro, Vt., to John Charles Stone 3d, the son of Mr.
Stone of Randolph, Vt., and Nicole Stone of Denver.
The Rev.
Leslie Simonson performed the ceremony at the United Church of Christ.
Mrs.
Stone, 27 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in museum education from George Washington University.
Her father is a retired Foreign Service officer.
Her mother, Susan Lukens, is a special-education teacher at the Lone Oak Montessori School in Bethesda, Md.


Networking; Just How Dead Is the Mainframe?
The boundaries had been quite clear: big iron (mainframes and minis) for big, complex jobs; personal computers for small jobs and single-user applications.
Then advances in the power of PC-based networks led some people to declare the mainframe dead.
And many companies began "downsizing" -- moving their "mission critical" applications from mainframes and minis to server-based local area networks.
But others contend that reports of the death of the mainframe have been highly exaggerated.
Moving rapidly toward PC's can put a company's valuable data in jeopardy.
PC-based systems are not set up to provide the safety and redundancy achieved by mainframes.
Those with faith in the mainframes also point out that many applications require the sheer power of big iron.


Ione Gatch, Kenneth Miller
Ione Waite Gatch, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Milton M. Gatch of New York, was married yesterday to Kenneth Norbert Miller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norbert Miller of Beaver Dam, Wis.
The bride's father performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of St.
James the Fisherman in Wellfleet, Mass.
Mrs.
Miller, 35 years old, is a district manager for Children's World Learning Centers in Minneapolis.
She is a graduate of Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is the director of the Burke Library of Union Theological Seminary in New York, where he is also a professor of church history.


'Lettice' Without Maggie Smith
IT did not seem unthinkable that "Lettice and Lovage" would, one day, go on without Maggie Smith for whose idiosyncratic gifts Peter Shaffer created the role of Lettice Douffet, the tour guide who cannot be bothered with mere facts, in fact, who cannot tolerate anything or anyone "mere."
And one would surely have chosen Carole Shelley as a most likely candidate for the outsized character whose credo is to "enlarge, enliven, enlighten."


THE ISLAMIC WAVE
In her superb report on the impact of Islamic fundamentalism on governments and societies in the Arab world, Miller notes that the resurgence of militant Islam is fueled by a longing for the restoration of Arab "pride and dignity."
No one would fault Islamic fundamentalists for seeking to restore Arab pride and dignity, if that effort drew on the humane and civilizing qualities that distinguished classical Islam.
However, the political order that modern-day Islamic fundamentalism seeks to restore draws on the most regressive, authoritarian and anti-democratic impulses.


Jane C. Curran, Gary L. McGuirk
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Curran Jr. of State College, Pa., have announced the engagement of a daughter, Jane Catherine Curran, to Gary Louis McGuirk, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis McGuirk of Athol, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Curran, 31 years old, is the administrative officer at the Boston investment bank of Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of New York Telephone.


SUPPORT GROWING IN CHINA FOR SHIFT TO FREER MARKETS
Advocates of economic change appear to be gaining ground in the power struggles here, and a result is that China is aiming to step up its drive toward free markets.
Spurred by a new, still unpublished speech by Deng Xiaoping, the senior leader, Chinese officials are planning to allow foreign companies to play a greater role in the service industry.
Officials are also stepping up plans to privatize housing, decontrol prices and even convert a large share of state industry into stockholders' companies.


Ms. D'Amario, Edmund Price
Elizabeth Vincent D'Amario, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony V. D'Amario of Westwood, Mass., was married yesterday in Boston to Edmund Hazleton Price, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Price of Lexington, Mass.
The Rev.
Michael Groden performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Cecilia's Church.
Mrs.
Price, 31 years old, teaches Spanish at the Barrie School in Silver Spring, Md.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in Hispanic culture and civilization from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was an advertising salesman for Where magazine in Boston.


Knapp Commission Reunion Has an Unexpected Currency
It was planned as a pleasant evening of reminiscences about an investigation 20 years ago that brought sweeping reform to a New York City police department mired in corruption.
But only that morning the newspapers carried front-page stories about the creation of a new investigative body with a similar mission.


Serbs Defy Ultimatum From U.N. And Persist in Shelling Sarajevo
Serbian forces continued to shell Sarajevo with sporadic artillery fire today, the day after the United Nations Security Council issued an ultimatum to the Serbians to halt fighting and put their heavy guns under United Nations control within 48 hours.
But the intensity of the firing seemed to have diminished in general, and a top United Nations official here said he had received reports that "some progress" had been made toward ending the fighting in the city.
Hints at Military Action
On Friday, the Security Council said that if Serbian nationalists did not stop fighting and put their heavy weapons under United Nations control by Monday, the Council would meet "to determine what other means would be required to bring relief flights of food and medicine for the suffering people of Sarajevo." Diplomats said a failure to comply could lead to military action.


Jennifer Crosby, Samuel Cargill
Jennifer Dunning Crosby, a daughter of H. Ashton Crosby Jr. of Bedford, N.Y., and Virginia D. Crosby of New York, was married yesterday to Samuel Whitney Cargill, a son of Therese Russell of Southport, Conn., and the late William S. Cargill.
The Rev.
Carleton Sweetser performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York.
Mrs.
Cargill, 26 years old, is a saleswoman for Paul Stanley Ltd., a women's clothing manufacturer in Los Angeles.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father teaches classics at the Rippowam Cisqua School in Bedford.
Her mother is the corporate director of volunteers at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.


Tennis Clothes
To the Editor: In "The Score Is Advantage, Foie Gras" (May 24) Michael Mewshaw mentions that "at the U.S. Open great passels of spectators show up in T-shirts and shorts, tennis shoes and headbands."
These comfortable clothes are worn almost every summer day by regular people.
Let me assure Mr.
Mewshaw that he won't see too many such outfits at the 1992 U.S.
Open.


SINKING FAST
In his article "Sinking Fast" (May 17), A. Alvarez writes that "in boom times" most owners prefer to sell old bulk carriers "for scrap and buy new vessels." It is true that, during boom times, owners will order new ships.
But few ships are sold for scrap during such periods.
When the shipping market is strong and freight rates are high, an old bulker, with probably only a very small mortgage to support, is an efficient moneymaker, and there is no incentive to scrap it.
Ships are not sold for scrap because of their age or because they are decrepit-looking.
They are scrapped, during busts rather than booms, because that is the best deal owners can get for them at the time.
SYDNEY P. LEVINE President, Shipping Intelligence Inc.
New York, N.Y.


Miss Gootenberg, Daniel Alpert
Lorraine Gootenberg of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter, Debra Jean Gootenberg, to Daniel Chase Alpert, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Saul Alpert of Providence, R.I.
An October 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss Gootenberg, 25 years old, is an assistant account executive at Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her mother is a real-estate broker with the William B. May Company in New York.


Droll Troll, $130
He ain't heavy, he's my backpack.
These endearing, ridiculous, vaguely folkloric rubber backpacks are cast from a mold, then hand painted, by T. Oliver Kopian Designs of New York and Miami.


Alice Carey and Geoffrey Knox
Alice Carey, a playwright, was married on Tuesday to Geoffrey Knox, the director of communications for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, both in New York.
The Rev.
Al Carmines, a Baptist minister, officiated at St.
John's Church in Greenwich Village in New York.
The bride, who is 45 years old and is keeping her name, is the daughter of the late Dennis and Alice Carey.
She graduated from New York University and received her master's degree in English there.


Technology; A Promising Way to Cut Nitrogen Oxides at Power Plants
For the right price, any pollutant can be cleaned up, but as standards get stricter, increasingly the trick is to find the technology that does the job with the minimum of resources.
In a widely watched experiment at the Long Island Lighting Company's oil-fired generating station here, engineers think they have found a cost-effective way to take nitrogen oxides out of power plant emissions.
Historically, utilities have not focused on nitrogen oxides.
They have had their hands full with two other pollution problems: sulfur dioxide, the prime cause of acid rain, and particulates, or soot.
But, acting under provisions of the Clean Air Act of 1990, New York, New Jersey and the six New England states recently agreed to strict new standards on nitrogen oxide emissions from power plants.


Ye Shall Be as Goddesses
THE MYTH OF THE GODDESS
Evolution of an Image.
By Anne Baring and Jules Cashford.
Illustrated. 779 pp.
New York:  Viking Arkana. $40.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record; Perot Pursued Charges Against Official for Years
The rivalry between Ross Perot and Richard L. Armitage, the senior Pentagon official on prisoner of war issues in the Reagan Administration, is now a well-known part of the lore surrounding Mr.
Perot's candidacy.
To counter the impression that he is vengeful and prone to vendettas, Mr.
Perot has depicted his involvement with investigations of Mr.
Armitage as an isolated incident motivated by patriotic concern and inspired largely by a chance meeting with a police officer who brought his suspicions of Mr.
Armitage to Mr.
Perot.


Son of Privilege, Son of Pain: Random Death At Yale's Gates
When the trial in the slaying of Christian Prince on the Yale campus ended late last month and the courtroom emptied, few of the central figures were satisfied with the outcome, not even the jurors who had handed down a mixed verdict in a case that had cut this city and the university to the bone.
The family of James Duncan Fleming, the 17-year-old defendant, expressed relief that he was acquitted on a charge that he intentionally murdered Mr.
Prince in the early morning hours of Feb. 17, 1991, but expressed sadness that he had been found guilty of conspiring to rob the 19-year old Yale sophomore.
"I wish they hadn't found him guilty on any count," the accused man's father, James Fleming Sr., said.
"My family and I want him home." Not Their Tragedy Alone
The family of the victim was not consoled by a verdict that left unanswered the question of who killed their son, even though the prosecutor said the defendant would be retried on two charges the jury deadlocked on: felony murder and robbery.


Abroad at Home; A New Life
In a world of disappointed expectations, the Israeli election had a transforming quality.
It was as if the people of Israel had decided to turn a page of history, a page filled with bitterness, and explore the possibility of hope.
Yitzhak Rabin, the Labor Party leader who will become Prime Minister, is not a man of uplifting eloquence or vision.
He is a curt ex-general whose philosophy, if it can be called that, is pragmatism.
He has no zeal for any ideology.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Suppose Hitler had won World War II.
That is the premise of Robert Harris's absorbing, expertly written novel, FATHERLAND (Random House, $21).
"Churchill and his gang of warmongers had fled to Canada," Mr.
Harris's protagonist recalls 20 years later.
"When America had defeated Japan by detonating an atomic bomb, the Fuhrer had sent a V-3 rocket to explode in the skies over New York to prove he could retaliate in kind if struck. After that, the war had dwindled to a series of bloody guerrilla conflicts at the fringes of the new German Empire: a nuclear stalemate the diplomats called the cold war."


CORRECTIONS
A heading and a picture caption on June 14 with a report in the Northeast Notebook column about the new City Line Centre shopping development and its first anchor, Pier 1 Imports, misstated its location.
It is in Philadelphia, not Bala Cynwyd.


EUROPE BACKS U.N. ON SARAJEVO FORCE
Leaders of the European Community agreed today to support the use of force by the United Nations if necessary to get humanitarian aid through to Sarajevo, which is under daily bombardment from Serbian forces.
Shortly after the leaders issued their statement, officials announced in Paris that President Francois Mitterrand had left for an unexpected visit to the former Yugoslavia.
Mr.
Mitterrand's destination was reported to be Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, whose airport is under siege; he stopped for the night in the Croatian city of Split.


Excerpts From Interview With Clinton on Goals for Presidency
Following are excerpts from an interview with Gov.
Bill Clinton in the Governor's Mansion here on Thursday.
The questioners were R. W. Apple Jr., B. Drummond Ayres Jr., Thomas L. Friedman, Steven Greenhouse and Gwen Ifill of The New York Times.
Some questions have been edited or paraphrased because of space limitations.


Public &amp; Private; All of These You Are
Let us begin today with the fact that being called a honky is not in the same league as being called a nigger.
And therein lies one explanation of why Bill Clinton generated considerable heat, but no light, when he publicly decried the anti-white comments of a woman who thinks with her mouth by the name of Sister Souljah.


Miss Murkland, Peter Hoffman
Lindsey Austen Murkland, a daughter of Mrs.
John C. Murkland of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Murkland, was married yesterday to Peter Kincaid Hoffman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Brooks Hoffman of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Thomas Lopes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's, Our Lady of the Isle, in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Hoffman, 34 years old, is a first-grade teacher at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College and received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education.


'The Price' Is Right for These Days
When Arthur Miller's "The Price" was originally produced in 1968, it flew resolutely against the temper of the day.
The cry was for liberation.
Sexual, political and social restraints were being vigorously contested, and here was Mr.
Miller, lecturing, as is often his wont, about responsibility, morality and the price we pay for our actions.
Everywhere the past was being shed.
Yet the playwright's characters, two long- estranged brothers, couldn't help dragging it up and hashing it over.
One of them, Victor, a middle-aged policeman, had sacrificed a promising career and financial stability to take care of their father, a man so traumatized by the Great Depression that he ended his life sitting wanly in an armchair, staring into space.
Without so much as a regret, the other brother, Walter, had stalked out the door and gone on to make a tidy fortune as a surgeon.
On the pretext of disposing of their late father's furniture, Mr.
Miller brought the siblings together in the attic of an old New York brownstone and let them hurl accusations and recriminations at each other.


Quotation of the Day
"The decision to break a promise of lifetime health benefits may represent a straightforward business decision for an employer. However, for the retirees who relied on such promises and now face an uncertain financial future, the decision is a betrayal." -- CATHY VENTRELL-MONSEES, a benefits-policy manager with the American Association of Retired Persons.  [ 1:3. ]


Retirees Threatened With Loss of Insurance
Several million Americans who retired with the promise of comprehensive medical coverage are now having those benefits terminated or sharply reduced by their former employers.
Indeed, as many as 95 percent of employers either are cutting back on retirees' health benefits or will do so eventually, says David M. Walker, a former Assistant Secretary of Labor in the Bush Administration who is a Washington representative of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting and consulting firm.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
GOLF EVENT FOR THE BLIND
More than 300 sighted and 16 blind golfers will participate in the 15th yearly Ken Venturi golf classic to benefit Guilding Eyes for the Blind.
The organization, based in Yorktown Heights, trains 150 guide dogs a year, matching them to blind owners at a cost of $20,000 each.


Whining To the Bank
To the Sports Editor:
Chronic hoop fatigue syndrome?
I am sick of elitist, pampered, overpaid athletes complaining about how overworked and underappreciated they are and columnists who think they must point this out ("Long March for Three Olympians," The Times, June 14, by George Vecsey).


I.B.M. and Microsoft Settle Operating-System Feud
The world's largest computer maker, I.B.M., and the most influential software company, Microsoft, have settled a noisy rift by agreeing to pursue divergent paths without legal and financial squabbling.
Both people who write software and people who buy it, for their own use or for their companies, have been afraid of committing themselves to either I.B.M.'s or Microsoft's new generations of operating systems.
Many industry executives believe that the fear has slowed sales for several years as customers put off choosing a system that could be endangered if the legal wrangling continued.


For Talk Shows, Less News Is Good News
PERHAPS they should call last week's episode "Men Who Talk Too Much: Should They be President?"
The latest fad in Presidential politics -- the rush of candidates from network news shows to the talk-show circuit -- has prompted a fair amount of hand-wringing.
Most commentators concentrated on the candidates' desire to avoid tough questions from political reporters.
But are the candidates running for cover or running toward coverage?
For even as cable television has been rapidly adding subscribers, the network news shows, beset by declining ratings and shrinking budgets, have been losing viewers.


A Writer's Best Friend
To the Editor:
"What sadder memoir of a writer's life could there be than one that proclaims his greatest friend to be his agent?" writes Rafael Yglesias in his review of "Friends in the World," by Aram Saroyan (In Short, June 7).
Well, really!
My own agent -- and yes, I shall name her; she is Claire Smith of Harold Ober Associates -- has bucklered and shielded me through some 20 years and some 15 books.
She has held my hand, corrected my English, bought my lunch and argued with my publishers.
On occasion she has even sent me a check, though she has never learned to make it quite large enough.
I proudly count her among my greatest friends, and I could name you a whole Who's Who of writers who will tell you the same thing about their own agents.
Herewith my tribute to them all (I am sorry I could not think of a twist of grammar to make it gender-free):
If you write prose, or if you are a poet,  And if you have to peddle what you've penned,  I needn't tell you -- you already know it --  His agent is a man's best friend.
WILLARD R. ESPY New York


Q and A
Auctions of Navajo Rugs
Q.
Can you tell me where there are auctions for Navajo rugs in the Southwest? -- Bert Romberg, Dallas


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
New home sales, percent
1.3
1.8
Tuesday
Leading indicators, percent
0.4
0.4
Consumer confidence index
71.0
73.8
Wednesday
Construction spending
-0.3
0.7
Purchasing managers index
56.3
56
Thursday
Factory goods orders
1.0
0.8
Unemployment rate, percent
7.5
7.4
Monday: European Community Ministers meet  Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee holds midyear meeting  Wednesday: Britain assumes European Community Presidency  Thursday: Bundesbank Council meets  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


POSTINGS: 81 for Union County; Homes on the Farm
A new community of one-family homes will soon rise on one of the few family farms remaining in Union County, N.J.
The development, Murray Hill Farms, will encompass 45 acres in New Providence and Berkeley Heights on what has been known as the Holiday Farm.
Plans call for 81 four- and five-bedroom homes of 2,400 to 3,200 square feet on lots of up to a half acre.


Gield Schools on Cape Cod
A series of weeklong field schools begins July 12 at the Massachusetts Audubon Society's Wellfleet Bay Wildlife Sanctuary in Wellfleet on Cape Cod.
Subjects include local archeology, coastal botany, birding, natural history, art and nature photography.
Programs emphasize field trips, which might be a whale watch, a seabird cruise from Provincetown or a jaunt to Monomoy National Wildlife Refuge.
Other fieldwork sends students to the Cape Cod National Seashore, the Prov incelands dunes and Coast Guard Beach in Eastham.
The six-day classes, held in July and August and limited to 8 to 12 participants, generally start on Saturday and end on Friday.
Class hours vary: Photography students are kept chasing the light from dawn until dusk, while archeology field students may end class at 3 P.M.
Evening lectures are often part of the curriculum.


Retirees Threatened With Loss of Insurance
Several million Americans who retired with the promise of comprehensive medical coverage are now having those benefits terminated or sharply reduced by their former employers.
Indeed, as many as 95 percent of employers either are cutting back on retirees' health benefits or will do so eventually, says David M. Walker, a former Assistant Secretary of Labor in the Bush Administration who is a Washington representative of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting and consulting firm.


G.M. Layoff Raises Employee Fears
THE announcement by General Motors that 800 employees on the night shift here will be laid off in August has heightened workers' fears about the scheduled closing of the assembly plant three summers from now.
Union officials say that unless retraining programs are implemented soon, the factory's 3,100 hourly workers, who will be hard pressed to transfer their skills elsewhere, may find themselves jobless.
"There's lots of stress," said Peter Donnelly, a benefits representative for United Auto Workers Local 664.
"Our careers, our lives are on the line. The vast majority of us want to continue working. We don't want to go on welfare."


No More Mets' Excuses
To the Sports Editor:
The contention by several New York Mets that umpires are responsible for the woes of Bobby Bonilla at the plate was not worthy of comment by Joe Sexton ("For Bonilla, Is It Two Strikes You're Out?," The Times, June 18).
I suppose the Mets would also like to blame the umpires for Willie Randolph's unwise attempt to stretch a double into a triple, with two out, against Montreal in Wednesday night's game.
No doubt, according to the Mets, the umpire did not make the proper call there either.
DON FISCHER Rochester


Oscar-Nominated Film Wins Beijing Consent
In a sign that the Communist Party may be loosening its grip on culture here, the Government said today that it had approved the domestic release of a Chinese film that was nominated for an Oscar this year.
The film, "Raise the Red Lantern," by China's most prominent director, Zhang Yimou, has received permission for distribution within the country and could be shown by August, the film's production company said.


As Phoenix Opens 5th Season, Names Are Brighter
"WE are the exception that tests the rule," said Bram Lewis, the founder and artistic director of the Phoenix Theater Company, which opened its fifth summer season last week.
Mr.
Lewis was referring to the company's resilience in Westchester, where professional nonprofit theater has so often failed.
"The structures that make nonprofit theaters possible have been under attack," he said, "beginning with a restructured tax code. Given Jesse Helms, who made things uncomfortable with the National Endowment for the Arts. Given the 46 percent the New York State Council on the Arts has cut. Given the most serious recession to hit the country since the 1930's.


Court Rules on Speech, Integration and Tobacco
As summer recess beckoned, the Supreme Court last week ruled in at least five major cases and surprised many Court-watchers with a more moderate direction than was expected.
While the opinions were often fractious and convoluted, the court bolstered First Amendment protections in three cases, denounced segregation in Mississippi's state universities and opened the door for smokers to sue tobacco companies. .
The court struck down a St.
Paul, Minn. anti-hate-crime ordinance under which a teen-age white supremacist was charged in 1990 for burning a cross on the yard of the black family across the street.
Justice Antonin Scalia castigated the crime but said that the law was impermissibly narrow, because it specified as offensive only certain kinds of speech.
Justice Byron R. White, who agreed the law was flawed, argued instead that it was overly broad because it made a crime of certain speech that, while noxious, was protected by the First Amendment.
The ruling calls into question laws that enhance penalties for bias-related crimes, and bans on hate speech at college campuses.


Eugene S. Johnson, Industry Spokesman, 60
Eugene S. Johnson, a leading spokesman for the oil industry in New York for 30 years, died at his home in New York on Friday.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Johnson died after surgery for a malignant brain tumor, said his wife, Sarah Wallace Johnson.


Arrest Order Issued for Giants' McGhee
A Houston judge issued an arrest order for New York Giants linebacker KANAVIS McGHEE, who left a Harris County courtroom in Texas before a child-support hearing began.
Judge JOHN MONTGOMERY signed the order Friday for McGhee, who was scheduled to appear regarding allegations he owed back child support and related expenses, court records show.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Piscataway
DR.
PAUL B. JENNINGS says he has a longstanding score to settle with the British crown.
As owner of the oldest house in Middlesex County and chairman of Piscataway Township's Historic Preservation Advisory Committee, he believes Britain should "finally return what its soldiers took from the home during the Revolutionary War."
A previous owner of the 1720 farmhouse on River Road gave him a copy of the reparations list filed at the State House in Trenton on Sept. 3, 1782, by John Smock, then the house's owner: He demanded the return of 2 mares, 6 heifers, 4 steers, a bull, 18 sheep and a yoke of oxen.


Arrest Order Issued for Giants' McGhee
A Houston judge issued an arrest order for New York Giants linebacker KANAVIS McGHEE, who left a Harris County courtroom in Texas before a child-support hearing began.
Judge JOHN MONTGOMERY signed the order Friday for McGhee, who was scheduled to appear regarding allegations he owed back child support and related expenses, court records show.


Sanctions Keep West Off the Road to Libya
Fauzi Ghnedi, the director of Libya's national tourist agency, sat in his empty office and tried to think of those who might want to take their holidays here.
"Perhaps reformed alcoholics," he said hopefully.
"You know, we don't allow alcohol. And then there are those who like adventure."


Fans Like It. Drivers Like It. Stock Cars a Natural for Indy?
The Indianapolis Motor Speedway last week took the first step in what could become the biggest breach of sporting tradition since the lights went on at Wrigley Field.
Nine leading stock-car racers took part in a tire test at the speedway on Monday and Tuesday.
The results were promising, with the drivers saying the track is a viable stock-car racing site.
If other details can be worked out, the speedway could join Nascar's Winston Cup tour as early as 1994.
And that would represent the first time since 1910 that the two-and-a-half-mile oval has held a race other than the Indianapolis 500.


A New Rule Clouds The Clean Air Act
PRESIDENT BUSH, who has said that signing the Clean Air Act of 1990 was one of the principal achievements of his Presidency, last week issued a regulation that would weaken the law and let manufacturers release tons of pollution into the air just by telling regulators that they wanted to.
The new rule, which was championed by the Council on Competitiveness chaired by Vice President Dan Quayle, was called "encouraging" by the National Council of Manufacturers.


Kimberly Ruggles, Bradley Mell
Kimberly Anne Ruggles, a daughter of Noma F. Ruggles of Farmington, Conn., and the late David J. Ruggles, was married to S. Bradley Mell, a son of William H. Mell of New Vernon, N.J., and Diana D. Mell of Far Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert B. Heppenstall 3d performed the ceremony at the First Church of Christ Congregational in West Hartford, Conn.
Mrs.
Mell, 27 years old, graduated from Clark University and received a master's degree in early childhood education from Boston College.
Her father was the chief financial officer for Rohr Inc., an aerospace manufacturer in San Diego.


Tenements
To the Editor:
Your article on May 3 entitled "Rehabilitating Tenements" was an accurate description of the Lower East Side project, but left out one major point: that this was a unique public/-private/nonprofit partnership of dollars and efforts and perseverance.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Starts
1,108
978
+13.3%
Completions
1,026
1,090
- 5.9%
Sales
530
505
+ 5.0%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.64
8.74
9.85
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.86
5.91
7.31
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.53
8.60
9.69
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.67
5.74
7.31
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.48
8.64
9.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.61
5.72
7.13
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.75
8.85
10.06
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.42
6.42
7.70
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.12
4.18
6.37
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.26
8.26
9.23
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Teller Network Grows in Asia And Europe
The automated teller machine is making inroads in many new corners of the globe, allowing more American travelers to pay for their foreign purchases in foreign currency, but without the burden of carrying much cash.
In the latest reflection of the trend, the Plus international network, which provides computer backup for A.T.M.'s, said it had added 12 countries in Asia and the Middle East to its system over the last two months, and will expand in Europe later this year.
Since April the network has been introduced in Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Macao, the Philippines, Bahrain, Brunei, Guam, Oman, Qatar, Spain, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, and soon to come are Plus machines in Austria, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy and Switzerland.


Faith Grietzer, D. P. C. Frankel
Dr.
Faith Ellen Grietzer, a daughter of Clare Grietzer of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late George Grietzer, was married yesterday in Washington to Dr.
Douglas Price Charles Frankel, a son of Florence N. Frankel of Hackensack, N.J., and the late Julius Frankel.
Cantor Harold Levy performed the ceremony at the Kennedy-Warren, a restaurant.
The bride, 27 years old, is a pediatric resident at Georgetown University Hospital.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her M.D. from the State University of New York at Buffalo.
Her father was the manager of marketing at the General Electric Company in Binghamton, N.Y.


JUNE 21-27: 20-Day Deadline; Congress Orders Binding Arbitration To End Railroad Strike
The railroad strike came and went last week like a summer thunderstorm, causing a spell of anxiety as it loomed ominously on the horizon, arrived uproariously, and then vanished before most people had time to comprehend the complex forces at work.
Congress, as usual in major rail disputes, intervened before the strike could have serious economic effects.
This time, though, Congress introduced a new form of binding arbitration, hoping to appease labor and business alike.


McCarthyism's Effects In New Jersey
I am writing in response to a recent "Jerseyana" article and specifically about the Rutgers faculty members who were discharged because of McCarthy-era allegations of Communist affiliations.
The article deals with two Rutgers professors, Moses I. Finley, an assistant professor of history, and Simon Heimlich, a tenured associate professor of physics.
It says nothing about a third professor, Abraham Glasser, an associate professor of law, whose resignation was forced in 1953 after he invoked the Fifth Amendment before the House Committee on Un-American Activities.


Dissing the Rappers Is Fodder for the Sound Bite
American politics, or maybe American entertainment, reached some sort of milestone on June 19.
When Vice President Quayle declared Ice-T's album "Body Count" "obscene" for its inclusion of a song called "Cop Killer," it became official: This year, both major parties had found rappers to run against.
While the Vice President was condemning Ice-T, the brouhaha continued over Gov.
Bill Clinton's swipe at Sister Souljah.
He construed a comment she made in a Washington Post interview as condoning blacks murdering whites and criticized the Rev.
Jesse Jackson for inviting her to a Rainbow Coalition forum.
Mr.
Jackson, and many observers, suggested that the candidate was trying to distance himself from black causes.


Concrete Work, Big or Little, Requires Special Materials
MOST minor flaws in concrete, like flaking, pitting, cracks and chipped corners, can be repaired easily if one knows which mending materials to choose and how to apply them.
Flaking or scaling, in which the surface of concrete sloughs off like peeling paint, usually results when concrete is smoothed excessively during pouring.
If the problem is minor -- that is, leaving the surface still virtually smooth -- sweep, vacuum and scrub the concrete with a wire brush and a solution of strong household detergent and water.
Repeat the procedure with a fiber brush and then rinse with clean water.


Out of Sand, West Virginia's Delicate Art
WHEN he is at work, there is little about the artist Bob Hamon that betrays the fact he is working in 20th-century West Virginia and not Herculaneum, except perhaps the style of the sweat-soaked clothes he wears.
His is the art of glassmaking, and it is over 3,000 years old.
Mr.
Hamon began working with glass at the age of 10, in his father's factory, which had gas, but no electricity.
He is the second generation of Hamon glassmakers, designing glass pieces himself and working with such well-known glass artists as Robert Willson, one of those who pioneered the making of solid glass sculpture in Venice and West Virginia.


Shoppingus Mallus Romanus
In a city where neon is a sacrament, it takes a lot to get noticed.
Two new behemoth hotel-casinos -- the Excalibur, a sort of Camelot on steroids, and the Mirage, with its pina-colada-scented volcano outside -- moved to the head of the must-see list in the last two years, taking a little luster off the lame of this town's older landmarks like Caesars Palace.


Russian Qualifies as a Wimbledon Giant-Killer
Jim Courier may have attempted to downplay his third-round loss to a player whose own coach describes him as a virtual nobody, but the Floridian made the wrong sort of Wimbledon history today by becoming the first top-seeded player in the Open era to lose to a qualifier.
Halfway to a Grand Slam, coasting imperviously along on a 25-match winning streak, and invincible in the last 15 Grand Slam confrontations, the Courier victory machine inexplicably broke down this afternoon on Wimbledon's center court.


Michele Plante, Eric R. Kemp
Michele Andre Plante, a daughter of Dr.
Inge R. Plante of Princeton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Marc A. Plante, was married yesterday in Bodrum, Turkey, to Eric Richard Kemp, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Kemp of Hartford.
Capt.
Hilmi Nebioglu, the master of the yacht Sina, performed the ceremony at a castle ruin.
Mrs.
Kemp, 31, is a national sales executive for Adrienne Vittadini, a clothing company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Middlebury College.
Her mother is a psychiatrist in Lawrenceville, N.Y.


Looking Ahead
Sow fall crops like kohlrabi, kale, sprouting broccoli and Chinese cabbage.
As leaves yellow or die, lift, separate and transplant irises and narcissus.


Lisa Lausier, Ward Urban
Lisa Mary Lausier, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Lausier of Farmington, Me., was married yesterday in Hanover, N.H., to Ward Alington Wickwire Urban, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Z. Urban of Buffalo.
The Rev.
John A. Allen performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Denis Church.
Mrs.
Urban, 33 years old, is an assistant vice president of Kyowa Saitama Bank in New York.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is a salesman for Southworth-Milton Inc., an earthmoving-equipment sales company in Scarborough, Me.


Debussy's Piano Music With Mozartean Respect
Alfred cortot warned his piano students that sins against the spirit of a composition invariably began with sins against its letter.
It is a cautionary phrase that might with profit be printed in every copy of Debussy's piano music.
For Debussy, while provoking the most delicate flights of fancy, engineered them with precise scores that thrive on literalism.
Literalism (taken literally) is of course a term as dangerously vague as the notational system to which it is applied.
Suffice it to say that Debussy's most effective interpreters have been those who have demonstrated a respect for rhythmic integrity, consistency of tempo and indicated phrase marks usually saved for Mozart, Haydn or Mendelssohn.


Debunking Some Myths on Dethatching
GRASS clippings do not increase thatch.
This fact is the kind of information to cut out and fasten to the refrigerator door.
Or at least it may help to settle some family arguments.
Thatch is an accumulation of organic materials such as grass roots (rhizomes), dead grasses and grass sheaths.
It just sits there and does not decompose unless it is removed by dethatching machines that slice through this accumulation.
Thatch, which smothers the grass and inhibits growth, is sometimes caused by applications of too much fertilizer.


In East Europe, the Hapsburgs Get Revenge; Inside the New Croatia
To the Editor:
For eight days Zadar was a ghost town; the populace buried in underground shelters because of continuous shelling by Serbian terrorists camped in the surrounding hills.
The city was under siege.
At 6 A.M., May 27, the all-clear sounded and families slowly and timidly overcame their fear.
Everyone needed a breath of fresh air.
The local heroes here today are the bakers, who despite constant shelling, baked bread all night, and journalists and printers, who got the paper out every day.
The favorite paper here is Slobodna Dalmacija (Free Dalmatia), whose journalists and editor are now under indictment.


'Don't Have So Many Baby Sitters. Enjoy Your Children.'
FRANK PERRINE was doing what he does best, moving in and out of classrooms, getting the feel of things.
The fourth graders were in high gear, having performed in a Mayan festival the night before.
"Were you nervous," asked Mr.
Perrine of one.
"Yes," confided the smiling child, "I said symbols instead of syllables."
Other children clamored to be heard.
At one point he sat on a small chair and the students gathered round.
"What's your theory as to why the Mayan civilization ended?" And the answers poured out.
"But we really don't know, do we?"
And letting the question hang in the air, he was out the door.
"This is what I like to do," he said.
"Get out and around, make sure the kids still got the spunk and the spirit in them."  Savoring Every Moment
Earlier this month he found himself savoring every moment in the final days in what has been a remarkable career as headmaster at the Foote School in New Haven.
Most heads of schools do not last a decade; Mr.
Perrine has been headmaster for 25 years.
He has won the praise and affection of the staff, faculty and parents.
His retirement, a year in the planning, has generated a library, a scholarship fund, a sculpture, a tree, a chair, a book, a biographical video, even an ode -- all in his honor.
Mr.
Perrine's leaving the Foote school was as thoughtfully planned as Benno C. Schmidt's leaving Yale University was abrupt.
While Mr.
Schmidt's departure made headlines, Mr.
Perrine's has been less visible yet of great significance to the same community.
The Yale president and the Foote headmaster are more closely related than one might imagine, for many Foote parents teach at Yale and they care deeply about the private day school founded 75 years ago by Martha Babcock Foote, a Yale faculty wife and parent as well as a graduate of Bryn Mawr.
Foote has been home to many connected to Yale, both as students and as parents.
The children of former Yale presidents A. Bartlett Giamatti, Kingman Brewster and A. Whitney Griswold all attended Foote.
Guido Calabresi, the dean of the Yale Law School, and his wife, Anne, went to Foote, as did their three children.
And the son of Yale's new provost, Judith Rodin, is now enrolled, as are many of the children of Yale's faculty.
Popular with students, Mr.
Perrine knows the name of every child in the school.
They approach him openly, unafraid.
In part, they respond to his modesty, his optimism, his sense of humor, his willingness to chat with them.
He still teaches the seventh grade and views himself as an old-fashioned history teacher.
He said he did not think students were hurt by memorizing certain things: the Gettysburg Address, multiplication tables, state capitals and the names of the Presidents.
At his final school assembly, the students presented him with a wooden chair, which they had all signed.
They asked him to sit him in it, and then each grade recited his favorites, including "The Swing" by Robert Louis Stevenson and a section of the Declaration of Independence.
They ended with a hymn with many chords, just the kind Mr.
Perrine likes to play on the piano.
Given this adoring throng, why is he retiring at the age of 58?
It is not for another job.
Rather, he said he believed it was time for him to try something new, and for the school to have fresh leadership.
The new headmaster is Jean Lamont, formerly of the Allen-Stevenson School in Manhattan.
Mr.
Perrine said that a good friend who had retired at 65 told him not to wait that long.
"He said 'you've got another life in you; do something else.' I believe that. I think you're a long time dead. Life is short and you should try different things. So, I forced myself out."
The Perrines will spend a year at their home in Peru, Vt., before deciding what's next.
Even so, they leave a personal legacy to education -- their three adult children, Charlotte, Bill and Katherine, are all in teaching.
Looking back, Mr.
Perrine says students are different today from when he arrived in New Haven from the Harvey School in Katonah, N. Y., where "we shook hands with the kids every morning and shook hands with them every night." The year was 1967 and the Foote School was at half its current enrollment of 430 boys and girls.
"Kids today are much more sophisticated," he continued.
"They have a lot more stuff -- Nintendos and games and after-school activities. I tell their parents slow 'em down, be their parents, tell them no, don't rush their childhood, don't over-program them. Stay with them. Take the afternoon off, go fishing. Don't have so many baby sitters. Enjoy your children, enjoy your life."
If anything, he confided, he has seen more change in parents than in children: "I get so mad at them, I want to spank the parents some days. They give those kids everything. The kids are crying for someone to set limits, they're not going to tell you that but they are dying for someone to structure them. Tell them what they're supposed to do. I tell the parents don't let these kids be making all their own decisions. Some parents are afraid to speak to them, to say stop it."
Mr.
Perrine, a product of the public schools of Cranbury, N. J., learned from the easy style of his acknowledged mentor at the Harvey School, Headmaster Leverett T. Smith, and sought to transplant the coziness of boarding school to Foote.
But shortly after he arrived he was caught up in the educational turbulence of the 1960's.
"We were radical about education in those days." he recalled.
"I got all stricken with the latest theories. The open classroom, the idea that kids can't learn sitting still. We had merged age groups. Then our board starting getting on my case because they didn't think the kids were learning."
Mr.
Perrine credited several people including Mr.
Giamatti, who was secretary of the Foote board and teaching at Yale at the time, with helping him rethink his educational philosophy.
"Rather than lecture me, he had me talk it through," Mr.
Perrine said.
"And we started all over again. We developed a statement of purpose for the school, we got a committee together and we worked on Saturday mornings and slowly pulled it all back."
Mr.
Perrine said he now thinks a classical education is best.
"We have Latin in grades seven to nine and French from grades four to nine, and we emphasize writing and the arts and sports."
He said a major issue for Foote was how to keep a social and economic mixture in a good community school when tuition ranges from $8,350 to $9,250 a child each year.
Foote draws from 30 communities in addition to New Haven, has a 16 percent minority enrollment and a strong scholarship fund.
The paradox in the departures of Mr.
Perrine from Foote and Mr.
Schmidt from Yale is that Mr.
Schmidt, who is to lead a new private school venture for Whittle Communications, has had no experience in a world that has been Mr.
Perrine's life.
The Whittle concept does not appeal to Mr.
Perrine because, he said, it is predicated on computer and television learning, and as important as technology is to education, it cannot replace the teacher.
"Education is the spark between the kid and the teacher," he said.
"You've got to get inside a kid's heart. That's not what computers do."


A Study Finds Magnesium Cut Deaths by Heart Attack
Injections of magnesium at the time of a heart attack reduced deaths by a fourth in a study of more than 2,300 patients, British researchers reported in a medical journal yesterday.
The magnesium injections also reduced by 25 percent the incidence of heart failure among patients during their stay in a coronary care unit after a heart attack, the researchers reported in The Lancet, a leading journal published in London.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 28, 1992
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
22
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
2
11
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
3
32
PATRIOT GAMES, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan battles terrorists in England, Ireland and America.
4
5
THE HOUSE OF THUNDER, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a woman who, upon regaining consciousness in a hospital, recalls the horrors that brought her there.
5
6
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
6
5
MAN OF MY DREAMS, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A Victorian beauty inadvertently wins the nobleman she had aspired to marry.
7
1
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $5.99.) Attending a family funeral, a woman lawyer finds new understanding and love.
8
4
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
9
22
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE, by Fannie Flagg. (McGraw-Hill, $7.95.) Life in rural Alabama.
10
2
DAISY FAY AND THE MIRACLE MAN, by Fannie Flagg. (Warner, $7.99.) A woman's coming of age in a Mississippi Gulf Coast town; originally published in 1981 as "Coming Attractions."
11
3
DARKNESS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) A family moves back to a Florida town, where something evil awaits.
12
5
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $5.99.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
13
1
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Is a fabled creature responsible for the disappearance of a couple sailing off Bermuda?
14
5
WOMAN WITHOUT A PAST, by Phyllis A. Whitney. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A woman journeys to South Carolina to solve the mystery of her birth.
15 *
1
ICE TRAP, by L. A. Graf. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" adventure.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
6
GROWING UP BRADY, by Barry Williams with Chris Kreski. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The making of the "Brady Bunch" television series, as recollected by the actor who played Greg.
3
21
ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Signet, $5.99.) The rescue of two Americans from an Iranian prison.
4
10
AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $6.95.) How the practices of Washington lawmakers and Wall Street deal makers have benefited a few Americans at the expense of most.
5
6
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Vintage, $12.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
6
58
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
9
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $5.99.) The tribulations of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
8
50
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a London advertising man.
9
451
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
10
1
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
46
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
10
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
3
94
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
75
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
14
ATTACK OF THE DERANGED MUTANT KILLER MONSTER SNOW GOONS, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Quest for Zoning
To the Editor:
Congratulations to David W. Dunlap for his "The Quest for New Zoning" on April 12..
His description of the city's current zoning ordinance as "a cumbersome, bloated, 835-page patchwork that can be navigated only by a handful of specialists, leaving everyone else -- developers, architects, community leaders and neighbors -- at a baffled disadvantage" is right on the mark.


Salmon Catches In the Northwest
Saltwater sports fishermen with visions of landing the Pacific Northwest's prized salmon this summer should be aware that the season has been shortened and fewer fish can be caught in Washington state waters.
Efforts to protect endangered species and the need to build up weak stocks are triggering the emergency restrictions, which were announced last month.
On the ocean, the action centers on four ports, Neah Bay, La Push, Westport and Ilwaco.
Quotas of fish permitted to be caught have been reduced by 50 percent to a total of 160,000 for the chinook and coho salmon species.
Normally the season extends into fall, but this summer, the catch limit most likely will be reached in August.


In 1992, America Discovers Columbus
Replicas of the three sailing ships that brought Christopher Columbus to the New World 500 years ago arrived in New York Harbor on Friday, beginning more than a week of festivities commemorating the voyage.
The pageantry will culminate Saturday and Sunday with a series of public events including an international flotilla of about 260 ships that will make their way from the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge through New York Harbor and up the Hudson River to the George Washington Bridge on the Fourth of July.


Portrait of 2 Accused of Kidnapping: Ardent, Hapless Pursuit of Affluence
During the giddy late 1980's, Arthur and Irene Seale wholeheartedly adopted the concept of having it all.
Blond, fit and perennially tan, the parents of two cashed in their four-bedroom colonial in Morris County, N.J., to join the sail-and-ski set in Hilton Head, S.C. and Vail, Colo.
But like the economy, the Seales' high life tumbled.
About three-quarters of a million dollars in debt, they moved back to New Jersey with no jobs, no prospects and no alternative but to stay with Mr.
Seale's retired parents in a farmhouse in rural Hunterdon County.


With the Police Behind Him Can de Klerk Look Ahead?
WHEN an affluent white South African hears a prowler outside his suburban home, he hits a panic button to summon a private security patrol.
It scarcely occurs to him to phone the police.
When a black township dweller senses danger, he doesn't call the police either.
The white suburbanite assumes the police are too busy to come.
The black South African fears they will.
During the four decades of apartheid, the South African police grew into a force not of crime fighters but of border guards, patrolling the racial boundaries.
In the twilight of apartheid, such a police force is not only obsolete, it is a growing political liability for the white leadership of President F. W. de Klerk.


Development With an Environmental Bent
Here among moss-draped live oaks and unspoiled ponds, a new style of island development based on strict environmental standards is being tested, and developers around the nation are watching to see if it succeeds.
"When I came to this island, I knew I had to find a way to spend the rest of my life here," said Jim Chaffin, one of the owners.
"Not having $17 million to spend on my personal island, I knew we would have to do some sort of development."


Elizabeth S. Kline, Henry Collins 3d
Elizabeth Suzanne Kline, the daughter of Dr.
Kenneth K. Kline and Elizabeth S. Kline, both of Wheeling, W.Va., was married yesterday to Henry Lafayette Collins 3d, the son of Mrs.
C.
Edward Pacaud of Berwyn, Pa., and the late Mr.
Collins Jr.
Judge Elizabeth Shequine, a family court judge in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., performed the civil ceremony at the bride's home in LaGrangeville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Collins is the events manager for WNET, the public television station in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Bethany College and received a master's degree in divinity from Yale University.
Her father is a retired oral surgeon in Wheeling.


Geneticists' Latest Discovery: Public Fear of 'Frankenfood'
Exhibits of Pfizer's Chy-max, a genetically engineered coagulant, bloomed alongside displays for the Santa Cruz Valley Pecan Company and Sunsweet Prunes at the annual meeting of the Institute of Food Technologists this week in New Orleans.
From above, the displays looked like technological crops in a furrowed field.
Instead of overalls, the 15,000 conventioneers who plied the 700,000-square-foot exhibition at the New Orleans Convention Center wore white lab coats or business suits.
They carried calculators and notebooks, and when they spoke of "growth potential," they were more often than not referring to the possibilities in the genetic engineering of food products.


Heather L. McLaughlin, Richard H. Hoffman Jr.
Heather Lee McLaughlin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis J. McLaughlin of Woodside, Queens, was married yesterday to Richard H. Hoffman Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoffman of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Aquinas Stack performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Visual Standards on the Decline
To the Editor:
In regard to "American Snapshot, the Next Generation" (June 7), the so-called "high-definition" electronic still picture technologies are being made possible by the lowering of visual standards.


West Coast Color
Truth is, most men in southern California do not dress as if they're on their way to a volleyball tournament on Zuma Beach.
In fact, three West Coast designers are spreading a sense of style that happily owes little to a surfboard, and even less to a Seventh Avenue drawing board.
"Do I look like I go to the beach?" asks a very pale, very English, very charming Richard Tyler.
"Though I do love knowing it's there. You sense it even when you don't see it. The light is beautiful in L.A. It reminds you how well color goes with a tan." The clothes he designs for Tyler Trafficante, the four-year-old company he runs with his wife, Lisa Trafficante, and her sister, Michelle, also remind you of how well color goes with precision tailoring.
Tyler's jackets are so beautifully crafted you could wear them inside out.
Though he has a deserved reputation for draping and putting clients through more fittings than an indecisive bride at Kleinfeld's, Tyler credits the loyalty of his local staff as the main reason for his growing success, and for his contentment with life in Los Angeles.


Nearly Flawless Frost Leads by 3
Continuing to playing unspectacular but nearly mistake-free golf, David Frost increased his lead to three strokes in the Buick Classic this afternoon.
Taking all of what little the stingy Westchester Country Club course is giving, Frost shot a four-under-par 67 for a 54-hole total of 11-under 202, three shots better than Duffy Waldorf, who had a 68.


Cuba Seeks Pain Relief: Shot of Western Capital
RECENT months have been filled with sour news for Fidel Castro.
First came the sudden dissolution of the Soviet Union and the disappearance of the billions in aid it had furnished.
Then came a near disastrous harvest of sugar, Cuba's main product.
Finally, even as supplies of oil and consumer goods from flour to bath soap began drying up, the leadership watched in scarcely disguised horror as an exile-led campaign to tighten the noose of a 31-year United States embargo seemed to gain serious momentum in Congress.


Miss Schwimmer, Thomas Wagner
Dr.
Alan M. and Judith C. Schwimmer of Livingston, S.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kristin Behrens Schwimmer, to Thomas Willard Wagner, a son of Samuel and Mary Ann B. Wagner of West Chester, Pa.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Schwimmer, 25 years old, is a traffic coordinator for Articus Ltd., an advertising design company in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
Her father is the associate director of the department of dental medicine and the chief of oral and maxillofacial surgery at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
Her mother is the director of admissions at the Woodward Park School, a private elementary school in Brooklyn.


G.O.P. Vows Budget Fight With Florio
New Jersey's Republican leaders vowed today to override Gov.
Jim Florio's veto of their $14.6 million budget and use their subpoena power to insure that their budget is carried out.
"The Legislature will oversee the implementation of this budget," said Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, a Republican whose party controls two-thirds majorities in both houses.
"Commissioners will be called before committees with subpoena power to explain how they are expending tax dollars."


What Writers Earn
To the Editor:
You report the average writer earns less than $9,000 a year (Book Notes, June 10).
A survey of our organization, comprising more than 800 professional independent nonfiction writers, shows a median income (1990 figures) of $20,000.
For full-time freelances, the figure is $26,000.


Linda McClain, James Fleming
Linda Christine McClain, an associate professor of law at Hofstra University, was married yesterday to James Edward Fleming, an associate professor of law at Fordham University.
The Rev.
William V. Crockett, a Presbyterian minister, officiated in the residents' lounge at 3 Lincoln Center in New York.
Ms.
McClain, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in divinity from the University of Chicago.
She earned a law degree from Georgetown University and a master of laws degree from New York University.


Ilene Weininger, David Jaroslaw
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Weininger of Flushing, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ilene Weininger, to David Jaroslaw, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry Jaroslaw of River Vale, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weininger, 29 years old, is an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is a retired Foreign Service officer and a retired assistant vice president of Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner &amp; Smith Inc. in New York.


Ukrainian National Team Receives a Welcome Celebration at Rutgers
To some 25,000 Ukrainian-Americans who were either in attendance or taking part in related activities, this evening's friendly soccer match between the national teams of the United States and Ukraine at Rutgers Stadium was a celebration of independence.
Ukraine achieved its independence from the Soviet Union about eight months ago and this evening's game was the first for the Ukrainian national team outside its borders.


Q and A
A Blocked Sale in a Co-op  Question: The board at my co-op has refused to approve the sale of my apartment to a qualified buyer.
The reason given is that the buyer would own two apartments in the building pending his divorce settlement, at which time the title of the apartment he owns now would pass to his wife.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING Morrison Knocks Out Hipp Tommy Morrison stopped Joe Hipp in the ninth round of their heavyweight bout yesterday in Reno.
Referee Rick Draklich halted the bout at 2 minutes 47 seconds after Morrison landed a right upper cut to Hipp's head.
Morrison (33-1, 29 knockouts) suffered a broken jaw and a broken right hand in the second round.
Hipp is 24-3 with 16 knockouts. (AP) Ruddock Stops Jackson: Donovan (Razor) Ruddock knocked out previously undefeated Phil Jackson at 2 minutes 12 seconds of the fourth round of their scheduled 10-round heavyweight bout in Cleveland Friday night.
It was Ruddock's first bout since defeating Greg Page on Feb. 15.
Ruddock improved to 27-3-1 with his second consecutive victory since consecutive losses to Mike Tyson in 1991.
In an earlier matchup of former World Boxing Association heavyweight champions, Page won a unanimous 10-round decision over James (Bonecrusher) Smith. (AP) SOFTBALL U.S.
Women Reach Finals The United States defeated Australia, 1-0, yesterday in the semifinals of the women's world softball Challenger Cup in Beijing, and ran its record to 8-0.
Julie Smith drove in Rina Foster in the seventh inning.
Australia beat Japan, 3-2, in the second game of a doubleheader and will face the United States again in today's championship game. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Sanderson Qualifies for Fifth Olympics Tessa Sanderson, the 1984 Olympic gold medal winner in the javelin, yesterday became the first British athlete to qualify for a fifth Olympic Games.
Sanderson, 36 years old, qualified by winning the event at the AAA championship meet in Birmingham, England, with her first throw of 207 feet 5 inches.
The meet is also the British Olympic qualifying trial.
She won her gold medal in Los Angeles with an Olympic record of 228-2.
Sanderson, born in Jamaica, first competed in the Olympics in 1976 at Montreal.
Linford Christie easily qualified for today's 100-meter final, as did his rival Jason Livingstone. (AP) Ethiopian Sets 10,000-Meter Mark: Tulu Daratu of Ethiopia smashed the African record by eight seconds yesterday in winning the women's 10,000-meter run at the African Athletics Championships in Pamplemousses, Mauritius.
South Africa continued its strong showing in its first appearance at the championships, leading the overall medal count with more than twice the total of the runner-up, Nigeria.
After three days, South Africa had 9 gold, 9 silver and 11 bronze medals for a total of 29, and Nigeria had 5 golds and 11 over all.
Daratu won Ethiopia's first medal of the four-day championships with a time of 31 minutes 32.56 seconds, breaking the record of 31:40.56 in the women's 10,000 meters set in 1989 by Sabiha Mansouri of Algeria. (AP) ROAD RACING Fifth Avenue Mile Qualifiers Seth Lane of New York won the first of three qualifying races yesterday for the Fifth Avenue Mile.
Lane was clocked in 4 minutes 25 seconds in Central Park.
Belinda Saunders of New York was the top female finisher in 5:27.
The Fifth Avenue Mile will be run Sept. 26.
GOLF Fruhwirth Gains Semifinals Amy Fruhwirth, the 1991 national Women's Amateur champion, advanced to the semifinals of the United States Women's Amateur Public Links Championship in Sacramento, Calif., with a 3 and 1 victory over Carrie Leary.
Fruhwirth will face Elizabeth Bowman of Bonita, Calif., who edged Andrea Baxter of Eagle, Idaho, 1 up.
Sara Evens of Grafton, N.D., defeated Megan Hamilton of Elk Grove, Calif., 3 and 2, and will play Nicole Jeray of Berwyn, Ill., a 3 and 2 winner over Angela Pieroni, of Seattle in the other semifinal match. (AP)


SUMMER IN THE CITY
SOMETHING NEW AND COOL IS what any woman who lives or works in the city needs right now.
This means a slip of a sheath, one that can be pulled on quickly.
The dress should be plain and simple; it should fit like skin, or just lightly skim the body.
It can be made of cotton, rayon or Lycra.
The color or pattern should be strong and decisive -- black, white, chrome-yellow or leopard-print all fit the bill.
The main point is for the hemline to fall below the knee.
Accessorized with little or no jewelry, chunky sandals or mules with platform soles and a cardigan or vest on top, it's a look that adds up to the summer of '92.


Claudia Siegel, Edward Figelman
Claudia Siegel, a daughter of Mrs.
Bernard Brenner of Wayne, N.J., and the late Richard Siegel, was married last night in Wayne to Edward John Figelman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard J. Figelman of Oldfield, L.I.
Rabbi Israel Dresner performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Tikvah.
Mrs.
Figelman, 29 years old, graduated from Dickinson College, as did her husband.
Mr.
Figelman, also 29, received an M.B.A. from Hofstra University.
He is a marketing manager for VIZ Manufacturing, an electronics concern in Philadelphia.


The Patriarch of American Luxury
WHEN it comes to automobiles, it is hard to say what sparks brand loyalty.
What makes you, for instance, a Ford guy?
Or a Plymouth person?
Or why are you passionate about Chevies?
It may be that you have heard good things.
Or that you like the lines.
Or, in my case, that you just wanted to one-up your father.
That's how I wound up with my first Cadillac, used but almost new -- and a year newer than Dad's '59 Lincoln.


Mexico Is Now Acting to Protect Border Migrants From Robbery and Abuse
Just a few years ago, the desolate canyons that wind down from Tijuana's last cinder-block barrios to the subdivisions of San Ysidro, Calif., became a symbol of the border as a no man's land.
Undocumented migrants were robbed, assaulted and raped there almost routinely; one was slain about every month.
As their numbers rebounded after the 1986 immigration-reform law, complaints of abuse against them by American Border Patrol agents and the San Diego police multiplied.
And in Mexico, officials now acknowledge, the police were part of the extortion rackets and did almost nothing to stop the violence.


Mitterrand Leaves for Sarajevo, Hoping to Shock His Serbian Ally
By embarking unexpectedly for Sarajevo tonight, President Francois Mitterrand appeared to be seeking to show that the patience of even Serbia's closest ally has run out and that a European leader does not need Washington's endorsement for a bold diplomatic gamble.
Although it did not seem clear that the French leader's visit would significantly advance the quest for peace, the domestic effect might be considerable for a President facing an important and potentially close-fought autumn referendum on European integration.


Pinch-Hitting for Dostoyevsky
THE BROTHERS K
By David James Duncan. 645 pp. New York: Doubleday.


Nicole Tempest, Robert Keller
Mr. and Mrs.
Harrison F. Tempest of Lake Forest, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nicole Suzanne Tempest, to Robert Andrew Keller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald H. Keller of New York.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Tempest, 25 years old, graduated from Stanford University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Harvard University.
Her father is the chief executive in Chicago for ABN/AMRO North America, a Dutch banking concern.


Randi H. Reich, Alan S. Kahn
Mr. and Mrs.
Jules W. Reich of North Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Randi Hope Reich, to Alan Stuart Kahn, a son of Barbara R. Kahn of Fair Lawn, N.J., and Herb Kahn of Fort Lee, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Reich, 26 years old, is a management trainee in the real-estate finance group at Citibank in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University and received an M.B.A from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president of the Somerset Investors Corporation, a finance company in Great Neck, L.I.


After Shoreham Fiasco, Break Up Lilco
If the chairman of Lilco  [ "New Style Emerges as Lilco Revives," June 18 ]  thinks that the company suffered during the 80's with the Shoreham fiasco, what about the innocent ratepayers who have to pay the huge cost of that mess for the next decade?
When you add in the interest charges, the price of Shoreham will be an easy $10 billion, which is higher on a per capita basis than the cost of the greatest American financial scandal: the Federal S. &amp; L. swindle.


Lindros Officially an Ex-Nordique
The Quebec Nordiques no longer own the National Hockey League rights to ERIC LINDROS.
That much was clear when LARRY BERTUZZI, the Toronto lawyer hired by the N.H.L. to arbitrate the trade dispute involving the player, announced at 2:20 A.M. yesterday that he had finished his hearings and would render a decision next week.
"Either Philadelphia or New York will have an agreement with Quebec," Bertuzzi said.
"One of them will prevail."


True Equality
To the Sports Editor:
There is only one answer to equality in college athletics ("Title IX: A 20-Year Search for Sex Equity," The Times, June 21-23): eliminate all gender and permit men and women to compete equally for sports on all teams.


Israel's Vote Shows It Has Tired of Ideology
FORGET for a moment about which parties landed on top and which on the bottom in Israel's national election last week.
The real winner was pragmatism and the big loser uncompromising ideology.
In the search for reasons why Israelis said yes to a Labor-led Government and tossed long-governing Likud unceremoniously out on its ear, it is tempting to say that they voted, as if in a referendum, for an accelerated Middle East peace process, for territorial concessions to the Arabs and for a drastic reduction in settlement-building on occupied lands.
Judging from the hosannas pouring in for Labor's Yitzhak Rabin, that seems to be a common view overseas.
And in some respects it is correct, for if Mr.
Rabin keeps his word he will push for a speedy peace agreement, give up some of the territories and put the brakes on new settlements there.


World Markets; The Rocky Road to a Global Market
"Our market will be the market where the action will take place," said Jean-Francois Theodore, the chief executive officer of the Bourse de Paris.
It is the kind of comment expected of a man in his job, especially when he is visiting the United States to drum up business for the French stock market.
This is the message he brought to the pension funds, brokerage firms and investment banks that he met with: France is a market poised for explosive growth, especially as the Government moves to sell to the public many state-owned or -controlled blue-chip companies, like Rhone-Poulenc, Air France, Banque Nationale de Paris and Credit Lyonnais.
It is a market that has been modernized, with a computer trading system driven totally by orders.


Stock Option Pricing
To the Editor:
In "The Abused Executive Stock Option" by Diana B. Henriques on June 7, there is a problem with Graef Crystal's suggestion that once a stock option is granted, the price should not be cut.


A Role Model With One Role
To the Sports Editor:
"The Good, Bad and Ugly All Rolled Into One" (The Times, May 27) about Nelson Diebel destroyed the athlete as role model by focusing on an amateur athlete who has but one redeeming quality: He can swim the 100 meter breast-stroke faster than anyone else in the world.
But the rest of his profile, which included receiving privileged treatment at expensive boarding schools and a most prestigious Ivy League university, boorish behavior, disrespect for his country, teammates, coaches and peers and lack of responsibility, is a disgrace to the amateur athletic system.
Until The Times's article, Diebel was a virtual unknown to all but the swimming community and with such a one-dimensional accomplishment as his swimming record would be better left an unknown.
KIRSTEN S. HEINEMANN Huntington, L.I.


Making the Most of a Little Bacon Can Capture the Flavor
BACON is a frequent treat.
It is treasured for its rich, smoky flavor.
But on a sensible diet, its high fat content, about 80 percent, and sodium, an average 150 milligrams in a slice, make it something to be consumed sparingly.
Fortunately, a little goes a long way in adding flavor, and sometimes texture, to a variety of dishes.
A strip or two of bacon, chopped and sauteed with the onions early in the preparation is enough to add hauntingly smoky flavor to a seafood or fish chowder.
It performs the same service in some pasta dishes.
It is even possible to capitalize on a small amount of bacon by using a little, crumbled as a topping, so that it seasons the first bite of a salad or some other dish.


Microsoft's Unlikely Millionaires
Just a few years ago, when the monied class of this city gathered inside a single ballroom for an annual arts benefit, nary an unfamiliar face could be seen.
Families named Boeing, Nordstrom and Weyerhaeuser, representing airplane, clothing-store and timber empires, were the financial powers of this corner of the Far West.
They were also benevolent civic players, keeping the arts afloat and leading drives to save a sports team or add a wing to a hospital.
But virtually overnight, the pecking order of wealth in the Pacific Northwest has been turned upside down.
The reason: The stunning success of the Microsoft Corporation, the company that William H. Gates 3d brought back to his hometown little more than a decade ago.


KNITTING IN CLASS
I came in late to the discussion of knitting at boring lectures.
But there appears to be an implicit assumption that only women knit.


Gardens of the Stars and Just Plain Ivana
Julian Sands, an actor, wants to become the Robin Leach of gardening.
Mr.
Sands, left, will be the host of "Jewels in the Garden," a television show featuring the gardens of celebrities.
"It will be very similar to 'Life Styles of the Rich and Famous,' " said Sandra Birnhak, one of the producers.
The pilot is to be taped this fall.
Ivana Trump is engaging in a little name-dropping.
Last Thursday, she was identified simply as Ivana on the list of committee members for a hospital benefit.
"Her company's name is Ivana Inc., so for marketing purposes she's only using the name Ivana," said Lisa Calandra, her spokeswoman.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Englewood 169,000  295 West Hudson Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 65-year-old colonial; French doors, h/w floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,850.
Lakewood 115,000
101 Glen Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; c/a, full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,200.
Metuchen 140,000
40 Carpenter Place
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old Cape Cod; new front porch, deck, fenced yard; taxes $2,808.
Oakland 232,000
12 Hemlock Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old bi-level; inground pool, new family room and solarium; taxes $5,856.
Piscataway 140,000
280 Hamilton Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; security system, fenced yard, convenient to transportation; taxes $2,582.
South Plainfield 168,000
1883 Bell Place
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old bi-level; new furance, in-ground pool, full basement; taxes $3,901.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 135,000
88 Fox Run
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 11-year-old garden condominium; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, patio; taxes $3,397.
Clinton, Conn. 98,000
48 Long Hill Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; deck, needs work, 1 acre; taxes $1,631.
Greenlawn, L.I. 275,000
27 Old Hills Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, great room, pool, c/a; taxes $5,400.


Mutual Funds; Bright Spots in a Dim First Half
This hasn't been a good year for stock funds, with the total return of the average fund off 3.3 percent through last Thursday, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc.
For some funds, the first half was extremely painful -- the health and biotechnology sector slid nearly 20 percent, while Japanese funds fell 17.8 percent.
But there were some pleasant surprises, too.
Consider what happened to the natural resource funds, which invest in a mix of energy, forest products and metals stocks.
Last year, the group lost nearly 3 percent in total return, which measures income plus changes in principal, compared with an average 7 percent gain for all stock funds.
This year, many in the group turned in positive returns and the 23 funds as a whole almost broke even, off just 0.3 percent.


CAMPAIGN 1992: Interview; Clinton Seeking Forceful Image As a Leader in Foreign Affairs
In a wide-ranging discussion of the policies he would pursue if elected President, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas supported strong action to help the besieged citizens of Sarajevo, criticized White House inaction on aid to the former Soviet republics and said Japan should be treated as "our most important bilateral relationship now."
Throughout a 90-minute interview at the Governor's Mansion here, Mr.
Clinton sought to project himself as a more forceful leader than President Bush in foreign affairs, which is normally regarded as Mr.
Bush's strong suit.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE HOLE IN THE FLAG: A Romanian Exile's Story of Return and Revolution, by Andrei Codrescu. (Avon, $11.) The author left Romania as a teen-ager, only to return to his homeland with a National Public Radio crew during the 1989 revolution.
Although he heartily condemned the Ceausescu regime, he came to feel that the new Government had manipulated the media to squelch opposition.
Last year our reviewer, Alex Kozinski, called the book "a work of great complexity and subtlety" and "a gripping political detective story."
LOS GUSANOS, by John Sayles. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Los Gusanos -- "the worms" -- is the disparaging term used by Cuban revolutionaries to describe those who left the island after Fidel Castro's rise to power.
Mr.
Sayles' novel deals with one such family, Miami immigrants whose personal dramas are interwoven with Cuban politics and more than a little madness.
Marta, the daughter, is hoping to redeem both her country and her relationship with her father by launching a reprise of the Bay of Pigs invasion, complete with explosives.
"The historical opera in this novel has become mostly
opera buffa


A Plan to Conserve New York's Wilderness
Conserving Open Space in New York State, a plan released last week, is an effort by state officials to define which unprotected parcels should be preserved for future generations.
But the state has no money to buy land, and lawmakers are deadlocked over how to finance a trust fund that would do so.
All told, the plan includes 75 separate sites, including these: Robins Island
A 460-acre island in the Great Peconic Bay on Long Island, one of the last undeveloped islands along the East Coast.
Both the state and Suffolk County have been unable to work out a deal with the private owner aimed at turning the island into a nature sanctuary and forest preserve.
Long Island Pine Barrens
The forest that once covered great parts of Long Island has dwindled to a several thousand acres.
Situated atop the state's aquifer, the pine barrens are considered critical for protecting the region's water supply.
While some parts are publicly owned, others have been proposed for private development.
State officials want to acquire land or have private owners agree to conservation easements.
Manhattan Circumferential Trail
Perhaps the most ambitious project on the list, this would entail constructing a hiking and bicycle trail that would stretch around the island.
Much of the land along the Hudson, Harlem and East Rivers is already publicly owned, so the chief expense would be the construction, other money would be used to acquire access rights from private owners.
Bronx River Trailway
The plan is to create a greenway trail all the way along the Bronx River, from where it empties into the East River, up to East 180th Street in the Bronx.
It would connect to an existing 17-mile trail leading to the Kensico Reservoir in Westchester County.
Neversink Gorge
This stretch of forest in the southern Catskills is home to one of the finest trout streams in North America, the Neversink River.
The state has been negotiating for years to expand public ownership and access.
Catskills Watershed
With many experts arguing that the best way to safeguard New York City's water supply is to protect the mountainous areas where most of it comes from, the state wants to acquire land or conservation easements in the Catskills watershed.
Sterling Forest
This 18,000-acre forest along the New York-New Jersey border is by far the largest stretch of woodlands left in the New York metropolitan region.
A subdivision plan has already been proposed for parts of the property, but the owner has also expressed a willingness to negotiate a sale to the state.
Lake Ontario Shoreline
A variety of parcels of land along the lake are available.
The state seeks to turn these into public beaches, parks and biological preserves.
Follensby Pond
The site of the famous 19th century Adirondack "Philosophers' Camp" of Ralph Waldo Emerson and others, this is the largest privately owned, undeveloped lake in the Adirondack Park.
The state has a contract to buy 14,500-acre property that includes the lake and several miles of the Racquette River.
But without any money, New York risks losing the property when its option expires next year.
Northern Lake George Shore
When a two-mile stretch of undeveloped shoreline on the east side of Lake George went up for sale two years ago, the state could not put up any money.
A private land trust then stepped in to acquire the property, in the hopes of selling it back to the state later.
But now the trust has been stuck with the land and risks having to put it up for sale to developers.
Lake Erie Waterfront
The centerpiece of this project is a plan to expand parks, bikeways and other public areas along the waterfront in Buffalo and adjacent towns.


Deborah Platt, Jeffrey Weiss
Dr.
Deborah Platt, a daughter of Sidney Platt of Glen Cove, L.I., and the late Sally Platt, was married last evening to Dr.
Jeffrey Weiss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Weiss of Fairfield, Conn.
Rabbi Morris Barzilai performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Great Neck, L.I.
Dr.
Platt-Weiss, 33 years old, is an attending anesthesiologist at the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and received her M.D. from the University of Health Sciences in Kansas City, Mo.
Her father is a founder of Data Communication Inc., a technical publications and engineering services company in Plainview, L.I.
Her stepmother, Marilyn S. Chiet of Glen Cove, is a retired schoolteacher.


Klepper Kayak
WHAT IT IS: -- A sea kayak that assembles and disassembles in less than 30 minutes and can be stuffed into two easy-to-carry bags about the size of a backpack and a sleeping bag.
Usually covered with a drab blue-and-gray canvas, the Klepper looks more like a baby whale than the myriad coral-colored fiberglass shells that are being paddled about the Hamptons and the Hudson this summer.
But the Klepper is the oldest and best known of all sea kayaks, having been produced by the Hans Klepper Corporation of Germany for 85 years.
It is also one of the most expensive sea kayaks, listing for $2,590 to $3,990, depending on extras.
DIMENSIONS: -- The one-seater weighs 55 pounds and holds 10 times that weight.
It is 15 feet long and 28 inches wide and can easily accommodate the broadest of buttocks.


Christine Krais, Steven Schott
Frederick V. Krais Jr. of Lighthouse Point, Fla., and Janet C. Krais of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Christine Lovell Krais, to Steven Gorin Schott, a son of Lewis M. Schott of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Marcia W. Schott.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Krais, 27 years old, is the New England advertising manager at Mademoiselle magazine in New York.
She graduated from Salve Regina College in Newport, R.I.
Her father, who is retired, was president of Communications Publishers Inc., which was a magazine publisher in New York.


James C. Millstone, Editor, 62
James C. Millstone, an editor and former Washington correspondent of The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, died on Thursday at his home in University City, a suburb of St.
Louis.
He was 62 years old.
The cause of death was brain cancer, the newspaper reported.


RECORD BRIEF
Copland: 'Billy the Kid' Suite, Piano Sonata; Bernstein: 'Seven Anniversaries,' 'On the Town' Dances
RCA Victor Symphony ("Billy") and "On the Town" Orchestras conducted by Leonard Bernstein; Leonard Bernstein, piano.
RCA Victor 60915-2; CD.


Did Los Angeles Change the Rules of the Game?
To put it bluntly, the Regional Plan Association is not known as a bunch of live wires.
An organization of professional urban planners from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, it enjoys no legal power and hasn't lately rocked the world with visionary fervor.
The association was established in 1929 on the sound idea that the future growth of New York City would require rational management of the entire metropolitan region.
But in recent years, it has come to seem like a relic of an earlier time, when people actually believed they could shape the urban environment.
So the lively mood at this year's annual meeting, which drew about 700 of its 1,300 members to the New York Sheraton Hotel last month, came as a pleasant shock.
The event percolated with energy and ideas.
The ideas came from speakers like Rena Cusma, executive director of the Metropolitan Service District of Portland, Ore.
Sound dull?
Not to planners who for years have wrestled unsuccessfully with the steady drift of economic vitality from the inner cities to the suburbs.


Making a Difference; Europe's Persistent Sky King Finally Opens the Airways
A convinced European who wrote his doctoral thesis on the supranational powers of the European Community executive commission, Karel Van Miert has been pressing for more than three years as the Community's Transport Commissioner to bring deregulation to the tightly controlled skies of Europe.
The efforts of Mr.
Van Miert, a Belgian Social Democrat with a belief in free markets, finally paid off last week when the 12-nation bloc agreed to remove government restrictions on air fares from Jan. 1, 1993, and allow unrestricted competition throughout the Community from April 1997.
As of that date, for example, Lufthansa and British Air will be able to compete with Air France on the Paris-Nice route.


All About/The Gold Market; The Good News About Gold: There Isn't a Lot
Yes, there is some good news about gold.
Gold fillings are making a comeback as prices have retreated.
And in 1991, the amount of gold used to make jewelry rose to 2,111 metric tons, a 3.7 percent increase from the year before and a new record, according to Gold Fields Mineral Services, the London-based precious metals research firm owned by three gold mining companies.
It was the fifth straight year that jewelry manufacturing had increased.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats; Clinton and Tsongas Agree to Keep Brown's Issues Out of Play
Gov.
Bill Clinton's camp struck a deal today with supporters of former Senator Paul E. Tsongas to keep former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. from forcing a convention debate on some of the Brown campaign themes.
The arrangement was intended to avert a fight next month at the Democratic National Convention on the kinds of trip-wire issues that have often divided and embarrassed the party in the past.


Westinghouse Offers a Plan for a Smaller, Safer Reactor
Beginning what Government and industry officials hope will be a new era in nuclear power, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation today formally submitted to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission an analysis of a new "simplified" reactor that the company says will be 300 times safer than current regulations require.
The design is for a smaller, more flexible plant with less safety equipment.
The new reactor would not require human operators to take prompt action in an emergency because it would use forces like gravity and natural heat flow in cooling systems instead of pumps and valves.
The plant would take half as long to build as recently built plants, and Westinghouse says the new design could be built for $1,400 a kilowatt of capacity, enough electricity to light 10 100-watt bulbs.
Some of the last generation of reactors cost as much as $5,000 a kilowatt.
Goal Is Standardized Plant
The Westinghouse analysis, an 18-volume document weighing 150 pounds, was prepared with the help of a $50 million grant from the Department of Energy.


Clouds Are Lifting for Westchester's Banks
EVEN with the failure this month of the American Savings Bank in White Plains and the seizure of two other banks in the county earlier this year, most financial institutions in Westchester -- along with those in the rest of the nation -- finally appear to be headed for happier days.
With many, but not all, problem loans behind them and a more favorable spread between relatively low interest rates paid on deposits and borrowings and the interest earned on loans and investments, banks are reporting record profits.


President Meets Female Officer In Navy Incident
Two days after a female aviator went on national television with the story of how she was molested and manhandled at a naval aviators' convention and how little had been done to investigate the event, the White House apparently decided it was time to act.
On Friday, President Bush had called the aviator, Lieut.
Paula Coughlin, in for a meeting at the White House during which he and his wife, Barbara, expressed their sympathy and assured her that there would be a full investigation, a White House spokesman said today.


In East Europe, the Hapsburgs Get Revenge
To the Editor:
What is happening in Central Europe, when seen in its proper historical perspective, is the second collapse of the "new Europe" of nation-states that was created after World War I, mostly out of the ruins of the Hapsburg Empire.
The viability of this regional order has always been questionable.
However, since its first collapse belonged to the Hitler era, its restoration after World War II seemed a triumph of justice to the eyes of the Western democracies, guilt-ridden by memories of their appeasement policy.


Paul de Man: The Plot Thickens
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to David Lehman's new attack against Paul de Man ("Paul de Man: The Plot Thickens," May 24).


Vegetables Can Be Stirring
A VEGETABLE garden can be a victim of lack of imagination.
Rows of the same old thing: Green Comet broccoli, Big Boy tomatoes, California Wonder bell peppers, Kentucky Wonder beans, a little curled parsley and sweet basil.
It may be fresher, but it's not far from the stuff you can buy in the grocery store.


Laurie J. Burton, Jon David Evans
Dr.
Laurie J. Burton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold J. Burton of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jon David Evans, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Evans of Windsor, Ontario.
Benjamin Lander, a retired justice of the New York State Supreme Court, officiated at the Conservatory Gardens in Central Park
Dr.
Burton, who is 29 years old and keeping her name, is a pediatric resident at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University and received her M.D. from State University of New York at Buffalo.
Her father is the president of IDP Services Ltd., a data-processing company in Scarsdale.


A Celebration Before Moving On


TCF Financial Serves a Winning Stew
Take one savings bank brought to its knees by ill-advised 1980's investments, bring in new management focused on local customers, add some spicy advertising, aggressive salesmanship and a dash of new capital.
Simmer for seven years.
For one 69-year-old savings bank here, this was a winning recipe for competing with much larger banks.
With $4 billion in assets, the TCF Financial Corporation, formerly Twin City Federal, is no match for the Norwest Corporation or First Bank System, the largest banks here, with their multistate branch networks and business clients.
Yet the savings bank has more than held its own in competition for individual customers.
Nineteen percent of Minneapolis consumers consider TCF their primary bank, up sharply from 6 percent in 1985 and way ahead of the current 15 percent for Norwest and 14 percent for First Bank.


Thai Food in the Heart of New Haven
IN the late 1980's, Thai restaurants seemed to open with alacrity, but the pace has slowed over the last couple of years.
That probably has as much to do with economics as with any possibility that the public is sated with the delicate yet fiery cuisine.
Nevertheless, a new Thai restaurant, Bangkok Gardens, has opened smack in the center of New Haven, near the Yale University campus and across the street from the Yale Repertory Theater.


JUNE 21-27: Life Without Parole; Pending Appeal, Gotti Is Dispatched to Prison
With defense lawyers already working on his appeal, John Gotti was whisked last week from a Manhattan jail to the Federal prison in Marion, Ill.
It came as no surprise that the authorities chose what is considered the toughest prison in the country for the convicted boss of the Gambino crime family.
Nor was it any surprise that Judge I. Leo Glasser sentenced him to life in prison.
In a jam-packed Federal courtroom in Brooklyn, Mr.
Gotti stood silently as he and his codefendant, Frank Locascio, got life sentences on racketeering-murder charges.
Outside, hundreds of supporters demonstrated noisily, smashing car windshields and scuffling with police.'


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
IT was a honey of a day, so sweet with sunshine and June skies that Newark looked scrubbed.
Real nice.
In such light the three blocks from Pennsylvania Station to Broad Street make for an impressive show.
Buildings there are tall, glassy and appropriately angular, the way they are expected to be in any modern city.
The overhead walkway above Raymond Boulevard connecting the train station to the Legal and Communication Center even makes Newark look, at that angle, futuristic.


Scorsese, From the Mean Streets to Charm School
In a gilded, gas-lit ballroom, whiskered gentlemen and ladies trailing clouds of tulle and lace waltzed under the fierce scrutiny of Martin Scorsese.
Suddenly, the director's back went rigid.
With one hand, he stopped the rehearsal.
With the other, he signaled for assistance.
Aides, barking into walkie-talkies, summoned a consultant.
"When Newland goes up to May," Mr.
Scorsese inquired, "would he shake her hand?"


Lauren Kasell, Lawrence Weiss
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Kasell of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Renee Kasell, to Dr.
Lawrence Jay Weiss, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold D. Weiss of Oceanside, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kasell, 22 years old, graduated from Tulane University and is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at Hofstra University.
Her father is a stockbroker with Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.


Camilla Campbell, Oliver Platt
John P. and Eleanor S. Campbell of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Camilla Bonsal Campbell, to Oliver Platt, a son of Ambassador and Mrs.
Nicholas Platt of Islamabad, Pakistan, and Washington.
Ms.
Campbell, who is 29 years old and known as Camilla, is a freelance publicity agent in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &amp; Mosle.


What Price Swimming Pools?
THE GREAT THIRST
Californians and Water, 1770s-1990s.
By Norris Hundley Jr.
Illustrated. 551 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $25.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 350,000
40 Valley View
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, wine cellar, family room, 1.1 acres; taxes $7,860.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 346,000
Major Lockwood Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old colonial; fireplace, screened porch, multi-level deck, hot tub, w/b stove, 4.25 acres; taxes $5,466.
South Salem, N.Y. 135,000
88 Fox Run
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 11-year-old garden condominium; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, patio; taxes $3,397.
Clinton, Conn. 98,000
48 Long Hill Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; new bathroom, deck, needs work, 1 acre; taxes $1,631.
Essex, Conn. 160,000
26 Laurel Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; fireplace, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,448.
Simsbury, Conn. 104,900
46 County Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 53-year-old cape cod; eat-in kitchen, formal dining room, expansion possibilities, 1 acre; taxes $1,820.
OTHER AREAS Greenlawn, L.I. 275,000
27 Old Hills Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, great room, pool, c/a; taxes $5,400.
Huntington, L.I. 162,000
78 Sammis Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Englewood, N.J. 169,000  295 West Hudson Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 65-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, h/w floors; taxes $3,850.


Development With an Environmental Bent
Here among moss-draped live oaks and unspoiled ponds, a new style of island development based on strict environmental standards is being tested, and developers around the nation are watching to see if it succeeds.
"When I came to this island, I knew I had to find a way to spend the rest of my life here," said Jim Chaffin, one of the owners.
"Not having $17 million to spend on my personal island, I knew we would have to do some sort of development."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Sharks as Food
The delicacy on the East End this week will be stir-fried shark.
"The ingredients include green onions, broccoli, mushrooms, celery and bean sprouts," said Sam Gershowitz, president of the Star Island Yacht Club in Montauk.
Of course, you also need the shark.
Those fishing in the Star Island Shark Tournament supplied plenty of it, 4,000 pounds of cleaned shark meat.
The Star Island contest was billed as an "environmentally sensitive shark tournament." Fishermen were asked to tag and release smaller sharks and donate their larger catches as food for the needy.
"If it's a good piece of meat, why waste it?" Mr.
Gershowitz asked.
So before the big-fish Polaroid pictures could even develop, volunteers from Fish Unlimited in Sag Harbor were chopping up the sharks and piling up the steaks and filets.
The meat was distributed to food banks and Long Island Cares.
Not all fisherman turned over their fish.
Those who caught makos, the filet mignon of sharkdom, were reluctant to give them away.
But plenty of blue sharks and thresher sharks, including a 373-pounder, were donated.
Usually Long Islanders do not eat any shark but mako, but if someone is hungry, why not a big blue, Mr.
Gershowitz thought.
With onions and mushrooms and stir fried, "I'd try it," he said.
"I was in Mexico, and they eat every type of fish there," he said.
Did he?
"Well, no," he said.
"But one man's salmon is another man's bluefish." Definitely something to think about.
Comics on the Links
THE golf stories were flowing at the Middle Island Country Club.
"I shot 74 today," John Tobin said.
"That's all the golf balls I had."
"I play golf in the 80's," Frank D'Amico said.
"If it gets any hotter, I go home and barbecue."
"Well, I got a hole in one today," Joe Bublewicz announced.
"So?" the others said, waiting for the punch line.
"No I did get a hole in one," Mr. Bublewicz said. "On the third hole. Really!"
It isn't easy being a good golfer when playing with a bunch of comedians.
Those are all who were playing in the Annual Comedy Golf Tournament.
The tournament, part of a convention for comics, is sponsored each year by Rick Morgan of Medford, a booking agent.
"It gives professional comics and those in the business a chance to meet each other," he said.
"And to play golf."
Not all golfers are funny.
And Bob Hope aside, not all funny people are good golfers.
Richie Minervini of the East Side Comedy Club in Farmingdale did not want to be laughed at when he took to the course.
"So I played 14 times in the last 19 days," he said, "trying to get ready for this tournament."
With shouts of, "Go Golfman!" and, "Hey T-Boy!" the comics joked their way around the course.
Some didn't play golf.
"I like to drive around in the cart and take pictures," said Lou Stevens of Rocky Point.
"You can always tell when the comedians arrive," the club bartender Richard Samuel, said.
"They drive the golf carts like bumper cars."
For 11 years Mr.
Samuel has been tending bar at Middle Island.
He has served Kiwanis Clubs, teachers' groups and corporate parties.
"The others show up in their sartorial golfing splendor," he said, "the pastels, the matching outfits. But the comics. Well, they make a statement with their dress." At least they did before the club instituted a dress code.
"Now everyone has to wear a collared shirt," Mr.
Samuel said.
"You should have seen the comics' T-shirts."
As comedians congregated at the bar, Mr.
Samuel eavesdropped on a few conversations.
"They're talking about stealing jokes," he said.
"And telling a few."
Surely Mr.
Samuel had a good golf joke, too.
"Well," he said, "how about the guy who was playing golf with his wife? He hits into a barn. To save a stroke, he opens the barn doors so he can hit through. But instead he hits his wife in the head and kills her. The next year he's playing golf on the same course with a new wife. He hits into the barn again. The new wife says, 'Why don't we open the barn door and you can hit through?' And he says: 'Oh no. Last year something terrible happened here.'
"And she asks, 'Oh, what?' And he says, 'I lost two strokes.' "  Mutant Art
Ann N. Sgarlata specializes in mutants.
"It started after I read an article about Three Mile Island," she said.
An artist, Ms.
Sgarlata first made mutant sculptures.
In copper and brass, she created a life-size mutant man walking a mutant dog.
Where in the home one might display a life-size mutant could present a problem.
"You'd have to have a special place for it," Ms.
Sgarlata, of Hartsdale, acknowledged.
She has since moved on to mutant paintings, which is helpful to those with limited space, and to Long Islanders.
Her mutant vegetables, flowers and animal paintings are now on display in the Sea Cliff Gallery.
Mutants in Sea Cliff are appropriate, said Don Mistretta, the gallery owner.
"We had a propane tank leak the other day that caused an evacuation around here," he Mr.
Mistretta said.
"We almost didn't have a gallery. And Glen Cove has its toxic waste. The problems are real close."
Ms.
Sgarlata likes to remind people of those problems with her art.
"I'm trying to raise consciousness," she said.
"Otherwise we may forfeit life as we know it."
Her oil-on-wood paintings of oddly shaped lemons, eggs, oranges, roses, violets and a deformed bald eagle were a great success in a show in California.
Sea Cliff may take a bit more time, Mr.
Mistretta said.
What may happen, he added, is that people may buy the art and not bother to mention to admirers the statement they make.
Even with a sale, Ms.
Sgarlata might take offense at that.
"My statement is as important as my art," she said.
"For me, substance is more important than style."


Left, Right: Box-Offs Proceed as Expected
After a week of trials and two days of box-offs, the 1992 Olympic boxing team has finally taken shape.
The good news for Joe Byrd, the head coach, is that there are really no surprises.
This afternoon, all six winners of the boxing trials earned Olympic berths with impressive box-off victories.
Added to five spots that were sewn up on Friday, 11 of the 12 Olympic berths have been decided.
The final spot will be determined Sunday afternoon in a light heavyweight rubber match between Jeremy Williams of Long Beach, Calif., and Montell Griffin of Studio City, Calif.


Cheers and Goose Bumps For U.S. Parade of Stars
Co-captain Larry Bird said to co-captain Magic Johnson, "You go on."
Johnson said, "O.K., thanks, man."
Johnson took the flag of the United States, held it front of him and led the United States Olympic basketball team onto the floor of the Memorial Coliseum today for the opening ceremonies of the Tournament of the Americas.
The fans, who had received the teams from the nine other nations warmly, stood and cheered wildly for the stars from the National Basketball Association, who have been brought here for step one in the operation to restore the United States to international prominence.


President's Wife Can Play a Valuable Role; She's Not Elected
To the Editor:
"Give Hillary a Break" (Op-Ed, June 8) by Letty Cottin Pogrebin, which criticizes negative reaction to Hillary Clinton, is wrong on several counts.
Ms.
Pogrebin is wrong on the role of the First Lady.
The First Lady is not a public official; she is not accountable to the electorate and should be neither obliged nor privileged to influence policies that affect the citizens of this country.


Valeri Primo, Jeremy Lack
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert T. Primo of Old Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rosina Valeri Primo to Jeremy Lack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Lack of Geneva.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Primo, who is known as Valeri, is an assistant vice president in the New York real-estate finance group of Barclays Bank.
She graduated cum laude from Rosemont College.
Her father is the president of Primo Newservice Inc., a television news film production and consulting company in Old Greenwich.
Her mother, Rosina P. Primo, is a broker in Greenwich, Conn., for William Raveis Real Estate.


Phone Company Introduces Call Return, Quietly
KENT SEELIG was about to enter his house in Syosset when he heard the telephone ringing.
But by the time he entered, the ringing had stopped.
Mr.
Seelig said he had just been listening to a radio commercial for a new service, Call Return, offered by the New York Telephone Company, and decided to see whether it worked.
He picked up the receiver and pressed the *, or star, button, the one at the left of the bottom row, followed by the numbers 6 and 9.


SINKING FAST
Alvarez notes current poor market conditions.
What he omits is the practice by some unscrupulous owners of scuttling ships to collect inflated insurance when profitable sale is impossible.
An owner can arrange this by paying the master and officers, while repatriating the third world crew, before any investigation can take place.
As any fire marshal in the Bronx knows, arson is difficult to prove.
TOM MENARD
Bronx


Election Makes Skeptics of Angolans
In three months Angola will hold its first multiparty elections, but preparations have been so tense and chaotic that the prospects for a peaceful transition to civilian rule have grown increasingly remote, analysts and diplomats say.
After a 16-year civil war in which at least 300,000 people died, the yearning for an end to the wrenching violence and fear is palpable here.


T.A.C. Acts On Behalf Of Reynolds
Senior administrators of the national governing body for track and field, The Athletics Congress, voted today to urge the international federation not to extend Butch Reynolds's two-year suspension because he competed in the United States Olympic trials this week.
The suspension, imposed in 1990 by the International Amateur Athletic Federation after Reynolds, the world record-holder in the 400 meters, failed a drug test, expires Aug. 11.
He had competed in several meets this year, as well as at the trials after gaining the right through a series of court orders.
He reached the 400-meter final on Friday and finished fifth, high enough only to make the United States Olympic team for the Barcelona Olympics as an alternate.


Few Available Pitchers Have Any Problems At Employment Line
Pitchers are in such great demand these days that one can hardly be released by one club without having half a dozen other clubs jangling his agent's telephone.
Kelly Downs is the latest example.
The San Francisco Giants placed him on waivers last Monday, he cleared without being claimed Thursday and that afternoon, seven or eight general managers contacted his agent, Jim Bronner, trying to secure the pitcher's services.
The Oakland Athletics succeeded yesterday, and Downs became an instant member of their starting rotation.


Larry King, Kingmaker to the Pols
So Larry King, the talkshow host, finally takes a vacation, in May, his first trip to Israel.
It's a "Roots" kind of thing for a 58-year-old guy from Brooklyn whose given surname was Zeiger.
In Jerusalem, he joins the crowds praying at the Wailing Wall.
His heart is full, and he is more than a bit awestruck when suddenly the man next to him, a Hasidic Jew in traditional dress, pauses in his chanting, stares and says: "Larry! Is Perot for real or what?"
Mr.
King told this story recently during dinner at Duke Zeibert's, a Washington hangout for movers and schmoozers, to illustrate both the reach of his fame and the reason his show has gone, as he says, "from being a 727 to a 747" since Feb. 20, when Ross Perot announced on the air that if viewers "want to register me in 50 states" as a Presidential candidate, that would be fine with him.
If Mr.
Perot catapulted into national politics on CNN's "Larry King Live," Mr.
King has new cachet, thanks to Mr.
Perot.


Miss Allyn and Mr. Lowsley-Williams
Elizabeth Compton Allyn, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Compton Allyn of Cincinnati and the late Elizabeth P. Allyn, was married yesterday to Paul Lowsley-Williams, a son of Capt.
Michael and Lady Fiona Lowsley-Williams of San Roque, Spain.
The Rev.
G.
David White, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Orleans, Mass.
Mrs.
Lowsley-Williams is an assistant vice president of Christie's, the auction house, in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father, who is an Episcopal priest, is professor emeritus of management at Northern Kentucky University in Highland Heights, Ky.
Her grandfather the late Stanley C. Allyn, was chairman and chief executive of the NCR Corporation, the maker of business machines, in Dayton, Ohio.


Leaders Drive Apart Czech And Slovak
NATIONALISM may well be Eastern Europe's most pervasive post-Communist trend, but that doesn't mean the 16 million people of Czechoslovakia are rushing to join the world's lengthening list of former nations.
To be sure, the victorious parties in this month's elections have set the country firmly on a course toward dissolving the 74-year-old federation of Czechs and Slovaks.
But unlike Yugoslavia and other breakups in the region, this is more schism imposed from above than a popular movement from below.
Public opinion is following the lead of politicians, and for the moment only reluctantly.


POSTINGS: Hamilton Fish Pool; Reopening a 'Treasure'
The best-known Beaux-Arts monument by the architects Carrere &amp; Hastings is the New York Public Library.
Less renowned, but also a landmark, is the firm's 94-year-old Hamilton Fish Pool and Recreation Center, at East Houston and Pitt Streets.
It is to be reopened Thursday after a $14 million restoration.
The project involved enlarging one of the outdoor pools to meet Olympic standards; converting a diving pool into a training pool and renovating playgrounds, ball courts, a spray fountain, picnic areas and the exterior of the original bath house, which is now a community center.
"It's really a treasure," said Parks Commissioner Betsy Gotbaum.


Topics of The Times; Coffin Nails
Rose Cipollone died of lung cancer eight years ago but her tenacity endures.
By suing three cigarette manufacturers for smoking damage to her health, she pounded a nail in tobacco's coffin -- and opened the way for the Supreme Court decision last week that tobacco companies are not immune from lawsuits.
Like many Americans, Mrs.
Cipollone started smoking as a teen-ager.
"I thought that it was cool to smoke, and grown up," she stated in a deposition a few months before her death.
Then, she added, "I got hooked."


W. T. Shirley Jr., 60, Real-Estate Developer
Walter T. Shirley Jr., who helped his father develop the Long Island community that bears his family name, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
Mr. Shirley died of a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Guy Bashing, With a Smile
THERE'S an old Monty Python routine about a couple of British gangsters, the Piranha brothers, whose individual gifts for inflicting pain are the foundation for an empire of terror.
Doug is fond of violence, and he has some imagination about it; he stitches people's legs together or nails their heads to the floor.
But the greatest tyranny is that of his brother, Dinsdale.
"He used," one victim says, pausing to gulp in terrified recollection, "sarcasm."


Torborg Looks in Book And Gives Franco a Call
For the Mets, it amounted to an exhausting case of supply and demand.
Almost no runs almost all afternoon meant there had to be lots of superb, or at least stubborn, pitching inning after inning.
On and on it went against the Cardinals, the score deadlocked at 1-1, the day's heat suffocating the dugout, the drama on the basepaths in the eighth, ninth and 10th innings draining the Mets' reserves of pitching and patience.
Sid Fernandez had given up a single run in seven innings.
Wally Whitehurst had danced with danger for three straight innings.


Minolta Brings Out A New 35-Millimeter
WHEN the professional likes and buys a new 35-millimeter camera -- a real seal of approval -- it can become the hot camera in photography.
Once amateurs hear the word, they often join the ranks of owners.
Minolta has designed its new Maxxum 9xi model for professionals -- the toughest, Minolta says, the most versatile, most resistant to dust and moisture, and fastest camera in their seven-year-old Maxxum xi line.


O'Brien Fails to Make Olympic Decathlon Team
Forget the Dan and Dave Show at the Barcelona Olympics.
While Dave got there by winning the decathlon today in the United States Olympic track and field trials, Dan knocked himself out of the picture when he incomprehensibly missed his first three attempts in the pole vault.
Dan is Dan O'Brien of Moscow, Idaho, the 25-year-old world champion.
Dave is Dave Johnson of Missoula, Mont., the 29-year-old Goodwill Games champion.
They are the stars of Reebok's Dan-and-Dave commercials on which the shoe manufacturer says it has already spent $25 million.
And they might have won the gold and the silver medals in Barcelona.


Some Modest Proposals To Ward Off Extinction
Nobody could call it a surprise: "Unless changes are made in the way orchestras do business," concludes a recent survey commissioned by the American Symphony Orchestra League, "the future of the orchestra industry is in serious jeopardy." Those changes, the report adds, will have to be "substantial and systemic." Deborah Borda, managing director of the New York Philharmonic, agrees.
American orchestras, she said at the organization's annual meeting earlier this month, "have started a long, progressive drive to the edge of a cliff."
The crisis is peculiar, because it has come about through success; the cliff is being reached only after an extended climb.
Beginning in the mid-1960's, foundations and the Federal Government did everything possible to encourage growth in orchestras' endowments and audiences.
Now, by enormous margins, there are more concerts, more donors, more earned dollars, more orchestras with longer seasons and bigger budgets.
There are also more orchestras with far more serious problems.


U.S. Women Launch Firepower and Dream
There are 11 pros and a high school coach 12 young women in a hurry to run the ball down the court and even more determined to make a point, in the neighborhood of 100 per game.
"It's unfair to compare any team to this team," said Cynthia Cooper of the United States Olympic women's basketball team.
"We're pretty good."


An Epitaph for Shoreham From Cuomo
From a podium near the reactor core Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo delivered a requiem for the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station on June 17 to start the two-year decommissioning of the plant.
The project, which will be carried out by the Long Island and New York Power Authorities, is expected to cost $186 million.
It involves a partial dismantling and the removal of radioactive parts from the $5.5 billion plant.
After off-the-cuff remarks, Mr.
Cuomo pressed a button to make an underwater torch sever a pipe that would have been part of the emergency cooling system.
Following are his remarks:


Overreach
To the Editor:
Although I've not read of prize-winning translations in subtitles, should there be a contest, I would like to submit this from "Diabolique," made in 1955.
I've recently seen it again and now have it on tape, which means the evidence is at hand.
A character in a literary mood for the moment refers thus: " 'Lady Windermere's Fanny' by Oscar Wilde." EUGENE W. FELDMAN Lewistown, Pa.


BIG PALERMO RALLY ASSAILS MAFIA GRIP
They came from across the land by train, plane and ferryboat, bearing bright banners and sharp anger, filling this Mafia fief with protest and urging that Sicilians break the compact of silence that sustains and shields the mob.
"Break down the wall of omerta," said one handwritten banner held aloft by a group of young women.
The Italian word covers both the Mafia's binding vow of silence on its followers and the fear that prevents many others from identifying criminals.


Data Bank/June 28, 1992


For Police Union Head, Review Board Proposal Is Latest Indignity
Phil Caruso's 12 years as president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association have been a series of political wars.
The arrest of six Brooklyn officers last month in cocaine trafficking focused attention on corruption and on the Police Department's Internal Affairs Division.
The department and the State Legislature recently struck a compromise to arm more officers with 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistols.
Finally, in an issue especially sensitive to Mr.
Caruso's union, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced his support for an all-civilian review board to investigate complaints of police brutality and misconduct.
On Thursday, Mr.
Caruso discussed these issues with Craig Wolff of The New York Times.
Following are excerpts of their conversation.
Q. What is it about a civilian review board that stirs so much reaction?


SCHOOL VOUCHERS DEALT A SETBACK
Backers of a California campaign to create the most far-reaching school voucher system in the nation have lost the first round in what is expected to be a bitter and protracted political battle with the leaders of public education.
For months, a conservative coalition has been canvassing the state seeking signatures to place a measure on the November ballot that would allow parents to use a state "scholarship" in public, private and parochial schools.
But on Thursday, Secretary of State March Fong Eu declared that there were not enough valid voter signatures for this year's ballot.
Count Will Be Challenged
The organizers of the campaign, the Los Angeles-based Choice in Education League, filed a lawsuit on Friday in Sacramento Superior Court challenging the sampling methodology used by the Secretary of State to invalidate many of the signatures.
Even if that suit fails, they said, they believed that a full count of the signatures would provide enough valid signatures to qualify the measure for the next general state election, in June 1994.


A Response To Rival Needs: 2 Income Groups Under One Roof
ANDREW M. CUOMO came to Westchester a month ago to describe his vision of a permanent housing program in which "low income and moderate income can live in the same place, together." Despite applause from the audience at the yearly Hope for the Homeless dinner where he spoke, many were skeptical and few were prepared for what happened next.
Last week, Mr.
Cuomo returned to the county to announce that the town of Harrison had endorsed a plan to build 25 two-family houses that the two income groups could share.
The low-income renters upstairs would receive an average $700 Federal subsidy to cover most if not all of their rent, which they would pay to a middle-income landlord living below.


A Summer Sibling Teaches All of the Family
As an Army brat in the 1950's, James Cotton grew up in newly integrated military bases around the country, largely shielded from the segregation and poverty many other black children encountered every day.
Then his family moved to Indianapolis, and for the first time he entered a segregated, all-black public school.
The experience, he said, startled him.
He remembers a classmate, Aaron, a boy with the spark of intelligence in his eyes but bound by a dearth of opportunity to go nowhere.


Lewis B. Funke, 80, a Writer and Editor of Theater Criticism
Lewis B. Funke, a retired drama editor and critic for The New York Times, died on Friday at Horton Memorial Hospital in Middletown, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Blooming Grove, N.Y., and Delray Beach, Fla.
He died of a heart attack and complications of pneumonia and kidney failure, his family said.


Ms. Mullan, Dinesh Jain
Nancy D. Mullan and W. Richard Mullan, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra DeVries Mullan, to Dinesh Chandra Jain, the son of Dr.
Sagar and Sushila Jain of Chapel Hill, N.C.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mullan, 25 years old, received a law degree last month from Fordham University and expects to join the New York office of Graham &amp; James, a San Francisco law firm, in October.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did her fiance.
Ms.
Mullan was a member of the New York Junior Assembly.
Her father is a senior vice president of the New York advertising agency of Ally &amp; Gargano.
Her mother owns NDM Kitchens Inc., a New York design and renovation company.


Marissa Sollitto, M. R. McDonnell
Marissa Andrea Sollitto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank N. Sollitto of New Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Richard McDonnell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. McDonnell of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
Otto Hentz performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in New Hartford.
Mrs.
McDonnell, 24 years old, graduated from Georgetown University, as did her husband, and is a fourth-year medical student there.
Her father is the president of the C. Lavieri Agency, a real estate and insurance brokerage company in Barkhamsted, Conn.
Her mother, Maria Sollitto, is the owner of the Hundred Antiques, an antiques and jewelry concern in New Hartford.


Susan F. Tourbaf, Timothy Liesching
Susan Fatima Tourbaf, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kamal D. Tourbaf of East Amherst, N.Y., was married yesterday in Buffalo to Timothy Neil Liesching, a son of Richard P. Liesching of Norwalk, Conn., and Ellen S. Corbett of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stephen J. White performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Cathedral.


Plucking A Tender Chord
To the Editor:
John Milward's article "Rich and Famous? Take a Lesson Anyway"  [ June 7 ]  offered an informative look at the need for professionals to continue their own artistic development.
But I am troubled by a statement attributed to Bela Fleck.


JUNE 21-27: Intellectual Property; A Computer Giant Loses A Copyright Case
When the personal computer was in its infancy in the mid-1970's, hobbyists and inventors freely shared hardware and software.
Apple Computer's co-founder, Stephen Wozniak, insists, for example, that he built the first Apple I to show off his ideas for his friends at the Homebrew Computer Club in Palo Alto.
But in the 1980's, as the business exploded into a multi-billion-dollar industry, high technology companies such as Apple Computer, Intel Corp. and Lotus Development Corp. turned to the courts to protect their software and hardware, filing copyright and patent infringement suits.
The Federal courts had generally sided with them.
But last week three judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan stunned the industry by ruling that companies cannot use copyright law as a bludgeon in the marketplace.
They denied an appeal by  the nation's second-largest software publisher, Computer Associates International, that sued a small Texas software company, Altai, Inc., for copying portions of a Computer Associates program.


Deborah Dodds, Gregory C. Smith
Deborah Montgomery Dodds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Dodds of Nevada City, Calif., was married yesterday to Gregory Carter Smith, a son of Charles J. Smith 2d of Naples, Fla., and the late Elizabeth C. Smith.
The Rev.
Robert E. Taylor performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Mystic, Conn.
Mrs.
Smith, 31, is a director of East Coast member relations for Mastercard International in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
She received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is a lawyer and a real-estate investor in Nevada City, and her mother, Pauline P. Dodds, is an interior decorator.


Beth Zadek, Joph Steckel
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Zadek of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter Beth Kate Zadek to Dr.
Joph Steckel, a son of Cantor and Mrs.
Harold Steckel of Bayside, Queens.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zadek, 31 years old, is an advertising account manager for The New Yorker.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is an assistant professor of orthopedic surgery at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore and an associate professor in the same subject at the University of Maryland there.
Her mother, Miriam Zadek, is the director of social work at the Hearing and Speech Agency of Baltimore.


But Is It Art?
To the Editor: Your article, "Mirror, Mirror, on the Way" (May 10), regarding shopping abroad, reminded me of two purchases, both supposed to be duty-free, both of which brought trouble.
How well I remember the merchant in Marrakesh who sold me my den rug yelling: "This is not a rug. It is a work of art, a work of art, a work of art!"


Debunking Some Myths on Dethatching
GRASS clippings do not increase thatch.
This fact is the kind of information to cut out and fasten to the refrigerator door.
Or at least it may help to settle some family arguments.
Thatch is an accumulation of organic materials such as grass roots (rhizomes), dead grasses and grass sheaths.
It just sits there and does not decompose unless it is removed by dethatching machines that slice through this accumulation.
Thatch, which smothers the grass and inhibits growth, is sometimes caused by applications of too much fertilizer.


Eberly Pitts, Robert Goldman
Eberly Virginia Pitts, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward P. Pitts of Fair Haven, N.J., was married yesterday in Rumson, N.J., to Robert Arthur Goldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brooks C. Goldman of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
George Willis performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Church.
Mrs.
Goldman, 26 years old, teaches mathematics at the Madeira School in McLean, Va.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in education from George Mason University.
Her father is a vice president of K. G. Pollock &amp; Associates, an oceanographic sales company in Arnold, Md.
Her mother, Eugenia W. Pitts, is the executive director of the Monmouth-Ocean Development Council in Manasquan, N.J.
The bride is the granddaughter of the late Heinrich Wieschhoff, a director of Political and Security Council Affairs at the United Nations.


An Old Health Insurance Idea Returns: Sharing the Risk
Responding to the plight of the increasing numbers of people priced out of health insurance, a number of states are legislating "radical" reform -- forcing companies to go back to the traditional idea of sharing risks as widely as possible.
Instead of letting insurers charge people more if they are older or more likely to become sick, the states want the companies to accept everyone, regardless of risks and at similar fees.
Vermont says it was the first state to pass such legislation, which is to take effect on Wednesday.
Minnesota's program is to go into effect in October.
New York is weighing changes in its health-insurance laws, as is New Jersey.


Melissa Micol, Stephen Porter
Melissa Denise Micol, the daughter of Roger L. Micol of Chelmsford, Mass., and Barbara Dowker Micol of Dunedin, Fla., was married yesterday in Chelmsford to Stephen Burr Porter, the son of Michael Porter of Chebeaque Island, Me., and Dr.
Laurel Porter of New York.
The Rev.
Hugh Evans performed the ceremony at the Central Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Porter, 28 years old, is an administrator in the department of medicine-gastroenterology at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is an electrical engineer at the Mitre Corporation in Bedford, Mass.


A Casualty Report; AIDS, Fatally Steady in the U.S., Accelerates Worldwide
BACK in the mid-1980's, when every scrap of information about AIDS was treated as urgent news, the Centers for Disease Control issued new totals for AIDS cases and deaths every week.
In 1989, with trends assuming a familiar contour, they switched to once a month.
This year, it became once every three months.


Woman About Town
AFTER the daily morning workout with the personal trainer and the massage, the makeup goes on.
It's 9:30 A.M., a pre-voguing hour for Toukie Smith, the sometime model, sometime actress, ubiquitous hostess and party presence.
The red lipstick ("Pimento") has already been applied, and her bright, flat doll's eyes have been lined with pencil.
Arlene Hawkins, a makeup artist, now delicately powders Ms.
Smith's face into a piquant, smooth mask.
The public face is finessed; the fantasy hourglass body is now ready for a day of wildly exuberant entrances and ongoing spectacles.
"Some people buy champagne," Ms.
Smith said.
"Some people take drugs. I like to have my face done every day."


Sports of The Times; Run to Win; Stand Up For Principle
AN amateur fighter in Phoenix, a world-class runner in New Orleans, and a professional football player in Minneapolis became united unwittingly last week when they challenged their respective governing bodies.
Their motivation for challenging the system varied.
For Montell Griffin, it was the desire to earn a berth on the United States Olympic boxing team; for Butch Reynolds, it was a need to force an unyielding track organization to see that due process is a right, not a privilege; for Freeman McNeil, it was securing the right of professional football players to test the free-agent marketplace without restrictions.


True Equality
To the Sports Editor:
There is only one answer to equality in college athletics ("Title IX: A 20-Year Search for Sex Equity," The Times, June 21-23): eliminate all gender and permit men and women to compete equally for sports on all teams.


Forget the Barrens, Build in Bay Shore
Re "Builders Rally to Free Up Pine Barrens Development"  [ May 17 ] : What upsets me about the developers is not so much their desire to develop, but their constant desire to develop only raw virgin land such as the pine barrens.
Since Long Island is already glutted with hundreds, perhaps thousands, of vacant commercial buildings, why don't they focus their attention on redeveloping already existing commercial areas?


Aurora Journal; Father and Son Reunited at a Shelter
The story of a chance reunion after 17 years between a troubled drifter and his troubled son at a homeless mission here is a fairy tale for the 1990's.
It involves drugs, domestic abuse, born-again faith, love, loss and maybe even a shot at renewal.
It is about John Starr, a 49-year-old wanderer who left his estranged wife and 3-year-old son in this city in 1975 and never looked back.


The Man of 100,000 Letters
Charles Lutwidge Dodgson -- mathematician, Oxford don, deacon of the Church of England and assiduous amateur photographer, as well as the author of "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" and "Through the Looking-Glass" under the name Lewis Carroll -- somehow found time to write more than 100,000 letters between the age of 29 and his death at 65.
Many of them were gravely nonsensical screeds to the little girls the shy Dodgson loved to entertain, tease and photograph (in both clothed and unclothed states).
Unfortunately, his letters to his beloved Alice Liddell, daughter of the dean of Christ Church and inspiration for the Alice books, were burned by her mother, who was made so uneasy by Dodgson's excessive attentions to her daughters -- and, presumably, his delicately erotic photographs of them -- that she refused him access to the dean's residence.
In LEWIS CARROLL: LOOKING-GLASS LETTERS (Rizzoli, $27.50) Thomas Hinde, an English novelist and popular historian, has therefore had to make do with letters to Dodgson's lesser child friends, which are nevertheless the most amusing -- and poignant -- entries here: "My dear Agnes, At
last
I've succeeded in forgetting you!
It's been a very hard job, but I took 6 'lessons-in-forgetting,' at half-a-crown a lesson.
After three lessons, I forgot my own name, and I forgot to go for the next lesson." Interspersed with these are less captivating notes to publishers, relatives and recalcitrant illustrators. Perhaps the most charming things in the book are the copious illustrations -- dozens of Dodgson's haunting photographs, his whimsical sketches for the Alice manuscripts, the more famous John Tenniel illustrations of Alice, and various contemporary paintings.


The Long, The Mysterious
The plunging hemline debate is gaining momentum once more as women experiment with narrower and longer styles for summer.
The point of longer skirts is not to make short skirts obsolete.
Rather, the length change is part of fashion's perennial search for fresh sensuality and fresh designs.
Some of the more intriguing ideas are the flying panel skirt and the slit skirt.
Both suggest mystery by giving only a glimpse of the leg underneath.
And on a windy corner on Fifth Avenue, the flying panel skirt is a real head-turner.


INSIDE
Courier Loses at Wimbledon To 193d-Ranked Player
Jim Courier, the No. 1-ranked male player in the world, failed in his bid to win tennis's four Grand Slam tournaments in a single year, losing on the grass at Wimbledon to No. 193-ranked Andrei Olhovskiy of Russia.
SportsSunday, section 8.  'I Think You're My Father'
After 17 years, a troubled drifter and his troubled son reunited by chance.
Their story is one of love, hate and redemption.
Aurora Journal, page 12.
A Truce in Software
Two giants in computing, I.B.M. and Microsoft, reached an agreement to end years of legal and financial squabbling over technology.
Page 21.
Bush Meets Navy Pilot
President Bush summoned to the White House a female officer who said she was assaulted at a convention of naval pilots last year.
Page 12.


Victoria A. Beers, Northrup Knox Jr.
Victoria A. Beers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Beers of Fayetteville, N.C., was married yesterday to Northrup R. Knox Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Knox of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Michael Hartney, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Matthias Church in East Aurora, N.Y.
Mrs.
Knox, 30 years old, is a founder and partner of JVB Management, a real-estate and property management concern in Boston.
She graduated from Stetson University.
Her father is a field service representative of Martin Marietta Corporation, the defense contractor, in Fayetteville.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Greenlawn 275,000
27 Old Hills Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, great room, pool, c/a; taxes $5,400.
Huntington 162,000
78 Sammis Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Lynbrook 195,000
22 Leaman Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 61-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700.
St.
James 227,000
116 Hobson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, basement, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $5,400.
Valley Stream 144,000
136 Copiague Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 51-year-old ranch; finished basement, 1-car detached garage; taxes $2,700.
Woodbury 645,000
11 Yukon Drive  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 23-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $15,000.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 135,000
88 Fox Run
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 11-year-old garden condominium; fireplace, dining room, eat-in kitchen, patio; taxes $3,397.
Clinton, Conn. 98,000
48 Long Hill Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; deck, needs work, 1 acre; taxes $1,631.
Englewood, N.J. 169,000  295 West Hudson Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 65-year-old colonial; French doors, h/w floors; taxes $3,850.


No-Frills Insurance Proposed for Cars
AFTER years of paying some of the highest automobile insurance premiums in the country, New Jersey motorists may soon be able to purchase bare-bones insurance for as little as $250 a year.
Two proposals about to work their way through the Legislature would dramatically change the state's compulsory-insurance law to allow drivers to buy greatly reduced coverage for a fraction of what they now pay, which can exceed $2,500 a year.


KNITTING IN CLASS
I suppose that it is fashionable for women like Laura Ann Petitto to refer to knitting as a porch activity left over from the days when women did "things like that." There is a tendency, particularly among certain academics, to depict women of past generations as drudges, engaged in mindless activities that symbolized their oppression.


David Keating, Miss Van Vranken
Cynthia Dale Van Vranken, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Frederick Van Vranken Jr. of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married yesterday to David Bruce Keating, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Geoffrey T. Keating of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
T.
Carlton Lee performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Keating, 28 years old, is an assistant product manager at Black &amp; Decker in Hunt Valley, Md.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received master's degrees in business administration and Asian studies from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a senior vice president of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, a New York investment research and management concern.
Her mother, Nancy S. Van Vranken, teaches science at St.
Bernard's School in New York.


Making the Most of a Little Bacon Can Capture the Flavor
BACON is a frequent treat.
It is treasured for its rich, smoky flavor.
But on a sensible diet, its high fat content, about 80 percent, and sodium, an average 150 milligrams in a slice, make it something to be consumed sparingly.
Fortunately, a little goes a long way in adding flavor, and sometimes texture, to a variety of dishes.
A strip or two of bacon, chopped and sauteed with the onions early in the preparation is enough to add hauntingly smoky flavor to a seafood or fish chowder.
It performs the same service in some pasta dishes.
It is even possible to capitalize on a small amount of bacon by using a little, crumbled as a topping, so that it seasons the first bite of a salad or some other dish.


POSTINGS: Doing It Right; Renovations on Landmarks
Many questions arise when apartment owners contemplate exterior alterations to buildings that are either individually designated landmarks or located in historic districts.
The Council of New York Cooperatives hopes that co-op and condominum owners can get some answers at a seminar Wednesday, from 8 to 10 P.M., at the Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street.
The main speaker will be Alex Herrera, director of preservation at the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission.


Jazz and Marches Celebrate July 4th
"I AM apt to believe that it will be celebrated by succeeding generations as the great anniversary festival," John Adams wrote to his wife Abigail on July 3, 1776.
"It ought to be solemnized with pomp and parade, with shows, games, sports, guns, bells, bonfires and illuminations from one end of this continent to the other, from this time forward for evermore."
In 1992 we can add music to the list of Fourth of July events.
The Bronx Arts Ensemble offers a free "Salute to George M. Cohan," not to mention Irving Berlin, Victor Herbert, W. C. Handy, Duke Ellington and Miles Davis, in Woodlawn Cemetery on Saturday at 2 P.M.


SURFACING
FASHION --
MTV jackets. Come fall, anyone can dress like a VJ.
PSYCHOLOGY --
Integrative therapy:
a set of 11 mind techniques for food and stress problems; from California. FOOD --
No-cholesterol pizza:
tomato sauce and tofu (instead of cheese) on a whole-wheat crust.  DRUG --
Zoloft:
an antidepressant that's the new alternative to Prozac. NOSTALGIA --
The 1980's:
party promoters are trying to revive the Mudd Club and the Paradise Garage.


Guggenheim In a New Light
A museum reopens with celebrations, and a protest to urge further diversity.


Japanese Folk Art: Much Elegance With Flashes of Wit
Folk art has been around since the beginning of time, but no one called it that until the late 19th century.
Today, it's collected internationally, and exhibitions of folk art from Europe, Latin America and Asia are on the increase in the United States.
The difference between what was made abroad and what was made in this country, say American experts, has more to do with Asian and European attitudes about social class than with art styles.
Currently, the most ambitious such show in New York is "Japanese Folk Art: A Triumph of Simplicity," at the Japan Society Gallery, 333 East 47th Street in Manhattan, through Thursday.
The 88 objects in the exhibition, which date from the 15th to the 20th century, were assembled over 20 years by Jeffrey Montgomery, a former crafts dealer from the United States who lives in Lugano, Switzerland.


The Take on Voice
In the soap opera "Santa Barbara," an irate father complains about his teen-age daughter's relationship with a newspaper publisher.
The publisher's girlfriend, Angela, quickly straightens the father out: "You think they were sleeping together? You have the wrong
take
on this situation."
I had originally filed that citation under "archaic euphemisms," because
sleeping together
now seems to be in the category once reserved for
holding hands
; the couch-potato generation, which knows more about copulation than copulative verbs and whose eyes glaze over at terms that used to be shocking, must wonder if
sleeping together
is some new kind of communal family value.


JUNE 21-27: A Pragmatic Path; Russia and Ukraine Ease Risk of Confrontation
Almost from the moment he returned to Russia from Washington, Boris N. Yeltsin was dousing the ethnic fires that have plagued the former Communist world: Moldovans against Russians, Georgians against Ossetians, Armenians against Azerbaijanis.
None came near the Yugoslav horror yet, but they seemed increasingly resistant to reason or moderation.
It was probably that very tenacity of the peripheral wars that prompted Mr.
Yeltsin and the Ukrainian President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, to look for ways of resolving their differences.
Both seemed to realize that the surrounding hostilities could draw them in: both Russian and Ukrainian nationalists were clamoring ever louder to help their "brothers" against Moldova and Romania.
More ominously, the leaders of Russia and Ukraine had ready evidence that seemingly petty grievances could escalate into intractable feuds.
And if they fell to fighting, all the rest would look like sand-box spats.


Performers Catch Up With a Composer's Imaginings
Advocates of "authentic" performance seem to believe that the earliest presentation of a piece is necessarily the best.
Composers know better.
Premieres can have an adrenaline-induced excitement, but they are usually tentative, shaky or downright disastrous.
A play-it-safe premiere can do far more damage to a work's future than an inspired train wreck.
Elliott Carter has remarked that it often takes 20 years before his pieces begin to sound the way he imagined them.
Perhaps his is an extreme case.
Not a performer himself, Mr.
Carter has had to rely on sympathetic musicians to bring his works to life.
And though he has been well served by a small New York-based group of devotees (the pianists Paul Jacobs, Charles Rosen, Gilbert Kalish and Ursula Oppens and the Composers String Quartet), no American conductor has yet become a strong proponent of his orchestral works.


Strings Attached
My friend calls to tell me that it really is over.
"Four years," she says, "and he still hasn't left his wife. I know I've said it before. But this time I mean it. I want peace."
Yes, she has said it before. But each time she says it, she believes it.


The Secret Life of Art Is Led in Drawings
There is in Westchester County, that bastion of silviculture, a very pretty new museum.
Called the Katonah Museum of Art, it has replaced the unobtrusive Katonah Gallery that was in the center of the town of that name and harbored many a memorable small-scale show.
Built on an intimate scale by Edward Larrabee Barnes, an architect in high favor in the neighborhood, the museum, which opened in November 1990, is sited about half a mile outside Katonah itself.


He Who Stripped Is Not A Stripper
Steven Chao, who was dismissed as president of Fox Television Stations last weekend after hiring a male model to strip at a business conference, wasn't the only one to feel the backlash from the scheme.
"I'm not a Chippendales kind of guy," said the model, Marco Iacovelli.
He insists he's not a stripper, even though he did remove all his clothes in front of Dick Cheney, the Secretary of Defense; Lynne V. Cheney, the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, and about 200 executives of the News Corporation, which is owned by Rupert Murdoch.
"There was one press report that said I do this for a living," Mr.
Iacovelli said.
"That's completely false. I work as a figure model for art classes."


Johnson Has Lewis on Run in the 200
It was Carl Lewis himself who provided the first lesson this week that nothing in track and field should be taken for granted.
As the United States Olympic trials had barely gotten under way last Saturday, he failed to make the team in his premier event, the 100 meters, finishing an unsightly sixth.
Since then, three other world champions of 1991 failed to make the team that will compete this summer in Barcelona -- Antonio Pettigrew in the 400, Kenny Harrison in the triple jump and, today, Dan O'Brien in the decathlon.


Serbs Defy Ultimatum From U.N. And Persist in Shelling Sarajevo; Yugoslav Prince Returns
Alexander Karadjordjevic, son of Peter II, the last King of Yugoslavia, came to Belgrade today intent on restoring a dynasty that originated 188 years ago and ended when Nazi armies occupied the country in 1941.
"I am coming in the hope that better days and real democracy will come to Serbia, without blood," said the British-born Prince, reading a statement in Serbo-Croatian as he arrived at the Hotel Intercontinental.
"Long live a new and free Serbia!"  Traveled by Car From Romania
About 300 well-wishers, some in formal dress and others in old army uniforms, cheered and tried to shake his hand.
They had waited as Prince Alexander's motorcade traveled 110 miles from Timisoara, Romania, the nearest airport open to foreign planes.


The Lipstick Wars
MANY years ago Leonard Lauder, president and chief executive of his family's company, Estee Lauder Inc., watched a friend's daughter brewing lip gloss on the kitchen stove and pouring it into bottle caps for sale at school.
Pleased that a young person was interested in the business that consumes him, Mr.
Lauder fostered her fledgling venture with a contribution of 24 empty pots from his company's packaging line to lend her product more panache.
But when his mother, Estee Lauder, the legendary founder of the $2 billion-plus cosmetics company that carries her name, heard of his largesse she was appalled.
"What?" she said.
"You
gave
her 24 pots? You're
giving
pots to the competition?"


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TEENAGE IDOL, TRAVELIN' MAN The Complete Biography  of Rick Nelson.
By Philip Bashe.
Hyperion, $22.95.


Tech Notes; A Bulletin Board Built for Baby
Faced with baffling questions about bringing up baby, first-time parents may at last have an alternative to telephone calls to Grandma or the pediatrician.
Using a computer and a modem, parents can now log on to an electronic bulletin board that offers an array of child care information.
The service, initiated by New Parents Network Inc., a nonprofit organization in Tucson, Ariz., began in May 1991 and has generated hundreds of thousands of calls from parents, hospitals and social service agencies, according to Karen Storek Lange, the organization's founder and executive director.


From Tocqueville to Perotville
Some evening this summer, Ross Perot's core supporters will likely gather before their TV sets to watch him declare his candidacy.
Then they'll trundle off to bed swollen with the sense that their efforts on his behalf represent a renewal of civic life and public spiritedness.
But I doubt they'll be so overwhelmed by the rush of cyber-civitas that, before turning in, they'll forget to activate the alarm system, or check to see that the neighbor's dinner guests have left or at least moved their car off the street, which is a cul-de-sac with no provision for on-street parking.


Dinkins Plan for Homeless Is Criticized
The head of a mayoral commission appointed to recommend solutions to the problem of sheltering New York City's homeless is clashing once again with city officials, this time over a plan by the Dinkins administration to move homeless men out of two large shelters.
Mayor David N. Dinkins announced last week that he would start moving homeless men out of the huge Fort Washington and Atlantic armories, a move he described as part of the city's "ongoing effort to implement the recommendations" of the commission.


Elizabeth Egan and Emanuel Stern
"I ALWAYS thought I'd get married in the woods with the chipmunks," said Elizabeth Egan, 27, a school teacher in Manhattan who grew up in Southern California and still goes barefoot whenever possible.
Last Sunday evening, she married Emanuel Stern, 29, who works for the Hartz Group, the pet-supplies and real-estate conglomerate, owned by his father, Leonard Stern.
The ceremony and reception were held in the one place in Manhattan which has woods and chipmunks as well as polar bears, monkeys, penguins and puffins: the Central Park Zoo.
It was not, however, a rustic affair.
Many of the 300 guests arrived by limousine, and all of the men wore black tie.
Nevertheless, the wedding felt at times like a simple ceremony in the wilderness.
The bride and groom were married next to the seal pond, beneath a chuppah of twigs, vines and flowers that looked as fragile as a bird's nest.
While they took their vows, sea lions barked in the background and tropical birds let out several jungle calls.
"This is like being in the wilds off Fifth Avenue," said one guest.


High Life
WALKING around in circles but never getting to the top.
The myth of Sisyphus?
Dante's "Inferno" upside down?
No.
It was the Guggenheim's black-tie reception on Wednesday night.
Beginning at 9 P.M., those critics, collectors, artists and donors who hadn't been invited to the evening's seated dinner began streaming in.
They admired the flawless renovation and the colors cast by Dan Flavin's installation of fluorescent lights.
They saw that the fountain had been painted blue as specified by Frank Lloyd Wright.
They got drinks at the bar and tried one of the figs with prosciutto mousse and pistachios being passed by waiters in white gloves.
They listened to the band play old-time Dixieland tunes but felt, perhaps, a little too dressed-up to quick step and risk perspiring.
They looked up at the darkening firmament through the center panes of the roof's clear glass dome.


Debunking Some Myths on Dethatching
GRASS clippings do not increase thatch.
This fact is the kind of information to cut out and fasten to the refrigerator door.
Or at least it may help to settle some family arguments.
Thatch is an accumulation of organic materials such as grass roots (rhizomes), dead grasses and grass sheaths.
It just sits there and does not decompose unless it is removed by dethatching machines that slice through this accumulation.
Thatch, which smothers the grass and inhibits growth, is sometimes caused by applications of too much fertilizer.


Atlanta Setting Court Example
To the Sports Editor:
We applaud Robin Finn's article about the Atlanta Lawn Tennis Association ("Tennis League Proud Its Roots Show," The Times, June 10).
Since December 1991, the Eastern Tennis Association has been researching the Atlanta system in order to set up a similar league in New York.


Woman About Town
AFTER the daily morning workout with the personal trainer and the massage, the makeup goes on.
It's 9:30 A.M., a pre-voguing hour for Toukie Smith, the sometime model, sometime actress, ubiquitous hostess and party presence.
The red lipstick ("Pimento") has already been applied, and her bright, flat doll's eyes have been lined with pencil.
Arlene Hawkins, a makeup artist, now delicately powders Ms.
Smith's face into a piquant, smooth mask.
The public face is finessed; the fantasy hourglass body is now ready for a day of wildly exuberant entrances and ongoing spectacles.
"Some people buy champagne," Ms.
Smith said.
"Some people take drugs. I like to have my face done every day."


Film Post Candidate Drops Out
A leading contender to become New York City's next film commissioner has withdrawn from consideration, citing political infighting.
Rafael PiRoman, the host of WNBC's "Visiones," had been supported by most of the labor unions involved in film-making in New York.


Jennifer Bradley, J. Carlo Cannell
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Michael Bradley of New York and Quogue, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Treat Bradley, to J. Carlo Cannell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Best Cannell of New York and Lattingtown, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Bradley, 28 years old, graduated from Tufts University.
She is a freelance artist specializing in faux finishes and other painting techniques.
Her father is a senior partner in Brown &amp; Wood, a New York law firm.


KNITTING IN CLASS
What a variety of responses there have been to Perri Klass's Hers column "A Stitch in Time" (Letters, May 10 and 17 and June 7).
My reaction to her essay was that here at last was a respected professional who shared my discovery that knitting could enhance one's concentration.
If I cannot knit, I have to take notes (which I may never look at again) to prevent my mind from wandering.
MARILYN SUTTON LOOS
Radnor, Pa.


Wall Street; An OTC Stock's Curious Rally
Nothing beats the excitement of getting in on the ground floor.
And for a little company called the Ringside International Broadcasting Corporation of Palm Beach, Fla., the "ground floor" was June 12.
On that date, after nearly two years without a price quote, a bid for Ringside's stock was posted on the OTC Bulletin Board, the electronic price list the National Association of Securities Dealers maintains for over-the-counter stocks too small or too flimsy to qualify for a Nasdaq listing.


Making the Most of a Little Bacon Can Capture the Flavor
BACON is a frequent treat.
It is treasured for its rich, smoky flavor.
But on a sensible diet, its high fat content, about 80 percent, and sodium, an average 150 milligrams in a slice, make it something to be consumed sparingly.
Fortunately, a little goes a long way in adding flavor, and sometimes texture, to a variety of dishes.
A strip or two of bacon, chopped and sauteed with the onions early in the preparation is enough to add hauntingly smoky flavor to a seafood or fish chowder.
It performs the same service in some pasta dishes.
It is even possible to capitalize on a small amount of bacon by using a little, crumbled as a topping, so that it seasons the first bite of a salad or some other dish.


Pained Neighbors Recall Slain Owner of South Bronx Bodega
They gathered outside the shuttered bodega on Dawson Street in the South Bronx yesterday and remembered its owner, Fulvio Jimenez, as a good man who had tried to soften the edges of a hard neighborhood with his jokes and kindness, who had given candy to the children and had trusted people for a few dollars or a few items from his shelves.
The neighbors had called him "Poppy" because he was older, and sometimes "Gorbachev" because he was short, baldish and had a birthmark like the former Soviet President's.
Hard-working, honest, short-tempered only with the punks who sometimes hung around: These were the dominant recollections about the man.


POSTINGS: Remember the Taft?; A StarHotel on 51st Street
Last year, when Elisabetta Fabri, president of the Italy's StarHotels International, was shopping around for a New York hotel, she found her way to the 178-room Parc Fifty-One, on 51st Street at Seventh Avenue.
She liked its 55-gallon bathtubs, its 52 suites, its marble-floored lobby and its elegant ground floor Italian restaurant, Harry Cipriani's Bellini.
Last week, the Parc Fifty-One became the first hotel in the United States for her family's group of 14.
The price was $42 million and it is now The Michelangelo.
Rooms rents begin at $240 a night.


Carolyn Weiss, C. L. Clayton
Ronald W. Weiss and Nancy S. Nelson, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Carolyn Whitman Weiss to Christopher Laurence Clayton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Clayton of Short Hills, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weiss, 26 years old, is a human resources assistant at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in applied psychology from New York University.
Her father is a managing director of Associated Madison Real Estate, a subsidiary of the Primerica Corporation, in New York.
Her mother is an art therapist in New York.
Ms.
Weiss is also a stepdaughter of Ellen Weiss of New York.


A Closer Look at Executive Pay
Though Congress may yet decide against legislating curbs on executive pay -- it's considering bills to limit tax deductibility and the multiple by which the chief executive's pay exceeds the janitor's -- stockholders are likely to soon know a lot more about this touchy, often embarrassing subject.
The Securities and Exchange Commission proposed last week that corporations be required to disclose compensation in all its forms, including stock options, by means of tables and graphs instead of today's often murky prose.
Moreover, the committee that sets pay would for the first time have to set out the factors on which the packages of the top five executives are based and how the pay relates to the company's performance.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended June 13  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 2.7 million
1133 Fifth Avenue (94th St.)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, 3 maid's rooms, dining room, library, fireplace, Central Park view; maintenance $5,100, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Sotheby's International Realty)  Greenwich Village 435,000
148 Waverly Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a town house; high-ceilings, 2 fireplaces, 2 exposures; common charge $350, taxes $4,512 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Greenwich Village 575,000
139 West 13th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; fireplace, terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $867, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Madison Square 325,000
5 East 22d Street  (Madison Green)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,273-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, balcony, 2 exposures, Madison Square Park view; common charge $576, taxes $3,576 (Broker: Newell &amp; Associates)  West Side 1.5 million
41 Central Park West (64th St.)  (Harperley Hall)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,750-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, 2 fireplaces, windowed kitchen, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $2,460, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Harrison Properties)  BRONX  Wakefield 183,000
4273 Carpenter Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Williamsbridge 155,000
902 East 223d Street  2-family, semi-attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other, dining room in each, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,250 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  BROOKLYN  Bay Ridge 160,000
459 78th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached house; dining room, full basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,084 (Broker: Velsor Real Estate)  Brooklyn Heights 115,000
195 Adams Street  (Concord Village)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,043-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, renovated kitchen and baths, 2 exposures; maintenance $738, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Sherry Brown Realty)  Prospect Heights 440,000
159 Prospect Place  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, 2 fireplaces in owner's triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in rental simplex; 21- by 131-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Astoria 250,000
32-46 47th Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 4 bedrooms, dining room in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath in each; rear deck, 2-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: Century 21/Triboro Terrace Realty)  Forest Hills Gardens 400,000
14 Beechknoll Road  2-family, 3-story, townhouse; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex; 2-car garage, 31- by 86-ft. lot; taxes $2,900 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 225,000
47 Genesee Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, high-ranch; dining room, family room, 1-car garage, 50- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: RE/ MAX Preferred)  Randall Manor 175,000
44 Moody Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached colonial; dining room, fireplace, den, 1-car garage, 60- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Foreman/Rand Properties Inc.)


Eileen Marie Guilfoyle and David Kennon Moody
Eileen Marie Guilfoyle, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Guilfoyle of White Plains, was married yesterday in Montgomery, N.Y., to David Kennon Moody, the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
F.
Kennon Moody of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The bridegroom's father, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Maureen Hayden, a friend of the bride's family.


One Sure Bet: It's a Trendy Business
Belmont Park is showing unexpected gains lately in attendance and betting, but nobody knows exactly why.
Nobody is really sure why anything works these days in horse racing.
Most racing people don't even seem sure what product they're selling.
Is it the Sport of Kings or the business of bettors?
Or, in some equation not yet calculated, is it both?


Ways to Embellish the Garden
AN exhibition to celebrate gardens provides an idyllic setting where weeds never grow, there is no lawn to mow and hundreds of flowers bloom continually without tending.
While paintings and photographs of blossoms line the walls of the Kornbluth Gallery, exuding radiant colors, it is the broad crafts selection on display that embellishes and diversifies the garden theme.
Ceramic stools and benches by Eric O'Leary are arranged throughout the space, inviting a relaxed mood.
Surprise.
They are sturdy and comfortable; the seats are broad with gentle upward curves at the sides.
Vibrant glazes flow across them like full-color Rorschach tests, inviting viewers' interpretations.


Sandy Amoros, World Series Star for Dodgers in 1955, Dies at 62
Sandy Amoros, who dashed across the Yankee Stadium outfield in Game 7 of the 1955 World Series and caught a piece of baseball immortality when he turned a deep Yankee drive into a spectacular Series-saving double play for the Brooklyn Dodgers, died yesterday in Miami.
He was 62 years old.
He died of pneumonia at Jackson Memorial Hospital, said his lawyer, Rafael Sanchez.
Mr.
Amoros, who had a leg amputated in 1985, had been stricken with pneumonia on June 16, just a few days before he was to have been honored in Brooklyn.


Libyan Doubts About Qaddafi Are Growing
THE United Nations sanctions that went into effect against Libya last April are turning out to be more than a symbolic gesture.
While they have not yet accomplished their purpose of compelling Libya to turn over two suspects wanted in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jumbo jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, they have been politically damaging to the mercurial Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.
The Libyan military is struggling with serious shortages.
Many Libyans openly call for Colonel Qaddafi's removal and the official information media now admit that the Arab solidarity that was the cornerstone of Colonel Qaddafi's foreign policy was "a mirage."


Fitness Freak
When a would-be novelist tries to make his way through the thickets of Hollywood, the dangers are many, as Paul Brock, the hero of Avery Corman's new novel, "The Big Hype," discovers.
In this excerpt from the book, to be published this week, Brock learns some lessons about the world of TV movie making.
The following morning I had a meeting with the head of Cineflex Productions, Whelan Briggs.
So successful was Briggs in television that he had inspired the very concept of the jogging meeting.
Once I let it slip that I ran around the reservoir in Central Park a couple of times about twice a week, and Briggs had me down as one of his jogging companions.
He ran eight miles each day.
I didn't mind doing some exercise, when I was out there, but my deal with him was that I ran only the last three miles.


Kerry Brady, T. P. McDonnell
Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Brady Jr. of Far Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kerry Chace Brady to Terence Peter McDonnell, a son of Mrs.
T.
Murray McDonnell of Peapack, N.J., and the late Mr.
McDonnell.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Brady, 28 years old, has a practice in Jin Shin Jyutsu, a form of theraputic message, in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a real-estate manager in Far Hills, and her mother is an artist.


Miss Horn, Mr. Wilmerding 3d
Christina Leslie Horn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Stoddard Horn of Water Mill, L.I., was married yesterday to Henry A. Wilmerding 3d., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilmerding Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Diarmuid McGann performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Holy Rosary in Bridgehampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Wilmerding, 29 years old, is the Women's Committee coordinator for the Central Park Conservancy in New York.
She graduated from Parsons School of Design.
Her father is a partner at Benton Corcoran Leib &amp; Company, a stock specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange.


Kim S. Sawyer, Lawrence A. Siff
Mr. and Mrs.
James Sawyer of Woodbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kim Sherrie Sawyer, to Lawrence Allen Siff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Siff of Worcester, Mass.
A March 1993 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Saywer, 26 years old, graduated from Clark University and received a law degree from Boston University.
She is a tax lawyer with the Massachusetts Department of Revenue in Boston.
Her father is the senior partner in the law firm of Sawyer, Davis, Halpern &amp; Rosenstock in Garden City, L.I.
Her mother, Dianne Sawyer, is a psychotherapist in Woodbury, L.I.


What, My Bank?
Wondering whether your bank is in trouble?
The ordinary concerned depositor or investor might look at such tried-and-true indicators as reports on troubled loans, levels of profitability and capital ratios to get a reading.
Some might ask about any possible regulatory interest in the institution, about the extent of insurance for their deposits, about who else banks there with what confidence.


How This Corresponds to That
FEARFUL SYMMETRY
Is God a Geometer?
By Ian Stewart and Martin Golubitsky.
Illustrated. 287 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers. $21.95.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  MARKET ENERGY IN BEIJING


Bush's Daughter Marries With 'a Minimum of Fuss'
There was a time when the marriage of a Presidential daughter dominated the news for days, even weeks.
Not so in the case of Dorothy Bush LeBlond, President Bush's daughter, who was married late this afternoon to Robert Petri Koch in a decidedly private ceremony at the Presidential retreat at Camp David, Md.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about moves toward the division of Czechoslovakia referred incorrectly to the Slovak Republic election victory of the Movement for Democratic Slovakia this month.
The movement won a plurality, not a majority.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
HURRAY FOR THE FOURTH OF JULY.
Written and illustrated by Wendy Watson.
Clarion. $14.95. (All ages) America's birthday is celebrated in a small town in a festive and appealing way.
Traditional verses, rhymes and jokes are set in boxes within full-page illustrations filled with children, dogs and merriment.


Ana Maria Alvarez And Carl M. Nappa
Mr. and Mrs.
Aurelio J. Alvarez of Park Ridge, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ana Maria Cristina Alvarez, to Carl Michael Nappa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo Nappa of Burlington, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Alvarez, 27 years old, graduated from Bradford College and is a customer-service representative for the Plus Corporation, an office-supply manufacturer in Allendale, N.J.
Mr.
Nappa, 24, graduated from the University of Lowell.
He is an assistant recording engineer at PdQ Slam productions, a record maker in Abington, Mass.


Netac's 'Pat on the Back'
To the Editor:
The Environmental Protection Agency contributed $4.5 million to the founders of the National Environmental Technology Applications Corporation (Netac).
"Helping Polluters Clean Up Their Act" (June 14) fails to mention the sum but blithely likens E.P.A.'s support to "a pat on the back." Just how "limited" has Netac been in fulfilling its mission to bring promising technology to market?


Anne Lively, Richard Nixon
Dr. and Mrs.
Karl W. Waterson of Meredith, N.H., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Anne North Lively, to Richard Scott Nixon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Nixon of Greenwich, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lively, 28 years old, is an assistant manager at Cosmair Inc., a New York cosmetics company.
She graduated from West Virginia University.
She is also the daughter of the late William H. Lively Sr.
Her stepfather is a dermatologist in Gilford, N.H.


Lynn Elizabeth Mather, John Alyre Charette
Lynn Elizabeth Mather, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Linwood S. Mather Jr. of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday in Hartford to John Alyre Charette, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Charette of West Hartford.
The Rev.
Peter B. Grandy officiated at the Asylum Hill Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Charette, 28 years old, is the assistant director of development for the Westminster School in Simsbury, Conn.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College.
Mr.
Charette, 27, is a vice president of Business Environs Inc., an office-design concern in Rocky Hill, Conn.
He graduated from Villanova University.


Development With an Environmental Bent
Here among moss-draped live oaks and unspoiled ponds, a new style of island development based on strict environmental standards is being tested, and developers around the nation are watching to see if it succeeds.
"When I came to this island, I knew I had to find a way to spend the rest of my life here," said Jim Chaffin, one of the owners.
"Not having $17 million to spend on my personal island, I knew we would have to do some sort of development."


At Work; Benefits for Domestic Partners
The day in 1987 that Margie Bleichman sat down to fill out forms required of new employees at the Lotus Development Corporation, she was fairly certain benefits were not extended to "spousal equivalents" like her female partner.
"I put my partner's name down to see what would happen," said Ms.
Bleichman, a software engineer at the Cambridge, Mass.-based software company.
"I was politely told that the insurance company wouldn't allow it."
Of course, even as a new employee, Ms.
Bleichman wasn't unaware of the irony that Lotus had a longstanding policy forbidding workplace discrimination, including that against gay men and lesbians.
So a year or so later, when she and other gay employees began to think about asking for domestic partner benefits, they went straight to the heart of the matter.


For Police Union Head, Review Board Proposal Is Latest Indignity
Phil Caruso's 12 years as president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association have been a series of political wars.
The arrest of six Brooklyn officers last month in cocaine trafficking focused attention on corruption and on the Police Department's Internal Affairs Division.
The department and the State Legislature recently struck a compromise to arm more officers with 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistols.
Finally, in an issue especially sensitive to Mr.
Caruso's union, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced his support for an all-civilian review board to investigate complaints of police brutality and misconduct.
On Thursday, Mr.
Caruso discussed these issues with Craig Wolff of The New York Times.
Following are excerpts of their conversation.
Q. What is it about a civilian review board that stirs so much reaction?


Minority Journalists Question Reporting on Riots
Across the country, reporters and editors, broadcasters and community leaders are engaging in critical analysis and sometimes bitter debate over the role of minority journalists and the news media in general in covering the Los Angeles riots.
At times the emotions have erupted into heated exchanges between minority reporters and their white colleagues over everything from what to call the outbreaks of protest and violence -- riots, uprisings, rebellion or disorders -- to whether minority reporters were used as "cannon fodder."


Bonnie Greenberg and Scott Stern
Robert A. and Roberta Greenberg of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Bonnie Jill Greenberg to Scott Michael Stern, the son of Emanuel and Lana Stern of Commack, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Greenberg, 25 years old, is an audience-research analyst for Seltel Inc., a television advertising representative company in New York.
She graduated from Long Island University.
Her father is an independent financial planner in New York.
Her mother is the associate dean of students at Monroe College in the Bronx.


Correction
Because of a typographical error, an article on June 14 about "Sesame Street" misattributed a comment about the program's acceptance of Federal financing.
"It doesn't need to" was a conclusion drawn by the article's author, Laurence Jarvik, not Fran Kaufman, an executive of the Children's Television Workshop, which produces the program.


Show Stoppers and a Resort Ambience
THE new Sfuzzi restaurant in Southampton looks like one of a kind and can hold its own against many of the East End's best.
Yet, there are 13 other Sfuzzis (pronounced FOO-zee).
The owners scrupulously avoid the word "chain" and call their enterprise a "collection of Italian restaurants." Indeed there is nothing in Sfuzzi's look, food or prices that says chain.
The Southampton Sfuzzi is a blend of traditional resort ambience and trendy 1990's styling.
Situated in the former location of Herb McCarthy's Bowden Square, it echoes old Southampton with its wide welcoming porches, striped awnings and umbrella-dotted patios.


The Executive Computer; As Price Wars Heat Up, the Victors Seem to Be Customers
With personal computer companies lowering prices at a cutthroat pace, some models are selling for half what they cost just several months ago.
For any company planning to add new computers or replace older ones, the price wars are good news, at least in the short term.
But the price-cutting may well lead to fewer manufacturers, few choices of computers and fewer places from which to buy them.
The more pessimistic industry watchers say that this is the start of a long-awaited shakeout and that some weaker manufacturers may be driven out of the personal computer business by the end of this year.


President's Wife Can Play a Valuable Role
To the Editor:
"Give Hillary a Break" by Letty Cottin Pogrebin (Op-Ed, June 8) was a fine job.
Nevertheless, one further point should be made.
This is the need by all people in high office for loving criticism.
The officeholder gets all too much unloving criticism, from opponents, the news media or people aggrieved by some official action.
The officeholder also gets too much loving uncriticism, from staff, groupies or people wanting favors.


Allison Dunham, 78, a Professor Who Helped Make Laws Uniform
Allison Dunham, a retired law professor who helped reshape many major state laws across the nation to make the provisions uniform, died on Thursday at his home in Pomona, Calif.
He was 78 years old.
He died apparently of a heart attack, his family said.


Making a Difference; Now Mr. Melamed's Dream Is a Night and Day Reality
With the push of a button, Leo Melamed's dream finally came true last week.
After years of planning and persuasion, Mr.
Melamed, the former head of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, saw the 24-hour electronic trading system he had fought to create spring to life Thursday night with a first trade of 11 futures contracts for Japanese yen.


Technology Hasn't Replaced Court Reporters
To the Editor:
Although "The Rules of Evidence Are Being Rewritten" (June 7) provided an excellent description of practical applications for the new multimedia technology Discovery ZX, several issues require clarification.


On Sunday; Another Cause For Attention At Jeff High
Alicia GeorgE could not believe that at a time like this her mother was making a pot of curried goat.
Her graduation from Thomas Jefferson High School was less than an hour away.
"Please hurry, Mommy," Alicia said.
"The good seats will be gone."
"Don't you worry," said Mrs.
George, shaking on extra curry for the party later.
Alicia knew there was no budging her mother, Cheryl.
If you ask Mrs.
George why her daughter made it this far, she'd say, "To be honest, it's the type of mother I am."


Traffic Alert
Lexington Avenue between 34th and 23d streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. today for the Lexington Avenue Festival.


Casino Opens In Minnesota
The Mille Lacs Band of the Ojibwe Indians in Minnesota has opened its second gaming facility, the Grand Casino Hinckley.
The casino, which has more than 1,500 video slot machines (slots, keno, blackjack and poker) as well as blackjack tables, is in Hinckley, about 70 miles north of Minneapolis-St.
Paul and about 90 miles southwest of Duluth.
The casino has two areas for gamblers' children: a video arcade for teen-agers and a supervised day-care activity center for those aged 6 weeks to 12 years, with an indoor playground, a Legoland play area and a space for watching movies.


Making the Most of a Little Bacon Can Capture the Flavor
BACON is a frequent treat.
It is treasured for its rich, smoky flavor.
But on a sensible diet, its high fat content, about 80 percent, and sodium, an average 150 milligrams in a slice, make it something to be consumed sparingly.
Fortunately, a little goes a long way in adding flavor, and sometimes texture, to a variety of dishes.
A strip or two of bacon, chopped and sauteed with the onions early in the preparation is enough to add hauntingly smoky flavor to a seafood or fish chowder.
It performs the same service in some pasta dishes.
It is even possible to capitalize on a small amount of bacon by using a little, crumbled as a topping, so that it seasons the first bite of a salad or some other dish.


Shanley Hinge, Gary Franklin
Shanley Maryellen Hinge, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Hinge of Barneveld, N.Y., was married on June 13 in Webb, N.Y., to Gary Lawrence Franklin, the son of Dr.
Girard Franklin of New York and the late Dr.
Gloria Friedman Franklin.
Donald E. Joslin, a Roman Catholic deacon, performed the ceremony at the Big Moose Community Chapel.
Ms.
Hinge, who is 28 years old and is keeping her name, is a telecommunications consultant at Network Planning Inc. in San Bruno, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father owns a hardware store in Barneveld.


Marianna Gatje, Pierre Perrier
Marianna Sherwood Gatje, a daughter of Barbara W. Gatje and Robert F. Gatje, both of New York, was married yesterday to Pierre Samuel Perrier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean-Claude Perrier of Nimes, France.
The Rev.
Dr.
Daniel M. Young, an American Baptist minister, officiated at the Church in Point O'Woods, L.I.
Mrs.
Perrier, 26 years old, is a graphic artist.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is a partner in the architectural firm of Richard Meier &amp; Partners in New York.
Her mother is a travel agent at the Frederics-Helton Travel Service in New York.


Separating the False From the True
THE Philatelic Foundation has examined hundreds of thousands of "patients," but as in any such examinations, only a few were sick: forgeries, fakes and counterfeits of stamps and other postal material.
The field of "expertizing," as it is called, seems particularly murky, even intimidating, to the casual hobbyist.
For one thing, usually only the most valuable items are expertized, or examined in great detail to decide if they are as advertised.


F.B.I. FINDS A BODY AND BELIEVES IT IS KIDNAPPED VICTIM'S
The F.B.I. said last night that it had recovered a body it believed was that of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive who vanished from his Morris County, N.J., home two months ago.
In a two-paragraph statement released about 9:30 P.M., the agency said the body was discovered in the Pine Barrens, a vast preserve of desolate and sandy forest in southern New Jersey.
The statement did not say precisely where the body had been found, but a law-enforcement officer confirmed that it was in or near Bass River State Forest, about 80 miles from Morris County, near Exit 58 on the Garden State Parkway.


THE ISLAMIC WAVE
By emphasizing the sensational and exotic aspects of Islam, Judith Miller's article "The Islamic Wave" (May 31) contributes to the already overwhelmingly negative body of work about one of the world's greatest and most diverse religious communities.
As examples, the headline, opening passages and photographs all emphasize the prevalent stereotype of Muslims as uneducated, militant and enigmatic.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
125.70
127.10
137.45
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5353
1.5750
1.8105
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1938
1.1970
1.1417
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8945
1.8585
1.6220
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$342.50
$340.70
$368.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
A BRILLIANT MADNESS Living With Manic-Depressive Illness.
By Patty Duke and Gloria Hochman.
Bantam, $22.50.


SINKING FAST
Metal fatigue takes place in ships, just as it does in airplanes.
Every ship hull is constantly flexed by waves and can withstand a limited amount of stress.
That is why, in ship failures, "the only common factor experts agree on is age." EUGENE H. HARLOW
Houston


Luminaries At the Met
The Candace Awards, at the Metropolitan Museum, honoring black women.


Arrest Order Issued for Giants' McGhee
A Houston judge issued an arrest order for New York Giants linebacker KANAVIS McGHEE, who left a Harris County courtroom in Texas before a child-support hearing began.
Judge JOHN MONTGOMERY signed the order Friday for McGhee, who was scheduled to appear regarding allegations he owed back child support and related expenses, court records show.


Betty Parsons's 2 Lives: She Was Artist, Too
BETTY PARSONS, born in 1900, grew up amid luxury, with homes in New York, Newport and Palm Beach.
When she was a child, a fleet of cars emblazoned with the family crest whisked her to Miss Chapin's School and then finishing school.
As a newlywed, she traveled through Europe on a nine-month honeymoon in a chauffeur-driven Rolls-Royce.
But it was not until she lost her fortune that Betty Parsons found her fate, to be, as Ellsworth Kelly said, "an extraordinary woman in the history of modern art."


The Top 10 Surprises So Far...
Rickey Henderson politicking for a trade or a better contract, that's not surprising.
Dennis Eckersley being a perfect 24-for-24 in save situations, that's not surprising.
The Cleveland Indians' holding up the rest of the major leagues, that's not surprising.
But that does not mean that the 1992 baseball season hasn't already had its share of amazing stories, some of significant proportions, some merely pleasant, others about as welcome to teams and players as an abscessed tooth on a holiday weekend.
Here's an attempt at choosing the top 10 surprises in baseball as the 1992 season nears its midway point:
1.
Comeback Players of the Decade?
Let's face it, the prognosticators who predicted greatness for Brady Anderson and Gary Sheffield moved on to other causes long ago.
But clearly, they gave too soon, because both are enjoying career years so far, putting up numbers worthy of early consideration for post-season awards.
Anderson, once considered a future savior of the Red Sox only to wind up on Baltimore's bench, has been completely resurrected by the Orioles as a standout left fielder.
As a full-timer, he is batting .278, has scored 43 runs, stolen 24 bases and driven in 46 runs.
Sheffield, just as successful a reclamation project, has risen from the dredges in Milwaukee to new heights in San Diego, batting .320 for the Padres.
Sheffield has hit 15 home runs and 14 doubles and driven in 53 runs.
2.
The Little Infielder Who Could Unlike Anderson and Sheffield, Andy Stankiewicz, the Yankees shortstop, wasn't looking for a second chance, just a chance.
And he wasn't going to get that until Mike Gallego went down with an injury just as the season was to open.
Yankee Manager Buck Showalter, a Stankiewicz believer since he managed the infielder in the minors, brought the long shot to the major leagues and immediate success, not to mention an Cinderella story, followed (.321, 13 doubles, 27 runs scored).
3.
A Little Change Is a Good Thing What the Atlanta Falcons' secondary may lose is turning out to be baseball's most pleasant gain.
Deion Sanders, a second-team All-Pro in football, is proving to be an all-star for the Braves, shedding the label of Punch-and-Judy hitter/designated runner by blossoming into a leadoff threat with pop (.348 with 11 triples, six home runs, 18 stolen bases).
Meanwhile, another Falcon defensive back, Brian Jordan, has enjoyed enough success with the Cardinals (5 home runs, 22 r.b.i., 6 stolen bases) to shelve the football cleats and take on baseball as a full-time career.
4.
Seattle's Shooting Stars It should be no surprise that the Seattle Mariners have launched the career of yet another young pitching phenom in one Dave Fleming (10-3, 3.35 earned run average).
The 22-year-old's victory total, compiled in less than a half a season is just 9 shy of his two-year minor-league total.
The real surprise is that the Mariners have still not figured a way to avoid jettisoning promising arms.
Last winter's sweep is contributing today to pleasant surprises blossoming in Minnesota (Bill Krueger, 7-2, 2.83 earned run average), and San Francisco (Billy Swift, 6-0, 2.17 e.r.a.; Mike Jackson, 3- 2, 2.50 e.r.a.).
5.
La-La Lost in Los Angeles It is not a surprise that most every Dodger on the field has trouble catching the ball.
But who would have thought that the Dodgers would be equally adept at being inept offensively?
Even the team's usually optimistic manager, Tommy Lasorda, must look in alarm at the fact that there's no clutch in the Little Blue Bicycle (6-20 in one-run games).
Another obvious worry: the league's leaders in runs batted in have individual totals greater than the combined total of his oft-injured big-contract players, Darryl Strawberry (21 r.b.i.) and Eric Davis (19).
6.
The Boston Massacre Talk about the truly offensive.
The Red Sox rank 14th and last in the American League in batting average, runs scored, hits, total bases, home runs, runs batted in and slugging percentage.
And they play in Fenway Park, one of the more notorious band boxes in the American League.
Well, at least the names Wade Boggs, Mike Greenwell, Jack Clark, Ellis Burks and Tom Brunansky still look good on paper.
But come on, guys, the rabbits who play in St.
Louis's spacious Busch Memorial have more home runs.
7.
The Express Derails Nolan Ryan, who has pitched in the major leagues since 1968, never went through an April without a victory -- until this season.
Now he has gone through May and most of June without a victory.
July now looms for the Ranger right-hander, bringing questions as to whether the bad luck can all be chalked up to bad weather and bad timing on the part of the Rangers' batters.
8.
Flying Dutchman I Bert Blyleven, who did not pitch professionally in 1991 because of shoulder surgery, has defied the odds by returning to the majors and winning with apparent ease for the Angels.
The Dutch-born Blyleven, who turned 41 on April 6, is 3-1 with a 2.63 e.r.a. and has obviously refueled the notion that he may yet have a shot at joining the illustrious 300 victory-3,000 strikeout club (the right-hander has 282 victories and 3,656 strikeouts).
9.
Flying Dutchman II Darren (Dutch) Daulton, the dean of the Phillies, has never driven in more than 57 runs in a season or hit more than a dozen home runs.
Now he stands on the threshold of July with 53 r.b.i. and 12 home runs, at last rewarding the Phillies for hanging in for the eighth year while waiting for Daulton to come of age at the plate.
10.
Biggest Bust-Up Since Martin and Lewis Kevin Mitchell and Matt Williams, ex-teammates and kindred spirits, seem to be lost now that they're not linked in the Giants' lineup.
Mitchell, flailing and failing in Seattle, has only 4 home runs and 29 r.b.i., killing the theory that the Mariners finally found a bat to protect young Ken Griffey.
Williams, left behind in San Francisco, has openly mourned the loss of Mitchell, whose swing and style he mimicked.
Williams's average is hovering around .200, and he has hit only 11 home runs and driven in just 35 runs.
The strikeouts -- 50 in 239 at-bats -- remain a mystery.


Portrait of 2 Accused of Kidnapping: Ardent, Hapless Pursuit of Affluence
During the giddy late 1980's, Arthur and Irene Seale wholeheartedly adopted the concept of having it all.
Blond, fit and perennially tan, the parents of two cashed in their four-bedroom colonial in Morris County, N.J., to join the sail-and-ski set in Hilton Head, S.C. and Vail, Colo.
But like the economy, the Seales' high life tumbled.
About three-quarters of a million dollars in debt, they moved back to New Jersey with no jobs, no prospects and no alternative but to stay with Mr.
Seale's retired parents in a farmhouse in rural Hunterdon County.


Yanks Take Hard Route to Victory
In this season of unending turmoil for the Yankees, they have managed to hover close to baseball's surface: the .500 mark.
But they did things the hard way yesterday.
Imagine Yankee Stadium packed with more than 42,000 fans, lured in part by the promise of free sunglasses, sitting it out on a long afternoon to the bottom of the ninth, two out, and the White Sox's best reliever, Bobby Thigpen, pitching.


A Plan to Conserve New York's Wilderness
Conserving Open Space in New York State, a plan released last week, is an effort by state officials to define which unprotected parcels should be preserved for future generations.
But the state has no money to buy land, and lawmakers are deadlocked over how to finance a trust fund that would do so.
All told, the plan includes 75 separate sites, including these: Robins Island
A 460-acre island in the Great Peconic Bay on Long Island, one of the last undeveloped islands along the East Coast.
Both the state and Suffolk County have been unable to work out a deal with the private owner aimed at turning the island into a nature sanctuary and forest preserve.
Long Island Pine Barrens
The forest that once covered great parts of Long Island has dwindled to a several thousand acres.
Situated atop the state's aquifer, the pine barrens are considered critical for protecting the region's water supply.
While some parts are publicly owned, others have been proposed for private development.
State officials want to acquire land or have private owners agree to conservation easements.
Manhattan Circumferential Trail
Perhaps the most ambitious project on the list, this would entail constructing a hiking and bicycle trail that would stretch around the island.
Much of the land along the Hudson, Harlem and East Rivers is already publicly owned, so the chief expense would be the construction, other money would be used to acquire access rights from private owners.
Bronx River Trailway
The plan is to create a greenway trail all the way along the Bronx River, from where it empties into the East River, up to East 180th Street in the Bronx.
It would connect to an existing 17-mile trail leading to the Kensico Reservoir in Westchester County.
Neversink Gorge
This stretch of forest in the southern Catskills is home to one of the finest trout streams in North America, the Neversink River.
The state has been negotiating for years to expand public ownership and access.
Catskills Watershed
With many experts arguing that the best way to safeguard New York City's water supply is to protect the mountainous areas where most of it comes from, the state wants to acquire land or conservation easements in the Catskills watershed.
Sterling Forest
This 18,000-acre forest along the New York-New Jersey border is by far the largest stretch of woodlands left in the New York metropolitan region.
A subdivision plan has already been proposed for parts of the property, but the owner has also expressed a willingness to negotiate a sale to the state.
Lake Ontario Shoreline
A variety of parcels of land along the lake are available.
The state seeks to turn these into public beaches, parks and biological preserves.
Follensby Pond
The site of the famous 19th century Adirondack "Philosophers' Camp" of Ralph Waldo Emerson and others, this is the largest privately owned, undeveloped lake in the Adirondack Park.
The state has a contract to buy 14,500-acre property that includes the lake and several miles of the Racquette River.
But without any money, New York risks losing the property when its option expires next year.
Northern Lake George Shore
When a two-mile stretch of undeveloped shoreline on the east side of Lake George went up for sale two years ago, the state could not put up any money.
A private land trust then stepped in to acquire the property, in the hopes of selling it back to the state later.
But now the trust has been stuck with the land and risks having to put it up for sale to developers.
Lake Erie Waterfront
The centerpiece of this project is a plan to expand parks, bikeways and other public areas along the waterfront in Buffalo and adjacent towns.


Latest U.S. Approach
Moving to a new stage in its policy on Yugoslavia, the Bush Administration appears to be planning a limited military role in the crisis.
At the Pentagon today, a spokesman said that the United States was waiting for word from the United Nations to begin airlifting relief supplies to the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina once the airport in Sarajevo is secured.


CAMPAIGN 1992: Interview; Clinton Seeking Forceful Image As a Leader in Foreign Affairs
In a wide-ranging discussion of the policies he would pursue if elected President, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas supported strong action to help the besieged citizens of Sarajevo, criticized White House inaction on aid to the former Soviet republics and said Japan should be treated as "our most important bilateral relationship now."
Throughout a 90-minute interview at the Governor's Mansion here, Mr.
Clinton sought to project himself as a more forceful leader than President Bush in foreign affairs, which is normally regarded as Mr.
Bush's strong suit.


Flexible Hours: A Tool to Keep Employees
FOR four days a week -- Mondays through Thursdays -- Caron Palder arrives at her office at Nynex corporate headquarters in White Plains shortly before 7:15 A.M.
She takes a half hour for lunch and leaves for home in Stamford at 4:30 P.M.
On Thursdays, she leaves at noon and works at home for the rest of the day.
On Fridays, she is off and stays at home.
Ms.
Palder, a manager in the Nynex corporate human resources department, said she chose a compressed 35-hour workweek in order to spend more time with her 2 1/2-year-old son, William.


Players in Epson Seem Countless
Counting the players in a bridge tournament can be a difficult exercise, akin to totaling the number of people passing through Times Square in a day.
This problem became acute for the organizers of the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, played eight days ago.
They announced that they broke into six figures with a total of 102,000 players, up 12,000 from last year, but it is hard to know how they can tell.
This year, for the first time, there were two sessions, at different times, to allow for simultaneous play around the world.
But many players undoubtedly played twice, particularly in North America, where the times were convenient: Friday evening and Saturday afternoon.


A Jolt of Cool
LIKE THE BELL OF AN ICE-CREAM truck crashing through the still air of a summer afternoon, sorbet or granite can give you a start.
Its temperature, simultaneously lip-numbing and a relief to the soul, mimics the double-edged thrill of a Popsicle.
And then the freeze fades to flavor, which is another jolt.
Made well, fruit ices are hyperbole, more intensely fruit than the fruit they're wrought from.
They take your breath away.
Considering the shocking nature of the confection, Harold McGee, author of "The Curious Cook," suggests that sorbet and granite "blend the unadorned flavor of intense life with a startling, lifeless cold." "The combination refreshes," he says.
"It brings us back to first things, back to earth." Life at its ripest, death at its most cold can do that to a person.
At the very least, it's enough to rouse you from the hammock of your own inertia.


Far From A Weather Report
To the Editor:
I cannot believe that it took very much reading on the part of the director Richard Eyre to discover that Richard III's speech "Now is the winter of our discontent" was not a "hunchback's bitter complaint against nature"  [ "The Power Behind Richard's Throne," June 7 ] .
The most obtuse schoolboy who read further -- about this "sun of York" and "this weak piping time of peace" -- would have concluded that the weather had nothing to do with Richard's raving.
To think that this was one of two "key decisions" by the director makes it all sound a little simplistic.


Mary P. Stone, Ross Aiello 3d
Mary Patricia Stone, a daughter of Robert L. Stone of Williamstown, Mass., and the late Mary L. Stone, was married yesterday to Ross Robert Aiello 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aiello Jr. of Pawcatuck, Conn.
The Rev.
Merle E. Spring, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the United Church of Stonington in Stonington, Conn.
Mrs.
Aiello, 34 years old, is a freelance photographer in Stonington.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman and chief executive of the Hertz Corporation in New York.
She is also a stepdaughter of Sheila M. Stone of Williamstown.


Beckoned by the Greens, Not the Gang
In the dense, sweet heat of the afternoon, gang members loaf along the pale-blue brick walls of the Ramona Gardens housing project.
This is Big Hazard turf.
Tattoos twitch on jail-built biceps.
The gang members snicker and point as Jose Navarro staggers past them.
The chunky 15-year-old is bent under a bag filled with golf clubs.
"They don't bother me," Jose says.
"My uncles are Hazard. They won't let nobody jump me into the gang. My uncles want me to get what they didn't get."


Bronx River Parkway Bike Sundays Due for 2-Month Hiatus
TODAY is the last Bicycle Sunday on the Bronx River Parkway until Sept. 13 -- unless a sponsor for July and August can be found -- and avid bicyclists are planning their new weekend routes.
Inexperienced riders might want to stretch their legs on local streets or take time out to learn some rules of the road.
Two alternate routes suggested by the County Parks Department are the Bronx River Pathway and the North County Trailway.
The pathway runs in three detached sections from Mount Vernon to Valhalla, and the trailway has four detached sections between Greenburgh and Millwood.


A True (Seven-Country) Tour and a True Test
Home is where the heart is, but not for Dirk De Wolf, not at Tour de France time.
"The Tour de France is all the best riders in the world," said De Wolf, who is pleased to have been enrolled in that club by virtue of his victory in the prestigious Liege-Bastogne-Liege race this spring.
"No rider likes to have to stay at home during the Tour."


Allan J. Gussack, 49, Mayor of L.I. Village
Allan J. Gussack, the Mayor of Great Neck Plaza, L.I. for the last 10 years, died yesterday at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center.
He was 49 years old and died after a lengthy illness, his family said.
Mr.
Gussack was instrumental in getting state legislation passed that enables towns and villages to create business improvement districts, and his village was the first in the state to exercise that right.
In his five terms as Mayor, he helped make improvements in the village's downtown area.


On Guard, Alone, Between Police and Corruption
ON Friday night, David Durk was the man who didn't come to dinner.
One reason he wasn't there was that he was not invited until only the night before, although protocol has rarely stopped him from showing up where he isn't wanted.
Another reason is that Mr.
Durk is largely a loner.
His loyalty has always been to his ideals rather than to any organization that, inevitably, fails to achieve them.


Japan's Top Party Agrees To Give Economy a Push
Japan's ruling party agreed over the weekend on a broad plan to stimulate the nation's sagging economy through increased Government spending and other measures worth more than $45 billion for the current fiscal year.
The plan, agreed to on Saturday, represents in part a response to calls from the United States and other nations that Japan accelerate its economic growth to help the world recover from the recession.


Did We Appease Iraq?
The story of the Bush Administration's "appeasement" of Iraq will not die in this election year.
But claims that U.S. policy emboldened Iraq to invade Kuwait ignore the regional circumstances preceding the gulf crisis.
U.S. policy did not mislead Iraq.
Primarily, Saddam Hussein miscalculated not American but Arab reaction.
He understood for months that the U.S., free of Soviet constraints, would counter his aggression.
He had said, "There is no place in our midst for those who fail to take note of recent developments that have added to U.S. strength, thus prompting it to the possible commission of follies against the interests and national security of the Arabs."


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
No appearances scheduled.  Gov. Bill Clinton
TOMORROW: 7-8 A.M., NBC, "Today."  (Channel 4 in New York.)  Ross Perot
TODAY: 10-11 P.M., ABC, interview.  11:30 P.M.-midnight, ABC, call-in session. (Channel 7 in New York.)


Compaq Plans Printer Sales
The Compaq Computer Corporation plans to enter the printer market this year.
Compaq will announce today that it intends to begin competing later this year at the high end of the market, with printers intended to be shared by multiple users on personal-computer networks, company officials say.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Umpires Pay a Price As Never Before
THEY don't hit home runs, throw shutouts, save games, win pennants.
But there is something about seeing their names on a lineup card, on a box score that brings knowledgeable players, managers and fans a certain degree of comfort.
Those names are Steve Palermo and Bruce Froemming, veteran umpires, respectively, in the American and National Leagues, two who epitomize their sport within a sport.


McDonnell Douglas in $1 Billion Chinese Deal
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it had won a fierce competition with the Boeing Company to supply at least 40 new jetliners to China in a deal worth more than $1 billion.
McDonnell Douglas said the announcement of the deal was to be made by the Chinese Government in Beijing early on Monday.
The deal calls for the midrange twin-engine planes to be assembled in China, with many of the components manufactured in the United States and Canada by McDonnell Douglas and its subcontractors.


INSIDE
Sewage Sludge, Anyone?
With a final 400-ton bargeload, New York City will end ocean-dumping of processed sewage, complying with a Federal deadline.
But the costly problems of how and where to get rid of the sludge remain.
Page B1.
Liability Costs Escalate
New York is spending more money each year to settle or satisfy lawsuits for medical malpractice, auto accidents, falls and the like.
Page B1.
Minimum Wage Debate
Studies suggest that higher minimum wages may not prompt employers to cut jobs, contrary to a widely accepted orthodoxy of economics.
Page D1.


Tax Fight in Florida May Halt Services
Having already vetoed two "no new taxes" budgets, Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida has told the Legislature that he will begin shutting down the government at 12:01 A.M. on Wednesday unless lawmakers agree to increase taxes.
The state's budget crisis has come to a head after years of rapid population growth without a corresponding change in Florida's tax structure.


Arens Faults Prime Minister's 'Greater Israel' Concept
Defense Minister Moshe Arens criticized some of his Government's peace and security policies today in a published interview in which he also said Israel had ignored Palestinians in the occupied territories for too long.
Mr.
Arens, who plans to retire from politics in the wake of his Likud Party's defeat in the national election last week, singled out the concept of a "Greater Israel" in his criticism.
That idea, a bedrock of Likud policy, has been championed by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir in his commitment to hold onto all the territories that have been under Israeli control since the 1967 Middle East War.


CHRONICLE
A promotional catalogue calls the book "fiercely candid" and says it will be a " 'tell it like it is' look at fellow educators and officials."
The book is the memoirs of JOSEPH A. FERNANDEZ, the New York City Schools Chancellor, a project about which he has been uncharacteristically quiet.
He recently delivered the 430-page manuscript to his publisher, Little, Brown &amp; Company.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-A7  PRESSURE TO SAVE SARAJEVO  President Bush consulted allies about forming an international military coalition to break the blockade of the Bosnian capital and deliver food supplies, officials said.
A1  MITTERRAND VISITS BESIEGED  Braving a situation that United Nations commanders had warned was dangerous, France's President flew into Sarajevo with "a message of hope" for its residents.
A1  The French leader's trip stirs dismay among European allies.
A6  SERBS CALL ON LEADER TO RESIGN  In what many described as the biggest demonstration in the Serbian capital since the end of World War II, tens of thousands gathered near Government buildings and called on President Milosevic to resign.
A6  RUEFUL REMARKS ON ISRAELI POLICY  Israel's outgoing Defense Minister criticized some of his Government's peace and security policies in a published interview, including the concept of a "Greater Israel." A3  ITALY FORMS SHAKY CABINET  After nearly three months of paralysis, Italian leaders formed a new and uncertain coalition Government to confront the problems of debt, organized crime and disillusionment.
A3  IRELAND JOINS ULSTER TALKS  The Irish Government says it will send high-ranking officials to meetings with prominent Protestant leaders from Northern Ireland.
A3  MANILA'S ISOLATED VICTOR  When Fidel Ramos takes office on Tuesday, he will not only be the first freely elected President in the Philippines in a generation, but the first who is forced to survive without the United States to back him up.
A7  MOURNFUL WHISTLE IN PATAGONIA  Twelve years after the publication of "The Old Patagonian Express," a steam engine that crosses 250 desolate miles of southern Argentina may face extinction.
Its demise would be another blow to the region's economy and heritage.
A4  Afghanistan installs a new caretaker President -- and peacefully.
A5  National A8-13, B6, B10  SEVERE QUAKES HIT CALIFORNIA  The most powerful earthquake to hit California in 40 years rumbled through the high desert east of Los Angeles and was followed hours later by a separate strong quake 19 miles away.
The quakes caused the death of one boy, set off fires, emptied store shelves and opened huge fissures in mountain roads.
A1  The quakes may have hastened "the Big One," experts said.
B10  Tornadoes destroyed 200 homes in a Texas Panhandle town.
A8  PEROT AS IRRESISTIBLE FORCE  Ross Perot shook up education in Texas eight years ago using the style and methods he says he would apply as President.
He proved he could learn quickly, sell bold policies to the public and ram them through a reluctant Legislature.
He also showed a talent for alienating many people along the way.
A1  BUSH AND THE ECONOMY  President Bush has said, "I happen to think the economy is better than most of the people in America think." But Americans appear to hold him responsible for the recession and the slowness of recovery, and if Mr.
Bush does not win re-election, his handling of the economy will probably have been the main cause of his undoing.
A1  The Democratic convention will get scant network coverage.
A11  CONGRESS HITS ITS STRIDE  After a three-month spell devoid of little but posturing, Congress appears to be passing substantial legislation.
Washington Talk.
A8  WOMEN IN COMBAT AND CAPTIVITY  Maj.
Rhonda Cornum's ordeal as a prisoner of war in Iraq, it is now being revealed, included sexual assault at the hands of her captors.
Her treatment has become an issue in the debate over whether women in the military should be allowed into combat.
A1  SENATORS EASE UP ON NAVY  Senior Senators said they might soon lift the freeze on Navy and Marine Corps promotions they imposed over the sex-assault scandal at an aviators' convention last year.
B6  BABOON LIVER PUT IN HUMAN  Surgeons from the University of Pittsburgh took a liver from a baboon and implanted it in a human patient in a renewed effort to help relieve the dire shortage of human donor organs.
A1  RAISE TAXES, OR ELSE, HE SAYS  Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida told the Legislature he would begin shutting down the government at 12:01 A.M.
Wednesday unless lawmakers agreed to increase taxes.
A8  Of charades and liberation at a conference of gay journalists.
B6  Metropolitan Digest, B1 Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  The Guggenheim reopens.
C11  Guggenheim fans line up.
C11  Film: "Last Date -- Eric Dolphy," jazz documentary.
C16  Music: Performances by Ray Charles and B. B. King.
C11  Norfolk Chamber Music.
C13  Rosanne Cash and Lucinda Williams.
C13  Futures II.
C14 Dave McKenna.
C16 Dance: Dayton Contemporary Dance Company.
C11  Dance in Review C12  Word and Image: "Gerald's Game." C13  Sports C1-8  Baseball: Cards edge Mets.
C5  Yanks lose to White Sox.
C7  Oriole protest denied, but Leary must explain.
C7  Ryan finally wins.
C7  Column: Smith on umpires C5  Cycling: Tougher Tour de France course.
C4  Features: Sidelines C2  Question Box C4  Golf: Frost is easy winner.
C7  Olympics: Romp for U.S. in basketball debut.
C1  Is triplecast a blunder?
C1  Some old heroes fade away.
C1  Another stunning failure for Carl Lewis.
C3  Tennis: Smooth first week at Wimbledon.
C4  Obituaries B7  Jon Jakob Smulewicz, radiology chief at New York hospitals.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials A14  Prisoners of war.
Policing the police.
Challenging an L.A. myth.
Mary Cantwell: A murder.
Letters A14  William Safire: "Deep Ross." A15  Garry Trudeau: Learning curves.
A15  Louis Menand: Bush's corporate raid.
A15  Shibley Telhami: Did we appease Iraq?
A15


Bridge
The modern one no-trump response, forcing for one round, is more heavily loaded than the old-fashioned non-forcing variety.
This is workable provided players resist the temptation to use the bid when a clearer alternative is available.
On the diagramed deal North should certainly have responded two diamonds to one spade.
As it was, he was in difficulty when his partner followed with three clubs, showing a big hand.
North took a wild stab at six spades, which would have been a reasonable contract if South's spade suit had been strong.
As it was South's chances were poor.
Obviously six diamonds would have been easy, making an overtrick, and six no-trump would have been a desirable spot in a match-point game.


Erika Siegel, David Pomper
Erika Janet Siegel, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel R. Siegel of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to David Eric Pomper, a son of Drs.
Gerald and Marlene Pomper of Highland Park, N.J.
Rabbi Barry Greene officiated at the Reeves-Reed Arboretum in Summit, N.J.
Ms.
Siegel, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Swarthmore College, and she is studying for a master's degree in psychology at the Catholic University of America.
Her father is a senior research associate at the Exxon Research and Engineering Company in Linden, N.J.
Her mother, known professionally as Dr.
Anne M. Shuttleworth, is a psychiatrist in Maplewood, N.J.


Bridge
The modern one no-trump response, forcing for one round, is more heavily loaded than the old-fashioned non-forcing variety.
This is workable provided players resist the temptation to use the bid when a clearer alternative is available.
On the diagramed deal North should certainly have responded two diamonds to one spade.
As it was, he was in difficulty when his partner followed with three clubs, showing a big hand.
North took a wild stab at six spades, which would have been a reasonable contract if South's spade suit had been strong.
As it was South's chances were poor.
Obviously six diamonds would have been easy, making an overtrick, and six no-trump would have been a desirable spot in a match-point game.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Recalled Bobby Rose, infielder, from rehabilitation assignment and optioned him to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Placed Rob Deer, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 24.
Activated Mark Carreon, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Activated John Doherty, pitcher, from the disabled list.
Optioned Shawn Hare, outfielder, to Toledo of the International League.


Prisoners of War -- and Deception
The Pentagon knew better.
Hanoi knew better.
Yet in April 1973, the Nixon Administration insisted it had no indication "that there are any Americans alive in Indochina." Those words concealed a startling fact: The Administration did have the names of 244 Americans who had been captured alive but who failed to return with the other prisoners of war Hanoi released that year.
That news and more was disclosed last week by the Senate Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs.
Led by two Vietnam veterans, Democrat John Kerry of Massachusetts and Republican Robert Smith of New Hampshire, the committee is giving Americans the chance to judge how successive Administrations handled the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue.


Yael Wohlberg, Ephraim Sobol
Yael Nechama Wohlberg, the daughter of Rabbi Jeremiah Wohlberg and Miriam Wohlberg of Merrick, L.I., was married last evening to Ephraim Sobol, a son of Solomon and Ruth Sobol of West Hartford, Conn.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Wohlberg Sobol, 22 years old, graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is the rabbi at Congregation Ohav Sholom in Merrick and is the president of the New York Board of Rabbis.
Her mother is an interior designer.


Republican To Support Florio Veto
A Republican Senator said today that he would not support his party's effort to override Gov.
Jim Florio's veto of the Legislature's $14.6 billion budget, instead urging a compromise that the Governor had suggested.
The decision by Senator Leonard T. Connors Jr., who voted against the Republican budget when it was passed June 18, appears to leave the Republicans in the Senate one vote short of the two-thirds majority needed to override the veto.


Challenging a Myth in Los Angeles
The young people of South-Central Los Angeles who try to make life work are almost invisible.
News about their riot-torn community leaves the impression that black and Hispanic teen-agers are mostly gang members and welfare spongers.
To learn how misleading that is, ask the Walt Disney Company.
Disneyland's employment recruiters visited South-Central and found themselves swamped by dynamic young applicants, many of whom will enter college this fall.
The company wished it could have hired more than 200 of them.


Colleen Christian, C. M. Schmidt Jr.
Dr.
Colleen June Christian and Dr.
Courtland Mercer Schmidt Jr., both ophthalmologists at the Wills Eye Hospital in Philadelphia, were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
Scott O'Brien performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Wharton-Sinkler Estate of the University of Pennsylvania.
Dr.
Christian, 33 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles and received her medical degree from Case Western Reserve University.
She is a daughter of Otto B. Christian of Alta Loma, Calif., and Suzanne H. Christian of Claremont, Calif.
Her father, who is retired, was a loan officer at the Bank of California in Los Angeles.
Her mother is a financial planner in Upland, Calif., for Waddell &amp; Reed Inc., a financial-services company.


CYCLING: Biking in the U.S.A. -- Day 20; Fuel for the Road
Call us animals.
Call us gourmands.
Just don't call us late for dinner.
After cycling 70 to 100 miles day after day, the 33 riders on the Coast-To-Coast Bicycle Classic are not merely hungry, they are ravenous.
Tour director Tim Kneeland urges riders to fuel their bodies with 6,000 to 8,000 calories a day.
So each morning's buffet breakfast usually includes cereals, eggs, potatoes, sweet rolls, fruit and more.
By now, climbing up and down the tan bluffs and green farmland of North Dakota, we know enough to save the cinnamon buns and peanut butter and jelly sandwiches offered at the breakfast spread for a mid-morning meal.
Some riders actually stop after the first 20 or 30 miles at a cafe to have a sit-down second breakfast.


Deborah Robin Slavkin And Eric Jeffrey Sekler
Deborah Robin Slavkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace Slavkin of Spring Valley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Eric Jeffrey Sekler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Sekler of Farmingdale, L.I.
Rabbi Alfred J. Kolatch officiated at the Sands Restaurant in Lido Beach, L.I.


Essay; 'Deep Ross'
Much more is to be learned about the secret political-media power connections of Ross Perot.
1.
The Rockefeller Connection
.
On Feb. 2, 1973, New York State's welfare department chose three data-processing companies to bid on a contract; because Ross Perot's company had a poor record in other states, it was not selected to be a bidder.


Lining Up to Inspect an Old Friend
At 9:15 A.M. yesterday, 45 minutes before the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum opened its newly expanded and refurbished Frank Lloyd Wright building to the public, only about a dozen people lolled around the entrance on Fifth Avenue, near 89th Street.
"When the line forms I'm No. 1!," shrieked Karen Wehman, a city planner from Chicago, who had flown to New York especially for the occasion and had been waiting since 6:15 A.M.
"I grew up around Frank Lloyd Wright buildings, and this is an esthetic inspection. I got here early because I figured this would be a major New York happening."


Dance in Review
Kirov Ballet  Metropolitan Opera House
Altynai Asylmuratova and Konstantin Zaklinsky stepped into the Kirov Ballet's "Romeo and Juliet" on Saturday afternoon, valiantly and often effectively struggling with the roles for which they were essentially miscast.


Where Wild Blue Yonder Is Untamed
TO imagine what this town's 47-year-old airport looks like, cast aside visions of sleek glass terminals, snarled parking lots and ominous jumbo jets.
This is a country airport.
The 150 small planes based here are arrayed in long rows on an open grass field near a meadow where horses graze.
The "lounge" where recreational pilots spend hours swapping war stories, sipping coffee or just gossiping has no walls, just a soda machine, a ceiling bulging with exposed insulation and three fraying couches that spent their better years in private homes.


CrownAmerica reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Humor, Suave Phrasing and 9 Saxophonists
Bobby Watson and Vincent Herring, two alto saxophonists, lighted a fire under "Saxophone Encounters," a summit meeting of five tenor and four alto saxophonists at the Equitable Auditorium on Wednesday night as part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
At a show that was threatening to become a round robin of workaday saxophone solos, they raised the stakes with impassioned tone and phrasing full of humor and suspense.
The concert, organized by Ira Gitler, mixed jam sessions and individual features.
Its first half, with Ricky Ford, Lew Tabackin, Joshua Redman, Scott Hamilton and Big Nick Nicholas, all on tenor saxophone, was largely a series of polite exchanges, each player running through his best licks.
They were backed by the punctiliously understated rhythm section of James Williams on piano, Christian McBride on bass and Tony Reedus on drums.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Miscellany
*
Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates Inc., an investment banking firm that specializes in the communications industry, is predicting a 7.4 percent compounded growth rate for United States spending on advertising and promotion in the next five years, compared with the 5.2 percent annual rate of the last five years.
Spending is predicted to reach $340.5 billion by 1996, up from $238.1 billion in 1991. *
The Association of National Advertisers Inc. and the American Advertising Federation denounced the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority's decision to ban all tobacco advertising on the transit system as "unconsitutional, unfair, outrageous and undemocratic."


Sandra Holden, A. N. Rosenberg
Sandra Haley Holden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Scott H. Holden of Perth, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Neil Rosenberg, a son of Robert C. Rosenberg of New York and the late Diane Rosenberg.
The Rev.
James C. Gulley, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Canfield Casino in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., with Rabbi Alvin Roth attending.
Mrs.
Rosenberg, 28 years old, is a director of marketing at the Starrett Housing Corporation in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Albany and received a master's degree in English and American literature from New York University.
Her father is a manager of operations at Gem Urethane, a chemical company in Amsterdam, N.Y.
Her mother, Marie C. Holden, is an administrator in the Perth-Broadalbin school system.


U.S. Men Make the Shots and Snapshots
It was not a total loss for Cuba, just a 79-point trouncing to remember.
"Listen, we know we were playing against the best team in the world," said the Cuban center, 6-foot-7-inch Felix Morales.
"It was an honor."


World Economies


Karen Malakoff, Bret I. Herman
Karen Lynn Malakoff, the daughter of Arnold and Jane Malakoff of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday to Bret Ian Herman, the son of Dr.
Richard Herman and Vivian Herman of Searingtown, L.I.
Rabbi Abner Bergman officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Herman, 25 years old, is the marketing manager for Random House Books for Children in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.


New Direction for the New President In Manila: Away From Washington
A few weeks before Fidel V. Ramos was proclaimed the winner of the Philippine presidential election, Washington delivered a message to this former colony that many here interpreted as another slap from America: with the forced closing of the giant Subic Bay naval base, aid would be slashed by more than half, with more cuts likely.
That should not have come as a surprise, because Manila, trying to overcome objections to the huge United States military presence, had long characterized the assistance as a form of rent.
But to many Filipinos, the drastic reduction was a telling symbol.


In This Year, Will of the Plurality Could Reign; Bizarre 1876 Election
To the Editor:
"If the House Picks the President" (editorial, June 11), on deadlocked Presidential elections, neglects the election of 1876 and its bizarre aftermath.
Gov.
Samuel J. Tilden of New York, the Democrat, defeated Gov.
Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio, the Republican, by 264,000 popular votes.
But four states submitted two sets of electoral votes, creating an impasse.
Congress decided to solve this problem by appointing a 15-member commission, composed of members from the House, Senate and Supreme Court, to decide which ballots to accept.
After 14 were appointed (7 from each party), the Court's members were to select the 15th.


Do Double Standards Apply at Fox?
The same week that Rupert Murdoch dismissed Stephen Chao for having a male stripper remove all his clothing in front of a crowd that included the Secretary of Defense, Mr.
Chao's most recent television creation for Fox Inc. reported its best results ever.
The syndicated program "Studs," which features three young women and two young men engaging in a half-hour of sexually suggestive conversation, received national ratings higher than those for Arsenio Hall, the first time in three years that any syndicated late-night show had surpassed Mr.
Hall's.


AutoInfo Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Standard Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


On the Economy, Bush Followed Reagan's Lead, Not His Success
By most gauges, the economy has performed worse under President Bush than under any other President since World War II.
Economic growth has been slower, more businesses have failed, fewer jobs have been created and the national debt has soared to a record high.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; A Magazine Goes on Line
New York magazine will offer restaurant, movie and play listings and reviews and some of its other features via computer, beginning in September.
The magazine announced the service last week under an agreement with Le Nouvel Observateur, the French media group that provides videotex services to six million French consumers through its Minitel system.


Mongolia's Elections Pose Certain Logistical Problems


Reporter's Notebook; Gay Journalists Gather to Complain And to Celebrate Progress at Work
In the Washington bureau of a large Southeastern newspaper, a gay reporter with "great faith in the power of gossip" assumes that his colleagues are aware of his sexual orientation, although he has never told them and they have never let on that they know.
This charade is debilitating, he said, and he would like to abandon it.
And so, seeking the courage of his comrades, he came to San Francisco this weekend, along with about 300 men and women from news organizations great and small, to attend the first national conference of the Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association.


Rite Aid reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Most Powerful Quake in 40 Years Hits California
The most powerful earthquake to hit California in 40 years rumbled out of the high desert east of Los Angeles early this this morning, a jolt so powerful that it sloshed swimming pools as far north as Idaho and rocked houseboats on Lake Union in Seattle.
The quake, which measured 7.4 on the Richter Scale of ground movement and killed one person, was followed three hours and seven minutes later by another strong quake 19 miles away.
The second quake cut off roads to the mountain resort of Big Bear Lake and touched off huge landslides that sent dramatic plumes of dust rising over the San Bernardino Mountains.


Review/Dance; Conviction and Precision From an Ohio Troupe
The Dayton Contemporary Dance Company is steadily growing stronger.
That was made clear by the way it electrified the American Dance Festival.
Ever since Jeraldyne Blunden, the company's artistic director, founded it in 1968, this group from Ohio has been a leader in regional dance.
As it has developed, it has gained national importance.
Its previous appearances at the American Dance Festival have been heartening occasions.
On Thursday night at Page Auditorium of Duke University, it performed with astonishing conviction.
Its dancers are talented and scrupulously rehearsed.
Even more important, they believe in what they are doing.


Last Year, Wimbledon Needed an Ark. Now It Needs Some Sunscreen.
Last year at this time, Wimbledon's vehicle of choice was Noah's Ark.
Soaked by constant thunderstorms and confronting a 200-match backlog by the weekend, the tournament was forced to bend a century-old rule and inflict a full schedule of play on the middle Sunday, the day this Grand Slam had traditionally been as empty as London's Theater Row.
Everybody was irritable and anybody who lost had a built-in excuse: Concentrating on a match that might have stretched over four days because of persistent rain delays -- as did defending champion Stefan Edberg's in the first round -- required a patience not many players possessed.


American Woodmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Iran Allows Foreigners To Buy Its Companies
Government officials have recently signaled that they are serious about allowing foreign companies to control plants and businesses in Iran.
In the hope of increasing foreign investment, the High Council for Investments at the Finance Ministry approved a measure last month to allow full foreign ownership of Iranian companies.
Foreign ownership was previously limited to 49 percent of an enterprise.


Anne Stone Toker, Dr. Dana Leifer
Anne Stone Toker, the daughter of Beatrice Toker of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Dana Leifer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edgar Leifer of New York.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Leifer graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the chemistry department at Queensborough Community College in Bayside, Queens.


CHRONICLE
Add another credit to the resume of the movie producer ISMAIL MERCHANT: chef.
Today he will spend the day in the kitchen of the Plaza Hotel preparing, with some assistance from hotel chefs, an 11-course feast.
The occasion for 110 guests this evening in the Rose Room is a celebration of the $1 million milestone his most recent film, "Howards End," reached at the box office of Loews Fine Arts Cinema.
"I wanted to do something completely different to celebrate with the friends and supporters of Merchant Ivory," he said, referring his collaboration with the director JAMES IVORY.


Bridge
The modern one no-trump response, forcing for one round, is more heavily loaded than the old-fashioned non-forcing variety.
This is workable provided players resist the temptation to use the bid when a clearer alternative is available.
On the diagramed deal North should certainly have responded two diamonds to one spade.
As it was, he was in difficulty when his partner followed with three clubs, showing a big hand.
North took a wild stab at six spades, which would have been a reasonable contract if South's spade suit had been strong.
As it was South's chances were poor.
Obviously six diamonds would have been easy, making an overtrick, and six no-trump would have been a desirable spot in a match-point game.


Essay; 'Deep Ross'
Much more is to be learned about the secret political-media power connections of Ross Perot.
1.
The Rockefeller Connection
.
On Feb. 2, 1973, New York State's welfare department chose three data-processing companies to bid on a contract; because Ross Perot's company had a poor record in other states, it was not selected to be a bidder.


Capilano International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Editorial Notebook; Death of a Super
The "shrine" is a first-floor windowsill of a Greenwich Village apartment house where there are a few flowers stuck in a jar, a votive candle, a statue of the Madonna and a scrap of paper inscribed "We'll miss ya, Lucille."
The flowers are fading, the candle is close to guttering and rain will soon wash away the message.
The Madonna, being porcelain, might endure -- if no one steals it.
Together these artifacts commemorate a woman who didn't get a proper wake or funeral.
But then she didn't get a proper death.
Lucille Chasin, who for years was this building's superintendent and janitor, was murdered.


Christine Lynn Alfano, Christian Arthur Smith
Christine Lynn Alfano, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Alfano of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Christian Arthur Smith, a son of Arthur T. Smith and Carol Fairchild-Smith, both of Bedford, Mass.
The Rev.
David L. Uhl performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.


Panel Seeks to Resume Navy Promotions
The Senate Armed Services Committee and the Pentagon are working to end a freeze on promotions of Navy and Marine Corps officers because of the scandal over an aviators' convention last year, military and Congressional officials said today.
The committee had imposed the freeze because of accusations of sexual assault at the convention.
The two senior members of the committee, Senators Sam Nunn of Georgia and John W. Warner of Virginia, said today that they would resume considering the promotions as soon as the Department of Defense provided a list of some senior and junior officers who had been cleared of any suspicion of participating in the incident or a subsequent cover-up.


Reviews/Music; In Connecticut, via Tokyo, Germanic Quartets
There was no reason to believe, this evening, that a concert the next night, on Saturday, by the Tokyo String Quartet would prove in any sense anticlimactic.
But the group set itself a tough act to follow in the opening weekend of the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival here by first offering two programs of "Quartets on Rise" in the late quartets of Beethoven.
The festival, presented by the Yale Summer School of Music, is in its 52d season, and the Tokyo has been a fixture here since 1976.
The concerts on Thursday and tonight came after two weeks of master classes and coaching by the Tokyo with young ensembles of its own choosing: Quartetto Fone and the St.
Lawrence, Shanghai and Ying String Quartets.
Beethoven's late quartets were chosen as grist, the festival's director, Joan Panetti, said, the purpose was "to make a project that would be highly stimulating for everyone."


Who Should Police the Police?
The proposal from Mayor David Dinkins of New York for a wholly civilian panel to review police brutality complaints has ignited the wrong argument.
The important question is not who does the job but how well, and the key is whether the city upgrades the quality of investigations.
More community policing means more contact with the public, giving the issue a legitimate place on the Mayor's agenda.
The current Civilian Complaint Review Board consists of six civilians appointed by the Mayor and six police officials appointed by the Police Commissioner.
Mr.
Dinkins wants 12 civilians, all appointed by the Mayor.


Ellen Moskowitz, Bruce Birenboim
Ellen Marla Moskowitz, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Moskowitz of West Hartford, Conn., was married there last evening to Bruce Alan Birenboim, the son of Mrs.
George Aaron of Shawnee Mission, Kan., and the late Dr.
Irvin Birenboim.
Rabbi Stanley Kessler performed the ceremony at Beth El Temple.
Mrs.
Birenboim, 29 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a J.D. degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the chief of radiology at Mount Sinai Hospital in Hartford.


Corrections
An article on the Education page on Wednesday about President Bush's new school voucher plan misstated the number of demonstration programs that it would finance.
No limit has been set on the number of cities that could participate.


Judith Karpen, Steven Schoenhaus
Judith Karpen, a daughter of Lynn Karpen and the late Sanford Karpen of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Steven Schoenhaus, the son of Edythe Jussim of Tamarac, Fla., and the late Robert Schoenhaus.
Rabbi Marjorie Slome performed the ceremony in the gardens at Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Livingston, S.I.
Ms.
Karpen, who is keeping her name, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
She graduated from the State University of New York in Binghamton, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from the University of Virginia.


Donald W. Woods, 34, AIDS Film Executive
Donald W. Woods, the head of an AIDS education organization and a former museum official, died on Thursday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 34 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Mitterrand Flies Into Sarajevo; Shells Temper 'Message of Hope'
While Western nations continued to consider possible military intervention to relieve the siege of Sarajevo, President Francois Mitterrand of France flew into the city by helicopter today with "a message of hope" for its 400,000 hungry and terrorized residents.
Braving a situation that United Nations military commanders had warned was dangerous, Mr.
Mitterrand flew into Sarajevo's airport from the Croatian port of Split.


Soaring Liability Payments Burdening New York
As New York City struggles to pay for essential services, it is spending huge and growing amounts of money each year to settle or satisfy lawsuits for medical malpractice, auto accidents, slip-and-falls and the like.
By tomorrow, the end of the city's fiscal year, New York will have spent a projected $229 million for such claims, 48 percent more than it did three years ago and more than the city spends to operate all its parks and libraries.


Exxon Chief Was Shot
A body unearthed in a shallow grave in southern New Jersey Saturday night was identified as Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon official kidnapped in April.
He had been shot in the arm, but the authorities refused to speculate if that played a part in his death.
Article, page B1.


Hamilton Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


An Uncertain Coalition Is Taking Shape in Italy
After almost three months of political paralysis, Italian leaders formed a new and uncertain coalition Government today to confront the chronic problems of debt and organized crime, along with public disillusionment about the authorities' ability to deal with either of them.
The Administration named by the new Socialist Prime Minister, Giuliano Amato, was Italy's 51st since the end of the World War II, but unlike most of the others, it took office at a time when many Italians are demanding a moral and political revolution in the way the country is run.


Tenants Turned Rundown Lofts Into Desirable Living Spaces
To the Editor:
While your June 19 report on the pending expiration of New York State's Loft Law admirably explicates a difficult subject, it may lead to a few misconceptions.
If a loft tenant indeed rented a three-bedroom apartment for $685 a month, that would be quite a real-estate deal.
But what loft tenants rented were empty or litter-filled spaces with no walls, broken windows, one cold-water tap, leaky roofs, roller-coaster floors and, as often as not, no heat.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Voices: Miami; On the Economy, Well-Being and Confidence
Political experts, local officials and ordinary voters in several cities were asked to appraise President Bush's handling of the economy.
ESTEBAN FERRER  65, law partner in the international division of the law firm Shutts &amp; Bowen
The problem with the economy is not directly related with the President.
It has to do with the overburdening of soft costs -- the mass of regulation and controls imposed on the small-business man -- that's kicked us out of the world market.
We don't produce here anymore, just buy.
There's nothing the President can do.
I would give Bush a passing grade but not an excellent one.


Camdev Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Question Box
Most Walks on Purpose
Q. Which major league player holds the career record for intentional walks received?
A.
It might well be Babe Ruth or Ted Williams, but for the time being, the name in the record book for most times walking to first base on an intentional pass by a pitcher belongs to Henry Aaron, who also holds the mark for most times trotting around the bases on an unintentional pitch.
The statistic of intentional walks was not kept too scrupulously for record books before 1955, a year that was considerably beyond Ruth's last game (1935) and about three-quarters into Williams's career (ended 1960).
Those two left-handed-hitting outfielders are 1-2 in walks received, intentional or otherwise, with Ruth having walked 2,056 times and Williams 2,019.


Corrections
A news analysis on Saturday about Ross Perot's proposals for the economy misstated the date of a speech he made to the National Press Club in Washington.
It was March 18.


Market Place; Portuguese Bank Shows Strength
If an American banker could start with a clean slate and a new bank, the result might resemble Banco Comercial Portugues, a Lisbon-based bank that is only seven years old, but already in the top tier of Portugal's banks.
Banco Comercial's success and future prospects were intriguing enough that it was able to raise $108.5 million of equity earlier this month by selling new shares to foreign investors, most of them American, through securities dealers led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The shares, issued in American depository receipts, are listed on the New York Stock Exchange and closed Friday at $15.625, up 12.5 cents on the day and 18.5 cents higher than the public offering price of $15.44.


Failure Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Women With Much More Than Music on Their Minds
Thinking men's sex symbols and thinking women's heroines, both Lucinda Williams and Rosanne Cash are singers with a credo of independence.
While country music has traditionally molded women who will cope with whatever their men dish out, Ms.
Williams and Ms.
Cash project images fiercer than a Wild West gunslinger.
Strong survivors whose characters take no guff from men or anyone else, these women have been recording since the late 1970's, and in that time they have reshaped the country format to suit their own individual styles.
A country-folky with a dusty rasp and wind-swept features, Ms.
Williams writes songs in which self-sufficiency isn't a quest but a given: "If I stray away too far from you, don't go and try to find me," she sings in "Side of the Road," from her eponymous 1988 album.
Ms.
Cash, the daughter of Johnny Cash and June Carter, chronicles the battle for self-determination; her 1990 album, "Interiors" (Columbia), was a moody analysis of the female psyche.


Ingeniero Jacobacci Journal; Old Patagonian Express Puff, Puff, Puffs to Its End
The American travel writer Paul Theroux described it as "a kind of demented samovar on wheels, with iron patches on its boiler and leaking pipes on its underside and dribbling valves and metal elbows that shot jets of vapor sideways."
This rail relic, a steam engine that crosses 250 desolate miles of southern Argentina, is still running, a vital transportation link for a few thousand sheep farmers and Mapuche Indians, 12 years after the Theroux best seller, "The Old Patagonian Express," was published.
It also employs several hundred workers


Intersolv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for this week: MONDAY Ameron Inc Del Unocal Corp TUESDAY  Delmarva Power &amp; Light Super Valu Stores WEDNESDAY  Corning Inc Natl City Corp (Cleve) Nevada Power Rockwell Intl Corp THURSDAY  Amer Water Works Excelsior Income Shs PNC Finl Corp Sun Inc FRIDAY  Snyder Oil Corp U S West Inc


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  GAY PARADE BOTH FESTIVE AND SOMBER
Walking arm-in-arm, thousands of gay and lesbian marchers streamed down Fifth Avenue for the annual Gay Pride parade, a celebration of sexual freedom and tolerance.
The mood was at once festive and somber.
Some cheering and laughing marchers mocked themselves and stereotypes of their life styles.
Others appealed for help in the fight against AIDS.
B3.
CONVENTION CONTENTION
The Democratic Party, traditionally the party of organized labor, has been caught in an unexpected labor dispute as it prepares for the convention at Madison Square Garden.
A four-day standoff kept power cables from being hooked into the television networks' trailers outside the Garden on schedule last week.
B3. 20 YEARS AFTER THE KNAPP COMMISSION
As another scandal erupts over police corruption in New York City, the alumni of the Knapp Commission held a 20th reunion of the investigation aimed at killing graft and in many ways remaking an entire police department.
One man who did not attend was David Durk, who persuaded a fellow detective, Frank Serpico, to go forward with the allegations that led to the creation of the Knapp Commission.
But he has always been a loner anyway.
Metro Matters.
B3.
QUEENS CELEBRATES ITSELF
An estimated two million people gathered under turquoise skies and marshmallow clouds to celebrate the 15th annual Queens Festival in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park this weekend.
As the smell of Ecuadorean empanadas, Italian zeppoli and Japanese bean-curd cakes were melded by the vibrating sounds of calypso, steel drums and Korean wedding music, it was not hard to tell that this year's theme was "Ethnic Pride and Cultural Diversity." B3.
DIPLOMAS DESPITE BARRIERS
Like most high school graduations, the one at the Upper Manhattan Outreach Center was a mix of elation over plans for the future and nostalgia for bygone days and friends.
But there was something more.
The 97 graduates of this alternative school shared a special pride: most of them had had problems in other schools and risked dropping out altogether.
The school, started in 1980 to help young people who cannot make it elsewhere, is one of six such centers operated by the New York Board of Education.
The centers have turned out 4,500 students over the past decade by adhering to the belief that "small is better." B2.
REGION  SUSPECT'S HELP CRACKS CASE
Investigators said they were finally able to find the body of Sidney J. Reso when one of the prime suspects in the kidnapping of the Exxon official, Irene Seale, agreed to cooperate.
After 26 years of marriage, the influence of her husband, Arthur Seale, the other suspect being held, waned rapidly under the pressure of incarceration and the prospect of a lifetime behind bars.
B5.
BUDGET SHOWDOWN IN NEW JERSEY
A Republican Senator said that he would not support his party's effort to override Governor Florio's veto of the Legislature's $14.6 billion budget, instead urging a compromise that the Governor had suggested.
The decision by Senator Leonard T. Connors Jr. appears to leave the Republicans in the Senate one vote short of the two-thirds majority needed to override the veto.
B5.
CUOMO GETS A NEW WEAPON
In the fight over his ambitious plan for a state takeover of all Medicaid costs, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has added a major new weapon: he is increasingly linking the proposed fiscal bailouts for Nassau and Suffolk Counties to lawmakers' approval of the Medicaid plan.
The Governor's tactic is aimed at the Republican-led State Senate, which is desperately seeking the local bailouts to avoid the likely alternative, huge property-tax increases that would enrage the Long Island voters who are crucial to the G.O.P's continued hold on the Senate.
B5.
SOARING AHEAD TO YESTERDAY
Thanks in part to its no-frills approach, Sussex Airport has weathered economic pressures that have shut down 5 of the state's 55 public airports in the last five years and pushed many others to the brink.
Thanks are also due some of the airport's great characters, like its senior flight official, 79-year-old Wild Bill Voorhis.
B4.
The Traffic Map B4 Chronicle B6


Oppenheimer &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Price Tag: Summer Games
What it might cost, per person, to attend events or participate in selected activities outdoors this summer in the New York City area.
Costs may vary in other ares.
Transportation, parking and special equipment are not included unless noted.


Griffin Gets Spot on Team With a Disputed Decision
In a dramatic end to a tournament that had little drama inside the ring, light-heavyweight Montell Griffin, the fighter who threatened to sue his federation, earned the final berth on the 1992 Olympic boxing team with a 14-11 victory over Jeremy Williams in an emotion-charged challenge match.
Griffin, a tough-talking brawler from Hollywood, Calif., took control of the fight in the second round when he staggered his taller opponent with a wicked straight hand.
He then pummeled him for the next two rounds with left jabs and hooks to Williams's head and body.


Cuomo Is Tying L.I. Fiscal Bailouts to His Plan for Medicaid
In the fight over his ambitious plan for a state takeover of all Medicaid costs, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has added a major new weapon: he is increasingly linking the proposed fiscal bailouts for Nassau and Suffolk Counties to lawmakers' approval of the Medicaid plan.
The Republican-led State Senate is desperately seeking the local bailouts to avoid the likely alternative, huge property-tax increases that would enrage Long Island voters, who are crucial to the Republicans' continued hold on the Senate.


A Little Labor Friction Slows Convention Momentum
The Democratic Party, traditionally the party of organized labor, has been caught in an unexpected labor dispute as it prepares for the convention at Madison Square Garden.
A four-day standoff kept power cables linking portable generators parked on the sidewalk to the television networks' nearby trailers from being hooked up on schedule last week.
Some officials at the Democratic National Convention Committee, the party's convention-planning arm, said the delay resulted from a misunderstanding about union jurisdictions and whether the electricians hired to do the work inside the Garden could also work outside -- in this case, on the sidewalk.
The contractor they work for, George Kleinknecht, did not return calls last week.


Terminally Ill Man Gets Baboon's Liver In Untried Operation
In a renewed effort to overcome the species barrier in transplantation and to help relieve the dire shortage of human donor organs, surgeons from the University of Pittsburgh today took a liver from a baboon and implanted it in a human patient.
The recipient was a man dying from hepatitis B, a virus that had destroyed his liver and had made him ineligible to receive a donated human organ.


Timetable for Cutting Rates: Probably Later Than Sooner
Most credit market analysts expect another cut in short-term interest rates, but probably not when the Federal Reserve Board's Open Market Committee meets tomorrow in Washington.
Nevertheless, many analysts argue that such a step would do little to cure the peculiar, perhaps unprecedented, problems on the economic landscape.
And some suggest that another easing could do more harm than good.


Bridge
The modern one no-trump response, forcing for one round, is more heavily loaded than the old-fashioned non-forcing variety.
This is workable provided players resist the temptation to use the bid when a clearer alternative is available.
On the diagramed deal North should certainly have responded two diamonds to one spade.
As it was, he was in difficulty when his partner followed with three clubs, showing a big hand.
North took a wild stab at six spades, which would have been a reasonable contract if South's spade suit had been strong.
As it was South's chances were poor.
Obviously six diamonds would have been easy, making an overtrick, and six no-trump would have been a desirable spot in a match-point game.


In This Year, Will of the Plurality Could Reign; Rules of the Game
To the Editor:
"If the House Picks the President" (editorial, June 11) is certainly timely, but the problem with the rule needed most critically is more serious and urgent than you indicate.
Whether state delegations vote for President by majority or plurality could affect the outcome, in addition to bearing on the House's ability to come to a timely decision.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.62 percent.
The rate on the six-month bill was 3.71 percent.


Plenty Of Cheers, But No Victory
Yankee Stadium fans cheered last night when Tim Raines, batting with runners at second and third and two out, grounded out.
They cheered when a pitchout trapped Lance Johnson off third and foiled a suicide squeeze.
They cheered when Charlie Hayes lined a single in the fifth inning for the Yankees' first hit and again a moment later when Matt Nokes singled for their first run.
They cheered when fans in the upper deck behind home plate unfurled a huge banner that said "Keep George Out."
But all of the cheers and Melido Perez's strikeouts could not manufacture a Yankee victory.
With Charlie Hough's knuckleballs prevailing over Perez's strikeout pitches, the Chicago White Sox won, 6-3.


Lindros Ruling Is Near
The Eric Lindros arbitration ruling could be announced as soon as today and Rangers General Manager Neil Smith is as eager as anyone to know if his team or the Philadelphia Flyers will get Lindros in a disputed trade with the Quebec Nordiques.
Smith is also trying to sign free agents on his roster, among them Brian Leetch, John Vanbiesbrouck and Mike Richter.
In a conference call with reporters yesterday, Smith spoke about his full summer agenda, which has been headed by the Lindros affair.


Reds Lead Braves by 4 Games As Sabo Powers the Assault
Reds 6, Braves 5
CINCINNATI, June 28 (AP) -- Chris Sabo drove in three runs, including the tie breaker with an eighth-inning single, as the Cincinnati Reds swept the Atlanta Braves for the second time this season with a 6-5 victory today.
The Reds rebuilt their lead over Atlanta to four games in the National League West with a lopsided three-game sweep, outscoring the Braves, 25-12.
Cincinnati is 6-0 against Atlanta at Riverfront Stadium this season.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Presenting Cellular as More Than a Telephone for 'Twits'
The problem was coming through loud and clear in focus groups, those sessions organized by companies so they can hear the unvarnished prejudices of their customers or would-be customers.
"I don't know about cellular phones," said a middle-aged woman, a self-described image consultant.
"They just seem like something for yuppie twits."


Review/Art; Guggenheim Reopens on a New Chapter
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum has divided in order to conquer the New York art world.
The one-two punch of the restored and expanded Frank Lloyd Wright building uptown and the big new branch in SoHo makes the 55-year-old institution the museum of the moment, on the brink of a new era in its history, full of possibility and potential.
Yet the new Guggenheim is not without its disappointments.
The new galleries in both the uptown addition and SoHo often have awkward display spaces.
And the inaugural exhibitions in both buildings, while understandably pressured by the final throes of construction and installed in spaces that are new to the museum's staff, could have been much better than they are.


Image-Repair Ads by Sears
Seeking to control the damage from recent fraud accusations, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is undertaking a national advertising campaign detailing changes made at its automobile repair centers.
Earlier this month, Sears was charged -- first in California and later in New Jersey -- with selling customers unnecessary repairs and parts at its auto centers.


Chopinesque Bop Dallying
If classical keyboardists were still expected to improvise, as in previous centuries, there might be more pianists like Walter Norris, who gave a solo concert on Friday afternoon at the Equitable Auditorium as part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
Mr.
Norris, an American who now lives in Berlin, draws on all sorts of 19th- and 20th-century styles -- Bud Powell, Chopin, Hindemith, Rachmaninoff, Ellington, Gershwin -- in solos that match dazzling technique with far-reaching ideas.
Mr.
Norris's classical inclinations emerge when he accompanies a melodic line with limpid harmonies, when he improvises a dissonant two-part invention or when he plays dreamy, crystalline high chords.
His right hand scampers and skitters at breakneck speed, but with every note articulated.
At times, he sounds as if he's playing hard-bop as imagined by Chopin.


Dance in Review
Manhattan Tap  St. Peter's Lutheran Church, Manhattan
The dancing was first rate when Manhattan Tap, one of New York's leading tap ensembles, performed on Thursday night.
The on-stage musical accompaniment provided by the New Jazz Order was just as good.
And eight of the 12 dances on the ambitious program were either world or New York premieres.
But unlike most tap concerts, this was strangely short on fun.


Free-Trade Talks in South America
In an important step toward creating a common market for much of South America, the presidents of Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay have agreed to a detailed timetable for dropping tariffs and harmonizing regulations, tax systems and customs procedures among the four countries.
The heads of state, in a summit meeting in the Argentine ski resort of Las Lenas, agreed on Saturday to a document that calls for the integration of their economies by the beginning of 1995 into a free-trade zone extending from the Amazon down to Tierra del Fuego.


Jan Jacob Smulewicz, 69, Chief Of Radiology at Three Hospitals
Dr.
Jan Jakob Smulewicz, who escaped a Nazi death sentence by outsmarting concentration-camp guards and after World War II served as radiology chief at three New York City hospitals, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Methode Electronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media; Networks Planning Cutbacks in Convention Time
After receiving abysmally low ratings in 1984 and 1988, the television networks are putting their collective foot down this summer and planning to cut their coverage nearly in half.
Although their plans are still under discussion, at this point no network is committed to more than one hour of prime-time broadcasting each night from the Democratic convention, which begins July 13.
Network executives say, however, that they expect to have somewhat more coverage on the final night, when the nominee gives his acceptance speech.


Reviews/Jazz Festival; A Revolutionary Medley, From Marches to Chorales
At a jazz festival full of memorials to musicians, Charlie Haden's Liberation Music Orchestra commemorated political figures and movements instead when it performed on Thursday night at Town Hall.
"Spiritual," by Mr.
Haden, was dedicated to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and Medgar Evers; another piece was called "Sandino," after the Nicaraguan revolutionary.
In the late 1960's, long before the term politically correct came into constant and derisive use, the Liberation Music Orchestra was putting together revolutionaries' songs and jazz.
With Mr.
Haden as leader and bassist and Carla Bley as arranger, the orchestra, currently a 14-member big band, moves from somber chorales to brass-band marches to freewheeling solos.


For Once, Waldorf Has a Big Finish
He wears psychedelic hats and shirts and decorates his golf balls before tournaments.
His golf game in six years on the PGA Tour has rarely been worth raving about, but Duffy Waldorf played the Buick Classic well enough this week to be in the last group on Sunday.
James Joseph Waldorf started the final round alone in second place behind the winner, David Frost of South Africa, and that is exactly where he finished.
His four-day total of 276 was the best of his PGA career for four rounds and earned him $108,000.


Mitterrand Trip Welcomed Only in Paris and Sarajevo
President Francois Mitterrand returned today from a daring six-hour visit to Sarajevo to face the dismay of Germany and his other European partners, the praise of most French people and the prospect of further friction in his country's strained relations with Washington.
Partly political theater and partly a statement that action is possible, the French leader's brief foray appeared less a major development in the search for peace in the Balkans than a boon to Mr.
Mitterrand's standing at home.


Johnson Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Frost Turns Buick Into Pushover
Playing that most elusive of games, natural golf, David Frost catapulted out of the worst slump of his career by cruising to an astonishing eight-shot victory today in the Buick Classic.
Building on the lead he had held the entire tournament with a prodigious display of putting on the Westchester Country Club's final nine, the 32-year-old South African shot a closing 66 for a 72-hole total 16-under-par 268.


In This Year, Will of the Plurality Could Reign; New House Decides
To the Editor:
"If the House Picks the President" (editorial, June 11) helpfully focuses attention on the need to review the rules of the House of Representatives in case November's election does not produce a majority of the Electoral College for any candidate.
You ask: "Should each state's House vote be cast by incumbents whose terms are about to expire, or by the members elected in November?" Unless the law now on the books is changed, as some wish to do, the question is answered in Section 15 of Title 3 of the United States Code, which requires that the electoral votes be counted by Congress on the sixth day of January.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Household Finance Corp., a unit of Household International Inc., Prospect Heights, Ill., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $250 million of general-term notes through Kemper Securities Inc.


Tenants Turned Rundown Lofts Into Desirable Living Spaces; Owners Can't Evict
To the Editor:
Your June 19 article on the expiration of the New York State Loft Law perpetuates the myth that artists are threatened with eviction from their lofts if the status quo changes.
Whatever the upshot of legislation in Albany -- no extension, modification or complete alteration of this 10-year-old law -- no landlord can force any tenant to vacate loft quarters.
Owners have no authority to evict.
Only courts have.
No loft tenant has ever been evicted with or without cause.


A Magazine Returns to Its Roots
This is the story of the Great Tomato Turnaround.
It is a cautionary tale of what can happen if a magazine forgets who its readers are, and how one magazine managed to right itself before it lost its way entirely.


SERBS' RALLY ASKS MILOSEVIC OUSTER
In what many people described as the biggest demonstration here since the end of World War II, tens of thousands of Serbs gathered near Government buildings today and called for President Slobodan Milosevic to resign.
The rising domestic pressure on the Serbian President, who has been blamed for the continuing violence in the neighboring republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and earlier warfare in Croatia, came as Western nations stepped up their efforts to relieve Sarajevo, the besieged Bosnian capital.


Joanne Moriarty, C. J. Aventuro
Joanne Marie Moriarty, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Moriarty of East Atlantic Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Christopher John Aventuro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis Aventuro of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
Msgr.
James P. Kelly performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Ignatius Martyr Church in Long Beach, L.I.
Mrs.
Aventuro, 27 years old, is a reading specialist at St.
David's School in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father is the general accounting manager for the chemicals division of the Olin Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


An Economics of Reality Professed by Rising Stars
A new brand of labor economics is emerging from two academic hubs: Princeton University, a school famed in the 1950's and 1960's for leading-edge research on the subject, and Harvard.
And three young economists at those universities are among the rising stars of this new economics.
David Card and Alan B. Kreuger of Princeton and Lawrence H. Katz of Harvard have created a stir with their findings that a higher minimum wage has not led to cutbacks in jobs.


Lilly Beth Weitzner And David Icikson
Lilly Beth Weitzner, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter B. Weitzner of Brooklyn, was married last evening to David Icikson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Icikson of West Bloomfield, Mich.
Rabbi Morton Yolkut officiated at the Plaza.


Ryan Looks Strong as He Breaks Out of Slump
Rangers 8, Tigers 4
DETROIT, June 28 (AP) -- Nolan Ryan finally won, pitching seven shutout innings today for his first victory of the season as the Texas Rangers beat the Detroit Tigers, 8-4.
Ryan (1-3) won for the first time in 14 starts since last Sept. 25, a span that included 12 starts this year.
His drought of 13 starts without a victory matched the longest of his career, although four times this season he left a game with a lead and wound up with a no-decision.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; 2 Kraft's Lines To Young &amp; Rubicam
Young &amp; Rubicam New York has been selected to handle advertising for Kraft's Bird's Eye vegetables and Budget Gourmet entrees.
Kraft announced its decision on Friday.


Ocean Dumping Is Ending, but Not Problems; New York Can't Ship, Bury or Burn Its Sludge, but No One Wants a Processing Plant
Late this afternoon the ocean barge Spring Brook will slip quietly into the East River and head to sea, carrying for the last time one of America's least loved cargoes: 400 tons of New York City's processed sewage.
It has been four years since Congress voted to ban the common practice of using the ocean as a municipal chamber pot, and with the Federal deadline set for tomorrow, New York is the only city that still does it.
For environmentalists and many politicians, the final barge journey will be a moment of triumph, one they say will make the planet a cleaner, healthier place.


Mystery of Kidnapping Unravels
For seven weeks, investigators had nothing.
They were certain, despite their public statements to the contrary, that Sidney J. Reso had been kidnapped, but they did not know who had abducted him, where he was, or how to find him.
All that changed in the last nine days.
First with the arrest of Arthur D. and Irene J. Seale, the prime suspects, and then with the decision of Mrs.
Seale to cooperate with the authorities, said an investigator involved in the case.
It was then that officials learned what they had feared: that they had been looking for a dead man.


Jennifer Hersch, Daniel Meron
Jennifer Rachel Hersch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Hersch of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Daniel Meron, a son of Theodor Meron and Roxandra Meron, both of New York.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Westchester Reform Temple.
The bride, 25 years old, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated from Harvard University, where they also received law degrees earlier this month.
In August, the bride will become a law clerk in Providence, R.I., for Judge Bruce M. Selya of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.
Her father is the president of the Fourteen Research Corporation, a securities research company in New York.


Leary, Yankees Are Warned by League
Bobby Brown, the American League president, yesterday labeled Tim Leary's camera-caught actions "highly suspicious," but he nevertheless denied the Baltimore Orioles' protest of their game with the Yankees in which they accused the pitcher of scuffing baseballs.
Brown said he will ask Leary to meet with him "to explain his actions" on the mound in the fifth inning of the Yankees' 8-2 victory last Sunday.
A television camera caught Leary, up close and personal, as he placed his glove in front of his face and apparently transferred something from the glove to his mouth.
When he reached the dugout after the inning, another television shot showed him appearing to remove something from his mouth.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
*
Bakers Square, Matteson, Ill., to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Chicago, as the agency of record for the restaurant chain's account, previously handled by Valentine-Radford Inc., Kansas City, Mo.
Billings were estimated at $8 million. *
Toymax Inc., Westbury, L.I., to the Youth Communications Group Inc., New York, to handle the toy maker's advertising and marketing accounts.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Something for Everyone, or Almost
The Knitting Factory's extravaganza at Town Hall on Friday night, the keystone of its What Is Jazz festival, was a downtown variety show.
Irony and humor showed up in the form of the Jazz Passengers, avant-garde authenticty showed up in the form of Sun Ra and his Archestra, and ethnicity appeared in the form of Nana Vasconcelos, a Brazilian percussionist and singer.
Blind Idiot God, a hard-core band meant to represent the younger generation, played last to an audience, which was small to begin with, of about 20 people.
Everybody else probably had to get back to the baby sitters; downtown avant-garde is looking a bit gray these days.
The Jazz Passengers, a six-member group, opened the show with a tight, sophisticated set of music that had the members pulling apart standards like "If I Were a Bell," by having its trombonist, Curtis Fowlkes, sing an adulterated version of the lyric, after which the group moved to free jazz or slapstick routines or tight be-bop.
The group gets progressively more impressive, and its show mixed be-bop and Charles Mingus-like brawl with a type of musical surrealism.
None of it would work without real musicianship, and the band's rhythm section -- Brad Jones on bass and E. J. Rodriguez on drums -- gets some real steam going, while the main soloists, including Bill Ware on vibraphone and Jim Nolet on violin, had their moments of brilliance.


Dublin To Meet With Protestants From the North, Including Paisley
The Irish Government said over the weekend that it is sending high-ranking officials to meetings in London on Tuesday with prominent hard-line Protestant leaders from Northern Ireland.
The Protestants are to include the Rev.
Ian Paisley, the powerful political and religious leader, who in the past has scornfully refused to talk to Dublin officials.
The meeting is considered vital to the continuation of talks on a peaceful solution to the violence in the British province between the Protestant majority and the Roman Catholic minority, in which nearly 3,000 have died since 1969.
One of the most volatile issues is expected to be discussed -- the republic's constitutional claim to the North.


Too Big a Spread by Tailgaters
Results of a questionnaire sent to 38,000 Giants and Jets ticket-holders regarding Giants Stadium parking provided no surprises.
Of the 13,000 replies, 77 percent said the tailgaters took up too many spaces; 59 percent said there were too few spaces; 52 percent said the parking personnel were not helpful, and 28 percent said there were too few parking people.


Paraskevy Vassilas, George Zaferiou
Dr.
Paraskevy Paris Vassilas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kimon Vassilas of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to George Constantine Zaferiou, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Zaferiou of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Eugene Pappas performed the ceremony at the Three Hierarchs Greek Orthodox Church in Brooklyn.


Life in the Minor Leagues
DAVID LAMB's passion for minor league baseball continues.
He was in the stands at Hagerstown, Md., last Wednesday night watching the local team, the Suns, thrash the New Britain Red Sox in an Eastern League tilt.
Lamb, who is 51 years old, expects that he will be going to minor league -- not major league -- games for the rest of his life.
It's the intimacy and the atmosphere that count.
His passion was activated in 1989 when Lamb, a national reporter for The Los Angeles Times based in Washington, took a year off to visit 35 minor league teams in every section of America and then to write.


Some Old Track Heroes Fade Away
When the United States Olympic track and field trials ended tonight, there was joy for such heroes as Jim Spivey, Michael Johnson, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Gwen Torrence and Gail Devers.
There was no joy for many others such as Mary Decker Slaney, Joe Falcon, Steve Scott, Greg Foster, Roger Kingdom and even Carl Lewis.
Slaney, America's best-ever female distance and middle-distance runner, finished fourth in the women's 1,500 meter final, and only the first three made the Olympic team.
Falcon, a favorite in the men's 1,500 meters, fell and finished last.
The 36-year-old Scott, America's best 1,500 runner of the 1980's, finished next to last.


Officials Say Body in Forest Is Sidney Reso
The decomposing body unearthed from a shallow grave in a southern New Jersey state forest Saturday night was identified today as that of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive kidnapped outside his home two months ago.
The authorities said that Mr.
Reso had been shot in one arm and that he appeared to have died shortly after being abducted on April 29.
They said the cause of his death had not been officially determined, and they refused to speculate on whether the gunshot wound played a part.


Karen Elise Cohen, Cecil Scott Caine
Karen Elise Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Shelley N. Cohen of New York, was married yesterday to Cecil Scott Caine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Caine of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Robert N. Levine performed the ceremony at the Swan Club in Glenwood Landing, L.I.
Mrs.
Caine, 27 years old, is a sixth-grade teacher at Public School 158 in Manhattan.
She graduated cum laude from Skidmore College.
Mr.
Caine, 26, is the national sales manager in New York for Techstyles Inc., which makes dust-free suits for the electronics industry.
He graduated from Hamilton College and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.


Saudis Pursue Media Acquisitions, Gaining Influence in the Arab World
Over the last decade, Saudi Arabia has invested tens of millions of dollars to acquire news organizations in the Middle East and Western Europe.
Now, the Saudis have moved further afield.
On Tuesday, Middle East Broadcasting Center Ltd., a British company owned by Walid al-Ibrahim, the brother-in-law of King Fahd, bought United Press International for $3.95 million.
The company said it acquired the bankrupt U.P.I. to bolster the news-gathering scope of its satellite television channel, which is broadcast in Arabic throughout Europe and the Middle East.


Bed Shortage Worse In U.S. Hospitals
To the Editor:
Dr.
John D. Dooley extols the virtues of the American over the Canadian health care system in "But at What Cost?" (letter, June 11).
He says that "acutely ill Canadian patients must lie in emergency rooms or hallways because there are no beds upstairs." This is the exception in Canada, yet he implies that no such problem exists in the United States.
My own recent experience at New York University's University Hospital with a life-threatening diagnosis reminded me of what I, as a medical writer, already knew.
Before a bed was found for me, I was kept on a stretcher in the bedlam of the emergency room for 15 hours, along with 9 other patients diagnosed no less seriously than I -- and uncounted others not horizontal, whose conditions I knew nothing about.
For lack of beds, we 10 lay in corridors scarcely wider than our stretchers, the ministering personnel doing their best with almost no room to move.


Jennifer Brisman, Michael Kaplan
Jennifer Lynn Brisman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald Brisman of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Paul Kaplan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley R. Kaplan of West Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Elazar M. Teitz performed the ceremony at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton.
Mrs.
Kaplan, 21 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and will enter Columbia University's medical school in August.
Her father is a neurosurgeon at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.


Thousands Join in Parade To Celebrate Gay Pride
Thousands of gay and lesbian marchers streamed arm-in-arm down Fifth Avenue yesterday afternoon, celebrating their sexual freedom and asking others for understanding.
The Gay Pride parade began with a roar as the Dykes on Bikes from the all-female Sirens Motorcycle Club of Manhattan, wearing black leather pants, vests and caps, started their engines at 12:30 P.M. at the corner of 60th Street and rode the purple center line south, leading dozens of ethnic bands, wildly decorated floats and somber groups appealing for help in the fight against AIDS.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Shaking the Schools; When Perot Took On Texas -- A Special Report.; Education Initiative Revealed A Savvy and Abrasive Perot
It was a tale of Texan proportions, complete with epic name-calling, massive lobbying and political skulduggery.
It was Ross Perot's foray into the turbulent world of education reform -- and it offers a rare chance to examine how he operates in a political arena.
Mr.
Perot proved he could learn quickly, sell bold policies to the public and ram them through a reluctant Legislature.
But he also showed a taste for attention-grabbing invective that alienated some of the very people whose help he needed to change the state's education system.


Dance in Review
Fay Simpson Dance Theater  Manhattan Class Company Theater
Fay Simpson got together a group of actor-dancers as fine as she is and offered 90 minutes of witty belly laughs and woundingly trenchant social commentary in "Take Me Home." The revue was presented by the Fay Simpson Dance Theater on Tuesday night at the Chelsea headquarters of the Manhattan Class Company, a theater group with which the dancers are affiliated.


Univar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


BUSH CALLS ALLIES ON A JOINT EFFORT TO HELP SARAJEVO
As pressure mounted for an effort to provide relief to the besieged city of Sarajevo, President Bush initiated intensive consultations this weekend with European allies over forming an international military coalition to break the blockade and deliver humanitarian aid to the Bosnian capital, Administration officials said today.
The President spoke by telephone today with the allies on the eve of a United Nations Security Council meeting scheduled for Monday, at which diplomats said the Council members were likely to consider military action to bring relief to Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the Bush Administration's policy toward Iraq misstated the date of an address by President Bush to a joint session of Congress.
It was March 6, 1991.


Fleet Call Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


BE Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


In Celebration Of Queens And Diversity
Jennifer Yu looked puzzled as Marilyn Bagley fingered a Russian nesting doll.
"When emigres from the Soviet Union come over here, they are not allowed to bring much money," said Ms.
Bagley, who helps Soviet Jews settle in New York.
"So they bring dolls like these as gifts for people who are kind to them."


Graduation Day for Some Unlikely Graduates
Like most high school graduations, the one at the Upper Manhattan Outreach Center was a mix of elation over plans for the future and nostalgia for bygone days and friends.
But there was something more.
The 97 graduates of this alternative school shared a special pride: most of them had had problems in other schools and risked dropping out altogether.
"You have overcome obstacles that can -- and did -- stop many others," said the keynote speaker, Derrick Bell, currently a visiting professor of law at New York University.
Mr.
Bell, the first black tenured law professor at Harvard Law School, has taken a leave of absence in protest against Harvard's failure to hire a black woman professor of law.


An Olympic Qualifier in French
In 1973, when MARCEL PHILIPPE, a native New Yorker, was named to the French track and field team, he could hardly speak French.
Now he speaks it so well that he spent the last two weeks in New Orleans as the expert commentator for French television at the United States Olympic track and field trials.
Philippe was a half-miler and miler at Fordham, good enough to have won the 800-meter silver medal in the 1973 World University Games.
His parents, Yves and Leonne, were born in France (Yves became a celebrated chef in New York, known as Philippe of the Waldorf).


Comtrex Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; An American Jazz Master Through European Eyes
On June 2, 1964, Eric Dolphy played bass clarinet, alto saxophone and flute with a trio of Dutch musicians for a Netherlands radio show called "Jazz Magazine." Most of the time, the show's sessions were broadcast live and were not recorded; Dolphy's set was taped because he was leaving before the day of the show.
It was fortuitous.
On June 29 he died in Berlin after collapsing onstage; the doctors assumed that the black American jazz musician was on drugs.
But Dolphy had slipped into a diabetic coma, and without treatment he never regained consciousness.
The Dutch recordings became his album "Last Date."
The radio sessions were photographed but not filmed, so Hans Hylkema's documentary "Last Date -- Eric Dolphy," which will be shown today and tomorrow at the Film Forum 2 as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, becomes a tease.
Although it is a kind of biography of Dolphy, its unstated and perhaps unintentional subject is the relation of Europeans to jazz, as perennial fans and inevitable outsiders, hearing a mythic America that they distrust and long for.
The manager of the Berlin nightclub Tangente, who didn't understand until it was too late why Dolphy was wolfing down ice cream and Coca-Cola, says: "I thought he's a black musician, and so he'll be on drugs. I was tolerant, but. . . ."


Review/Jazz Festival; Motion, Speed and Pairs
The pianist Dave McKenna's show at the Equitable Auditorium last Monday evening was all about swing.
Mr.
McKenna is a brutally driving solo pianist, and his left hand, chugging away, nearly buries his right.
This is happy music, full of movement, and he makes it easy to listen to.
For his show, which was part of the JVC Jazz Festival, Mr.
McKenna paired up songs.
He joined "Sometimes I'm Happy" with "Get Happy," "Summertime" with "The Summer Wind," and "As Time Goes By" with "I Didn't Know What Time It Was." Mr.
McKenna isn't much on variety and resources, so most of his tunes opend with a bit of a rumination on the melody, then went into the swinging part, in which his right hand raced around as his left pounded out a walking bass line.
When he's soloing, Mr.
McKenna doesn't bother much with melodies.
Occasionally he would break up his forward motion with elements of stride piano, or he'd let a song's melody ring as he rumbled away in the lower register.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
*
Nancy Rice was named group creative director at DDB Needham Chicago.
Ms.
Rice was previously executive vice president and creative director at Rice &amp; Rice Advertising, Minneapolis. *
Al Lerman was named executive vice president and chief creative officer at Venet Advertising, Union, N.J., succeeding Murray Skernick, who resigned.
Mr.
Lerman previously served in the same capacity at Wells, Rich, Greene BDDP Inc., New York.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Irish Derby Won by St. Jovite
St.
Jovite, a loser to Dr Devious in the English Derby four weeks ago, atoned yesterday with a 12-length, record-breaking victory in the Irish Derby in Newbridge.
St.
Jovite, second in the English Derby on June 3, outclassed 10 challengers in covering the mile and a half at The Curragh in 2:25.60 -- three seconds better than the track record.
St.
Jovite, owned by Virginia Kraft Payson, was the first non-English horse to win the Derby in six years. (AP) SWIMMING  World's Best in Men's 50-Meter Butterfly


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Best Western Drops Karsh &amp; Hagan
Best Western International Inc. said Friday that it would dismiss Karsh &amp; Hagan Advertising Inc. as its agency, ending a a two-year relationship.
The lodging chain cited the need to change marketing directions and find a fresh creative approach.
In a telephone interview, Robert F. Fitzgerald, chief operating officer for Best Western, based in Phoenix, said the hotel chain was satisfied with the efforts of Karsh &amp; Hagan, of Denver, but added, "The hotel has to take a more aggressive marketing approach to succeed and grow globally."


Drug Emporium Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Forging New Insight on Minimum Wages and Jobs
Contrary to one of the most widely accepted orthodoxies of modern economics, raising the Federal minimum wage may not prompt employers to trim jobs, new studies suggest, and therefore may not be such a bad way to help America's working poor.
The findings are likely to influence the growing national debate -- re-ignited by the Los Angeles riots -- over how best to reverse the deteriorating fortunes of young, less-educated workers.


Erica Prager, Jeffrey Hessel
Erica Lynn Prager, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Prager of Syosset, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Hessel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Hessel of Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Ms.
Prager, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a J.D. degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Lily of France, a New York clothing company.
Her mother, Francine Prager, is the vice president of patient-care services at the Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.


Diana Kaufman, Thomas M. Schutt
Diana Fern Kaufman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Kaufman of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Martin Schutt, a son of William M. Schutt and Margaret A. McKenzie, both of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Rabbi David Blumenfeld officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Schutt, 23 years old, graduated from Emory University, as did the bridegroom.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in special education at the College of New Rochelle.
Her father is the president of Global Perspective, an economic consulting company in Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother, Rosalind Fuchsberg Kaufman, is the managing partner in the Jacob D. Fuchsberg Law Firm, a New York practice that bears the name of the bride's grandfather, who is the firm's senior partner.
The bride's grandmother Shirley G. Fuchsberg is the president of the Westchester Symphony Orchestra.


How to Use (Nonaddictive) Coca Tea
To the Editor:
I was happy to read "El Alto Journal: A Cup of Coca Tea, Anyone? Bolivia Sees a Market" (news article, June 17), in which you report that the Bolivian Government of Jaime Paz Zamora hopes not only to make the coca plant legal to export but also to create a market for such products as coca leaf tea.
As anyone who has traveled in the high Andes knows, drinking coca tea, which tastes like most herbal teas and does not become addictive, is great at relieving altitude sickness.
We traveled into the new National Park between Chile and Bolivia, at 18,000 feet altitude, and if it hadn't been for the coca leaf tea we had brought along, many of us would have become very ill.


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Allied Capital Commercial Corp., 10 million common shares. Lehman Brothers.


Mikhail Tal, a Chess Grandmaster Known for His Daring, Dies at 55
Mikhail Tal, a Latvian grandmaster who held the world chess championship in 1960-61 and was one of the game's most popular and exciting players, died in Moscow yesterday after a long illness, the Russian news agency Itar-Tass reported.
He was 55 years old.
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Mr.
Tal had hoped to represent Latvia in this month's world chess Olympiad in Manila, but was unable to make the trip because of illness.
No cause of death was given, but he had suffered from liver and kidney ailments for many years.
Itar-Tass said he died after being taken to a hospital to undergo surgery for a severe kidney illness.


Ouch! This Time, Franco Is Burned
Jeff Torborg, the manager of the Mets who spends endless hours crunching numbers and shuffling lineups in pursuit of the perfect matchup, didn't need any computer data to understand the strength of his club's position in the 10th inning today.
The Mets, with a run in the top of the 10th, led the Cardinals, 2-1.
John Franco, the closer with the inhuman earned run average of 0.77, was on the mound.
Three outs would get the Mets their second triumph in three games against the Cardinals and inch them within 5 1/2 games of first place in the National League East.


How to Use (Nonaddictive) Coca Tea; Hardly Innocent
To the Editor:
Your excellent June 17 news article from El Alto, Bolivia, points up a serious problem in connection with Bolivia's efforts to commercialize coca leaf and legalize international trade in such consumer products as coca tea.
Despite claims to the contrary, coca leaf is hardly innocent.
In view of broad socioeconomic, geographic and cultural differences, drinking coca tea in lower Manhattan could have very different effects from drinking it in the higher Andes.
The issue also needs elucidation because of international law.
The 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, to which 134 countries, including Bolivia and the United States, are parties, requires all governments to apply comprehensive national and international control on narcotic drugs.
All 134 governments have agreed that -- in addition to cocaine -- coca leaf and all other narcotic raw materials are subject to governmental control measures limiting their use to medical and scientific purposes.


Dow Jones Signs Truce With Newspaper Rivals
In the newspaper industry's battle with the telephone industry over electronic information services, Dow Jones &amp; Company Inc. has emerged as the company most willing to swim with the sharks, as the seven Bell regional operating companies are regarded by many newspapers.
The aggressiveness of Dow Jones has made it both an object of suspicion and a closely watched guinea pig that might lead the way for newspapers to forge potentially lucrative alliances with the "Baby Bells."


Review/Jazz Festival; The Opposing Styles Of Pain and Solitude Versus Boisterousness
In the war for listeners' hearts, the singer has options.
One is direct assault; another is subtle negotiation.
Ray Charles and B. B. King practiced similar strategies at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday night.
Their joint concert was part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
Mr.
King has taken the blues out of small places and given it impressive size and electronic glare.
His big, confident baritone sings about the joys and sorrows of infidelity, and it is to the singer's credit that whether he is being slyly quiet or reveling in ear-crushing overstatement, the tensions between sentiment and form hold their proportion.
Mr.
King has essentially one message: extroverted self-pity rescued by mordant self-deprecation.
He can whisper it or yell it; the thought comes out the same.


2 Quakes May Have Raised Chances for a Bigger Temblor
Seismologists had depressing news for frightened Southern Californians in the wake of today's two powerful earthquakes.
Instead of relieving tension on the San Andreas fault, the two earthquakes on adjacent faults near Landers and Big Bear Lake probably increased seismic strain in the region.
Thus the dreaded "Big One," a catastrophic magnitude 8-plus earthquake that is sure to strike some day, may hit sooner rather than later.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook; Clinton Enjoying Mystery Over Choice for Ticket
Gov.
Bill Clinton says he does not want to "play with people's minds" as he goes about choosing a Vice-Presidential running mate.
But no one is playing the mating game any harder, or enjoying it more.
The Governor's eventual choice, and when he will disclose it, are anybody's guess at this point because he has masterfully masked where he is headed, usually with a teasing grin.


Anchor Lamina Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Medical Technology Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alcide Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Texture, Logic and a Young Trumpeter
The trumpeter Nicholas Payton, who performed at Fat Tuesday's last Tuesday through Saturday as part of the JVC Jazz Festival in a group called Jazz Futures II, may end up being the most important trumpeter to have arrived since Wynton Marsalis.
Mr.
Payton, at the age of 18, is a bit young to pass final judgment on, but if his shows last week were any indication, he has already arrived, full-blown.
Jazz musicians often take a decade or so to shift from muscle-flexing improvisations to thoughtful solos; Mr.
Payton is there.
It helped that Mr.
Payton was part of one of the most exciting new bands working.
Sharing the front line with the tenor saxophonist Herb Harris and the trombonist Ronald Westray, both exciting intelligent soloists, and backed by Peter Martin on piano, Chris Thomas on bass and Brian Blade on drums, Mr.
Payton and his bandmates navigated through standards and a series of complicated originals that balanced gorgeous writing and arranging with improvisation.
It was a band that clearly took pleasure in the process of invention, with the musicians listening intently to one another's solos.


More Revenues, but Thinner Profits, for Law Firms
Despite the recession, the nation's 100 largest law firms collectively took in a record $13.9 billion last year and suffered only a slight decline in profitability, according to a study to be released today by The American Lawyer, a legal magazine.
Five New York firms with a total of 377 partners -- Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore; Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz; Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel; Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, and Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell -- averaged at least $1 million per partner in profits.
The least profitable firm on the list, Venable, Baetjer and Howard, of Baltimore, had an operating income of $20 million, or $155,000 a partner, on revenues of $72 million.


BioChem Pharma Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Triplecast: An Olympian Blunder or Innovation?
When NBC agreed in December 1988 to pay $401 million for the broadcasting rights to the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, the television network believed it had a better idea: a pay-per-view venture with Cablevision Systems of Long Island that would provide 15 days of round-the-clock Olympics coverage, but, more important, would help to recoup the $100 million NBC was certain to lose from its inflated bid.
Now, less than a month from its debut July 26, what came to be called the Olympics Triplecast has the potential of being a pay-per-view equivalent of the megaflop movie "Ishtar," with a greater chance of losing $100 million than of making a red cent.


Dance in Review
Voronezh Dance Company of Russia  Pam Am Building, Manhattan
A folk dance department within a ballet academy is unusual, even in the former Soviet Union.
But the fruit of such an effort was on sparkling display in the United States debut of senior students from the Voronezh Dance Academy of Russia.


Washington Talk; After a Lull Capitol Gets In the Mood To Legislate
Congress seems to be easing into a law-making phase, dealing with legislation on issues from aid to the nations that used to be the Soviet Union to unemployment insurance and enterprise zones.
In the first three months of the year, about the only major bill to go through Congress was a middle-class tax cut that was more of a political statement than a serious policy proposal, let alone a measure whose advocates expected it to become law.
Indeed, some supporters would not have voted for it without the certainty of a Presidential veto.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
McDonnell Douglas said it had won a fierce competition with Boeing to sell at least 40 new jetliners to China in a deal worth more than $1 billion.
The planes will be assembled in China, with many of the components made in the United States.  [ D1. ]


Dance in Review
Kirov Ballet  Metropolitan Opera House
Ghosts haunted the ballrooms and bedrooms of "Romeo and Juliet," presented by the Kirov Ballet on Friday night in a staging by the company director, Oleg Vinogradov.
One of the ghosts was the memory of Galina Ulanova, the now-retired ballerina for whom Leonid Lavrovsky created Juliet in the original version of this production.
Larissa Lezhnina is certainly no Ulanova, nor does she need to be.
The young Kirov ballerina has her own charms.
But one of them is an achingly familiar curve of the torso, particularly to the front and side, that echoes the lyrical, tensile line of Miss Ulanova's body as a yearning yet indomitable Juliet.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Female P.O.W. Is Abused, Kindling Debate
On a cold night during her weeklong captivity in Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, Maj.
Rhonda Cornum was loaded into a pickup truck with another American prisoner of war, a young male sergeant, and taken from an underground bunker to a small prison.
During the 30-minute drive, an Iraqi guard kissed her repeatedly, pulled a blanket over their heads so that they would not be seen, unzipped her flight suit and fondled her breasts.
Major Cornum, a 37-year-old flight surgeon and biochemist from upstate New York, had broken both arms, smashed her knee and had a bullet in her right shoulder as a result of the downing of her Army helicopter.
She screamed in pain when the Iraqi tried to pull her flight suit down over her untreated and swollen arms.
Before the ordeal was over, she told a Presidential commission on women in the military this month, she was "violated manually -- vaginally and rectally."


Tektronix Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Quotation of the Day
"Everyone's made such a big deal about this indecent assault. But the only thing that makes it indecent is that it was nonconsensual. I asked myself, 'Is it going to prevent me from getting out of here? Is there a risk of death attached to it? Is it permanently disabling? Is it permanently disfiguring? Lastly, is it excruciating?' If it doesn't fit one of those five categories, then it isn't important." -- MAJ.
RHONDA CORNUM, who said she was sexually abused as a prisoner of war in Iraq.  [ A13:1 ]


In This Year, Will of the Plurality Could Reign
To the Editor:
"If the House Picks the President" (editorial, June 11) urges that the House of Representatives adopt procedures for its constitutionally mandated selection of the President in the event that no candidate receives a majority of electoral votes.
You state: "Public acceptance of the winner depends on confidence that he was chosen fairly."
It is important that the public perceive fairness in the Nov. 3 election itself.
Such fairness does not exist in a system where all of a state's electoral votes are allocated to the candidate who receives a plurality in the state.
Conceivably, a candidate who receives 34 percent of a state's popular vote would receive all of that state's electoral votes, denying input to 66 percent of the voters.
This method of electing a President will further destroy public confidence in our electoral system and engender even lower voter turnouts in future elections.


Leigh Shemitz, Christopher Winters
Leigh Shemitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Shemitz of Guilford and Woodbridge, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Winters, a son of Ann V. Winters of Greenwich, Conn., and William T. Winters of Sewickley, Pa.
Rabbi Helene Ferris performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents in Guilford.


Final Shock of Trials: Lewis 4th in the 200
It was unimaginable enough that Carl Lewis failed to make the United States Olympic team in the 100 meters last week, as he finished sixth in an event in which he is the world-record holder.
Now, the brain is asked to factor in his failure in the 200, a distance at which he shares the American record with the second-fastest time ever run.
It was almost sad to watch the concluding race of the Olympic trials today, as Lewis leaned across the line hoping his chest would catch the photo-timer before someone else's did.
Michael Johnson, the world's best at the distance the last two years, had already crossed in 19.79, a meet record, followed closely by Mike Marsh in 19.86 seconds.


Clinical Data reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reading, Writing and Receiving
When ROB MOORE was growing up in Hempstead, L.I., JULIUS ERVING, a native son who had achieved fame and fortune through sports, often came back and visited with the town's young people.
That exposure was inspirational for Moore, who went on to a successful football career as a wide receiver at Syracuse and now with the Jets.
Moore was so inspired that he is the catalyst behind a sports camp being held this week at the Jets' training center in Hempstead.
It is called Rob Moore's Books &amp; Ball Camp, a blend of academics, such as writing skills, memory development and Scholastic Aptitude Test preparation, and non-contact football skills.


Jamie Smida, Joseph Wood
Jamie Anne Smida, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Smida of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Joseph Robert Wood, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Wood of Whitinsville, Mass.
The Rev.
Stephen T. Giordano, a Reformed minister, performed the ceremony at the Montauk Club in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Wood, 27 years old, teaches kindergarten at St.
Luke's School in Manhattan.
She graduated from Boston College and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father is an art director at New York Telephone.


Cimarron Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Lisa Buttenheim, Jean-Claude Aime
Lisa Marian Buttenheim, a senior political officer in the United Nations Secretary General's office in New York, was married yesterday to Jean-Claude Aime, an Assistant Secretary General of the United Nations.
The Rev.
Theodore H. Evans performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Stockbridge, Mass.
Ms.
Buttenheim, who is keeping her name, graduated from Stanford University and received a master's degree in international relations and economics from Johns Hopkins University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis R. Buttenheim of Dennis, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the Buttenheim Publishing Corporation in Pittsfield, Mass.


A Celebration of Pride


Way Above Average in Classrooms
So how smart are Ivy League athletes?
If grade-point averages are a fair evaulation then the smartest this last academic year was CATHY SHARKEY, a Yale senior who won a Rhodes Scholarship.
Sharkey, who played on a losing lacrosse team, had a 3.90 grade-point average in economics.
Next came OLIVER MARTI, an all-America Brown lacrosse player from British Columbia, who had a 3.88 in business economics.


Books of The Times; To Be Read in Daylight, Away From Hungry Dogs
Gerald's Game  By Stephen King  332 pages. Viking. $23.50.
Are you ready for this?
At the start of Stephen King's harrowing new novel of horror, "Gerald's Game," a married couple, Gerald and Jessie Burlingame, are alone in the bedroom of their Maine woods summer cottage on an midweek afternoon in October, playing a little game to revive their flagging sex lives.
Jessie is lying on the bed, "her arms raised and splayed out, making her look a little like Fay Wray chained up and waiting for the great ape in 'King Kong.' " She has allowed her husband to secure her two wrists to the mahogany bedposts with two sets of handcuffs.
They are both stripped down to their underpants and Gerald is approaching his bride.


Ridden With Debt, U.S. Companies Cut Funds for Research
SCIENTIFIC research by private industry, the traditional powerhouse of innovation and technological leadership in the United States, is suffering deeper financial woes than previously disclosed, suggesting that America is slipping in the international race for discoveries that form the basis of new goods and services.
The National Science Foundation reported in February that industrial spending on research and development had begun to shrink after decades of growth.
The most recent numbers showed that, in inflation-adjusted dollars, such financing peaked in 1989 at about $79 billion, dropped slightly in 1990 and was projected to fall further in 1991.
Such declines worry analysts because foreign rivals are increasing their research investments at a brisk pace.


Taking Manhattan, by Way of Jersey City
Appealing to people who want to see every inch of a city they would not dream of setting foot in if they did not have to, the Circle Line will open a berth in Jersey City today for its three-hour cruises around Manhattan.
Long an only-in-New York experience for tourists, the Circle Line is following in the wake of expatriates like the Giants and the Jets with its new, not-quite-in-New-York experience on the west bank of the Hudson River.
The company says there are millions of people for whom the Jersey City pier is more convenient than the Circle Line's longtime pier at the end of West 42d Street in Manhattan.


ISRAEL DETAINS 17 WHO MET ARAFAT
Seventeen members of the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks were held by the Israeli police today and questioned about their recent public embrace of Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
All were released after three hours of interrogation at the Allenby Bridge, near this ancient city, as they crossed from Jordan into the West Bank.


Kicking Off the Slick: The Other Talley Beatty
Talley Beatty has made his name as a leading modern-dance choreographer with flowing, high-energy jazz dances.
But another side of Mr.
Beatty will be on view this week at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival in Becket, Mass., when Philadanco, a Philadelphia-based modern-dance company, performs a revival of Mr.
Beatty's "Southern Landscape," a 1947 work that has not been performed as a whole since 1949.
Philadanco will share the program with the Jose Limon Dance Company in an engagement to open tonight and run through Saturday night in the Ted Shawn Theater.
The suite of six dances, which includes "Mourner's Bench," a modern-dance classic, is set to traditional spirituals and deals with the killings of Southern blacks at the end of the Reconstruction.
Its use of black experiences and music predates the better-known works in that genre created by Alvin Ailey and Donald McKayle.


Excerpts From the Justices' Decision in the Pennsylvania Case
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's ruling today in the Pennsylvania abortion case, Planned Parenthood v.
Casey.
Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy, and David H. Souter jointly wrote an opinion for the Court upholding a portion of the regulations -- an "informed consent" provision and a 24-hour waiting period -- and reaffirming the 1973 Roe v.
Wade ruling that legalized abortion, but declaring unconstitutional a requirement that women seeking abortions notify their husbands.
Justices John Paul Stevens and Harry A. Blackmun each wrote an opinion arguing that all the restrictions should have been found unconstitutional.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia each wrote dissenting opinions, joined in both instances by Justices Byron R. White and Clarence Thomas, arguing that the Court should have overturned Roe v.
Wade.
FROM THE DECISION By Justices O'Connor, Kennedy and Souter
Liberty finds no refuge in a jurisprudence of doubt.
Yet 19 years after our holding that the Constitution protects a woman's right to terminate her pregnancy in its early stages, Roe v.
Wade, 410 U. S. 113 (1973), that definition of liberty is still questioned.
Joining the respondents as amicus curiae, the United States, as it has done in five other cases in the last decade, again asks us to overrule Roe.
At issue in these cases are five provisions of the Pennsylvania Abortion Control Act of 1982 as amended in 1988 and 1989.
The Act requires that a woman seeking an abortion give her informed consent prior to the abortion procedure, and specifies that she be provided with certain information at least 24 hours before the abortion is performed.
For a minor to obtain an abortion, the Act requires the informed consent of one of her parents, but provides for a judicial bypass option if the minor does not wish to or cannot obtain a parent's consent.
Another provision of the Act requires that, unless certain exceptions apply, a married woman seeking an abortion must sign a statement indicating that she has notified her husband of her intended abortion.
The Act exempts compliance with these three requirements in the event of a "medical emergency," which is defined in Sections 3203 of the Act.
In addition to the above provisions regulating the performance of abortions, the Act imposes certain reporting requirements on facilities that provide abortion services.
Before any of these provisions took effect, the petitioners, who are five abortion clinics and one physician representing himself as well as a class of physicians who provide abortion services, brought this suit seeking declaratory and injunctive relief.
Each provision was challenged as unconstitutional on its face.
The District Court entered a preliminary injunction against the enforcement of the regulations, and, after a 3-day bench trial, held all the provisions at issue here unconstitutional, entering a permanent injunction against Pennsylvania's enforcement of them.
The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed in part and reversed in part, upholding all of the regulations except for the husband notification requirement. . . .
And at oral argument in this Court, the attorney for the parties challenging the statute took the position that none of the enactments can be upheld without overruling Roe v.
Wade.
We disagree with that analysis; but we acknowledge that our decisions after Roe cast doubt upon the meaning and reach of its holding.
Further, the Chief Justice admits that he would overrule the central holding of Roe and adopt the rational relationship test as the sole criterion of constitutionality.
State and Federal courts as well as legislatures throughout the union must have guidance as they seek to address this subject in conformance with the Constitution.
Given these premises, we find it imperative to review once more the principles that define the rights of the woman and the legitimate authority of the state respecting the termination of pregnancies by abortion procedures.
After considering the fundamental constitutional questions resolved by Roe, principles of institutional integrity, and the rule of stare decisis, we are led to conclude this: the essential holding of Roe v.
Wade should be retained and once again reaffirmed.
It must be stated at the outset and with clarity that Roe's essential holding, the holding we reaffirm, has three parts.
First is a recognition of the right of the woman to choose to have an abortion before viability and to obtain it without undue interference from the State.
Before viability, the state's interests are not strong enough to support a prohibition of abortion or the imposition of a substantial obstacle to the woman's effective right to elect the procedure.
Second is a confirmation of the state's power to restrict abortions after fetal viability, if the law contains exceptions for pregnancies which endanger a woman's life or health.
And third is the principle that the state has legitimate interests from the outset of the pregnancy in protecting the health of the woman and the life of the fetus that may become a child.
These principles do not contradict one another; and we adhere to each.
. . .
Men and women of good conscience can disagree, and we suppose some always shall disagree, about the profound moral and spiritual implications of terminating a pregnancy, even in its earliest stage.
Some of us as individuals find abortion offensive to our most basic principles of morality, but that cannot control our decision.
Our obligation is to define the liberty of all, not to mandate our own moral code.
The underlying constitutional issue is whether the state can resolve these philosophic questions in such a definitive way that a woman lacks all choice in the matter, except perhaps in those rare circumstances in which the pregnancy is itself a danger to her own life or health, or is the result of rape or incest.
It is conventional constitutional doctrine that where reasonable people disagree the Government can adopt one position or the other.
That theorem, however, assumes a state of affairs in which the choice does not intrude upon a protected liberty.
Thus, while some people might disagree about whether or not the flag should be saluted, or disagree about the proposition that it may not be defiled, we have ruled that a state may not compel or enforce one view or the other.
Our cases recognize "the right of the individual, married or single, to be free from unwarranted governmental intrusion into matters so fundamentally affecting a person as the decision whether to bear or beget a child." Eisenstadt v.
Baird.
Our precedents "have respected the private realm of family life which the state cannot enter." Prince v.
Massachusetts.
These matters, involving the most intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity and autonomy, are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.
At the heart of liberty is the right to define one's own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life.
Beliefs about these matters could not define the attributes of personhood were they formed under compulsion of the State.
These considerations begin our analysis of the woman's interest in terminating her pregnancy but cannot end it, for this reason: though the abortion decision may originate within the zone of conscience and belief, it is more than a philosophic exercise.
Abortion is a unique act.
It is an act fraught with consequences for others: for the woman who must live with the implications of her decision; for the persons who perform and assist in the procedure; for the spouse, family, and society which must confront the knowledge that these procedures exist, procedures some deem nothing short of an act of violence against innocent human life; and, depending on one's beliefs, for the life or potential life that is aborted.
Though abortion is conduct, it does not follow that the State is entitled to proscribe it in all instances.
That is because the liberty of the woman is at stake in a sense unique to the human condition and so unique to the law.
The mother who carries a child to full term is subject to anxieties, to physical constraints, to pain that only she must bear.
. . .
Although Roe has engendered opposition, it has in no sense proven "unworkable," representing as it does a simple limitation beyond which a state law is unenforceable.
. . .
But to do this would be simply to refuse to face the fact that for two decades of economic and social developments, people have organized intimate relationships and made choices that define their views of themselves and their places in society, in reliance on the availability of abortion in the event that contraception should fail.
The ability of women to participate equally in the economic and social life of the nation has been facilitated by their ability to control their reproductive lives.
The Constitution serves human values, and while the effect of reliance on Roe cannot be exactly measured, neither can the certain cost of overruling Roe for people who have ordered their thinking and living around that case be dismissed.
No evolution of legal principle has left Roe's doctrinal footings weaker than they were in 1973.
No development of constitutional law since the case was decided has implicitly or explicitly left Roe behind as a mere survivor of obsolete constitutional thinking.
. . .
We have seen how time has overtaken some of Roe's factual assumptions: advances in maternal health care allow for abortions safe to the mother later in pregnancy than was true in 1973, and advances in neonatal care have advanced viability to a point somewhat earlier.
But these facts go only to the scheme of time limits on the realization of competing interests, and the divergences from the factual premises of 1973 have no bearing on the validity of Roe's central holding, that viability marks the earliest point at which the state's interest in fetal life is constitutionally adequate to justify a legislative ban on nontherapeutic abortions.
The soundness or unsoundness of that constitutional judgment in no sense turns on whether viability occurs at approximately 28 weeks, as was usual at the time of Roe, at 23 to 24 weeks, as it sometimes does today, or at some moment even slightly earlier in pregnancy, as it may if fetal respiratory capacity can somehow be enhanced in the future.
Whenever it may occur, the attainment of viability may continue to serve as the critical fact, just as it has done since Roe was decided; which is to say that no change in Roe's factual underpinning has left its central holding obsolete, and none supports an argument for overruling it.
The sum of the precedential inquiry to this point shows Roe's underpinnings unweakened in any way affecting its central holding.
While it has engendered disapproval, it has not been unworkable.
An entire generation has come of age free to assume Roe's concept of liberty in defining the capacity of women to act in society, and to make reproductive decisions; no erosion of principle going to liberty or personal autonomy has left Roe's central holding a doctrinal remnant; Roe portends no developments at odds with other precedent for the analysis of personal liberty; and no changes of fact have rendered viability more or less appropriate as the point at which the balance of interests tips. . . .
. . .
Our analysis would not be complete, however, without explaining why overruling Roe's central holding would not only reach an unjustifiable result under principles of stare decisis, but would seriously weaken the Court's capacity to exercise the judicial power and to function as the Supreme Court of a nation dedicated to the rule of law. . . .
The root of American Governmental power is revealed most clearly in the instance of the power conferred by the Constitution upon the Judiciary of the United States and specifically upon this Court.
As Americans of each succeeding generation are rightly told, the Court cannot buy support for its decisions by spending money and, except to a minor degree, it cannot independently coerce obedience to its decrees.
The Court's power lies, rather, in its legitimacy, a product of substance and perception that shows itself in the people's acceptance of the judiciary as fit to determine what the nation's law means and to declare what it demands.
The underlying substance of this legitimacy is of course the warrant for the Court's decisions in the Constitution and the lesser sources of legal principle on which the Court draws.
That substance is expressed in the Court's opinions, and our contemporary understanding is such that a decision without principled justification would be no judicial act at all.
But even when justification is furnished by apposite legal principle, something more is required.
Because not every conscientious claim of principled justification will be accepted as such, the justification claimed must be beyond dispute.
The Court must take care to speak and act in ways that allow people to accept its decisions on the terms the Court claims for them, as grounded truly in principle, not as compromises with social and political pressures having, as such, no bearing on the principled choices that the Court is obliged to make.
Thus, the Court's legitimacy depends on making legally principled decisions under circumstances in which their principled character is sufficiently plausible to be accepted by the nation.
The need for principled action to be perceived as such is implicated to some degree whenever this, or any other appellate court, overrules a prior case.
This is not to say, of course, that this Court cannot give a perfectly satisfactory explanation in most cases.
People understand that some of the Constitution's language is hard to fathom and that the Court's Justices are sometimes able to perceive significant facts or to understand principles of law that eluded their predecessors and that justify departures from existing decisions.
However upsetting it may be to those most directly affected when one judicially derived rule replaces another, the country can accept some correction of error without necessarily questioning the legitimacy of the Court.
In two circumstances, however, the Court would almost certainly fail to receive the benefit of the doubt in overruling prior cases.
There is, first, a point beyond which frequent overruling would overtax the country's belief in the Court's good faith.
Despite the variety of reasons that may inform and justify a decision to overrule, we cannot forget that such a decision is usually perceived (and perceived correctly) as, at the least, a statement that a prior decision was wrong.
There is a limit to the amount of error that can plausibly be imputed to prior courts.
If that limit should be exceeded, disturbance of prior rulings would be taken as evidence that justifiable re-examination of principle had given way to drives for particular results in the short term.
The legitimacy of the Court would fade with the frequency of its vacillation.
That first circumstance can be described as hypothetical; the second is to the point here and now.
Where, in the performance of its judicial duties, the Court decides a case in such a way as to resolve the sort of intensely divisive controversy reflected in Roe and those rare, comparable cases, its decision has a dimension that the resolution of the normal case does not carry.
It is the dimension present whenever the Court's interpretation of the Constitution calls the contending sides of a national controversy to end their national division by accepting a common mandate rooted in the Constitution.
The Court is not asked to do this very often, having thus addressed the nation only twice in our lifetime, in the decisions of Brown and Roe.
But when the Court does act in this way, its decision requires an equally rare precedential force to counter the inevitable efforts to overturn it and to thwart its implementation.
Some of those efforts may be mere unprincipled emotional reactions; others may proceed from principles worthy of profound respect.
But whatever the premises of opposition may be, only the most convincing justification under accepted standards of precedent could suffice to demonstrate that a later decision overruling the first was anything but a surrender to political pressure, and an unjustified repudiation of the principle on which the Court staked its authority in the first instance.
So to overrule under fire in the absence of the most compelling reason to re-examine a watershed decision would subvert the Court's legitimacy beyond any serious question.
. . .
The Court's duty in the present case is clear.
In 1973, it confronted the already-divisive issue of governmental power to limit personal choice to undergo abortion, for which it provided a new resolution based on the due process guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Whether or not a new social consensus is developing on that issue, its divisiveness is no less today than in 1973, and pressure to overrule the decision, like pressure to retain it, has grown only more intense.
A decision to overrule Roe's essential holding under the existing circumstances would address error, if error there was, at the cost of both profound and unnecessary damage to the Court's legitimacy, and to the nation's commitment to the rule of law.
It is therefore imperative to adhere to the essence of Roe's original decision, and we do so today.
From what we have said so far it follows that it is a constitutional liberty of the woman to have some freedom to terminate her pregnancy.
We conclude that the basic decision in Roe was based on a constitutional analysis which we cannot now repudiate.
The woman's liberty is not so unlimited, however, that from the outset the State cannot show its concern for the life of the unborn, and at a later point in fetal development the state's interest in life has sufficient force so that the right of the woman to terminate the pregnancy can be restricted.
. . .
Yet it must be remembered that Roe v.
Wade speaks with clarity in establishing not only the woman's liberty but also the state's "important and legitimate interest in potential life." That portion of the decision in Roe has been given too little acknowledgement and implementation by the Court in its subsequent cases.
Those cases decided that any regulation touching upon the abortion decision must survive strict scrutiny, to be sustained only if drawn in narrow terms to further a compelling state interest.
Not all of the cases decided under that formulation can be reconciled with the holding in Roe itself that the state has legitimate interests in the health of the woman and in protecting the potential life within her.
In resolving this tension, we choose to rely upon Roe, as against the later cases.
. . .
Some guiding principles should emerge.
What is at stake is the woman's right to make the ultimate decision, not a right to be insulated from all others in doing so.
Regulations which do no more than create a structural mechanism by which the state, or the parent or guardian of a minor, may express profound respect for the life of the unborn are permitted, if they are not a substantial obstacle to the woman's exercise of the right to choose.
Unless it has that effect on her right of choice, a state measure designed to persuade her to choose childbirth over abortion will be upheld if reasonably related to that goal.
Regulations designed to foster the health of a woman seeking an abortion are valid if they do not constitute an undue burden.
That is to be expected in the application of any legal standard which must accommodate life's complexity.
We do not expect it to be otherwise with respect to the undue burden standard.
We give this summary:
(a) To protect the central right recognized by Roe v.
Wade while at the same time accommodating the state's profound interest in potential life, we will employ the undue burden analysis as explained in this opinion.
An undue burden exists, and therefore a provision of law is invalid, if its purpose or effect is to place a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion before the fetus attains viability.
(b) We reject the rigid trimester framework of Roe v.
Wade.
To promote the state's profound interest in potential life, throughout pregnancy the state may take measures to ensure that the woman's choice is informed, and measures designed to advance this interest will not be invalidated as long as their purpose is to persuade the woman to choose childbirth over abortion.
These measures must not be an undue burden on the right.
(c) As with any medical procedure, the state may enact regulations to further the health or safety of a woman seeking an abortion.
Unnecessary health regulations that have the purpose or effect of presenting a substantial obstacle to a woman seeking an abortion impose an undue burden on the right.
(d) Our adoption of the undue burden analysis does not disturb the central holding of Roe v.
Wade, and we reaffirm that holding.
Regardless of whether exceptions are made for particular circumstances, a State may not prohibit any woman from making the ultimate decision to terminate her pregnancy before viability.
(e) We also reaffirm Roe's holding that "subsequent to viability, the State in promoting its interest in the potentiality of human life may, if it chooses, regulate, and even proscribe, abortion except where it is necessary, in appropriate medical judgment, for the preservation of the life or health of the mother." Roe v.
Wade, 410 U. S., at 164 165.
By Justice Stevens Concurring in part and dissenting in part
The portions of the Court's opinion that I have joined are more important than those with which I disagree.
I shall therefore first comment on significant areas of agreement, and then explain the limited character of my disagreement.
The Court is unquestionably correct in concluding that the doctrine of stare decisis has controlling significance in a case of this kind, notwithstanding an individual justice's concerns about the merits.
The central holding of Roe v.
Wade, has been a "part of our law" for almost two decades.
It was a natural sequel to the protection of individual liberty established in Griswold v.
Connecticut, The societal costs of overruling Roe at this late date would be enormous.
Roe is an integral part of a correct understanding of both the concept of liberty and the basic equality of men and women.
. . .
I also accept what is implicit in the Court's analysis, namely, a reaffirmation of Roe's explanation of why the state's obligation to protect the life or health of the mother must take precedence over any duty to the unborn.
The Court in Roe carefully considered, and rejected, the state's argument "that the fetus is a 'person' within the language and meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment."
From this holding, there was no dissent, indeed, no member of the Court has ever questioned this fundamental proposition.
Thus, as a matter of Federal constitutional law, a developing organism that is not yet a "person" does not have what is sometimes described as a "right to life." This has been and, by the Court's holding today, remains a fundamental premise of our constitutional law governing reproductive autonomy.
By Justice Blackmun Concurring in part and dissenting in part
Three years ago, in Webster v.
Reproductive Health Serv., four members of this Court appeared poised to "cas(t) into darkness the hopes and visions of every woman in this country" who had come to believe that the Constitution guaranteed her the right to reproductive choice.
All that remained between the promise of Roe and the darkness of the plurality was a single, flickering flame.
Decisions since Webster gave little reason to hope that this flame would cast much light.
But now, just when so many expected the darkness to fall, the flame has grown bright.
I do not underestimate the significance of today's joint opinion.
Yet I remain steadfast in my belief that the right to reproductive choice is entitled to the full protection afforded by this Court before Webster.
And I fear for the darkness as four Justices anxiously await the single vote necessary to extinguish the light.
Make no mistake, the joint opinion of Justices O'Connor, Kennedy, and Souter is an act of personal courage and constitutional principle.
In contrast to previous decisions in which Justices O'Connor and Kennedy postponed reconsideration of Roe v.
Wade, the authors of the joint opinion today join Justice Stevens and me in concluding that "the essential holding of Roe should be retained and once again reaffirmed."
In brief, five members of this Court today recognize that "the Constitution protects a woman's right to terminate her pregnancy in its early stages." A fervent view of individual liberty and the force of stare decisis have led the Court to this conclusion.
. . .
At long last, the Chief Justice admits it.
Gone are the contentions that the issue need not be (or has not been) considered.
There, on the first page, for all to see, is what was expected: "We believe that Roe was wrongly decided, and that it can and should be overruled consistently with our traditional approach to stare decisis in constitutional cases." If there is much reason to applaud the advances made by the joint opinion today, there is far more to fear from the Chief Justice's opinion.
The Chief Justice's criticism of Roe follows from his stunted conception of individual liberty.
While recognizing that the Due Process Clause protects more than simple physical liberty, he then goes on to construe this Court's personal-liberty cases as establishing only a laundry list of particular rights, rather than a principled account of how these particular rights are grounded in a more general right of privacy.
. . .
If, as the Chief Justice contends, the undue burden test is made out of whole cloth, the so called "arbitrary and capricious" limit is the Solicitor General's "new clothes."
Even if it is somehow "irrational" for a state to require a woman to risk her life for her child, what protection is offered for women who become pregnant through rape or incest?
Is there anything arbitrary or capricious about a state's prohibiting the sins of the father from being visited upon his offspring?
But, we are reassured, there is always the protection of the democratic process.
While there is much to be praised about our democracy, our country since its founding has recognized that there are certain fundamental liberties that are not to be left to the whims of an election.
A woman's right to reproductive choice is one of those fundamental liberties.
Accordingly, that liberty need not seek refuge at the ballot box.
In one sense, the Court's approach is worlds apart from that of the Chief Justice and Justice Scalia.
And yet, in another sense, the distance between the two approaches is short -- the distance is but a single vote.
I am 83 years old.
I cannot remain on this Court forever, and when I do step down, the confirmation process for my successor well may focus on the issue before us today.
That, I regret, may be exactly where the choice between the two worlds will be made.
FROM THE DISSENT By Chief Justice Rehnquist Dissenting in part and concurring in part
The joint opinion, following its newly-minted variation on stare decisis, retains the outer shell of Roe v.
Wade, but beats a wholesale retreat from the substance of that case.
We believe that Roe was wrongly decided, and that it can and should be overruled consistently with our traditional approach to stare decisis in constitutional cases.
We would adopt the approach of the plurality in Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services, and uphold the challenged provisions of the Pennsylvania statute in their entirety.
. . .
The joint opinion of Justices O'Connor, Kennedy, and Souter cannot bring itself to say that Roe was correct as an original matter, but the authors are of the view that "the immediate question is not the soundness of Roe's resolution of the issue, but the precedential force that must be accorded to its holding."
Instead of claiming that Roe was correct as a matter of original constitutional interpretation, the opinion therefore contains an elaborate discussion of stare decisis.
. . .
In our view, authentic principles of stare decisis do not require that any portion of the reasoning in Roe be kept intact.
"Stare decisis is not . . . a universal, inexorable command," especially in cases involving the interpretation of the Federal Constitution. . . .
Erroneous decisions in such constitutional cases are uniquely durable, because correction through legislative action, save for constitutional amendment, is impossible.
It is therefore our duty to reconsider constitutional interpretations that "depar(t) from a proper understanding" of the Constitution.
. . .
Our constitutional watch does not cease merely because we have spoken before on an issue; when it becomes clear that a prior constitutional interpretation is unsound we are obliged to reexamine the question.
. . .
In the end, having failed to put forth any evidence to prove any true reliance, the joint opinion's argument is based solely on generalized assertions about the national psyche, on a belief that the people of this country have grown accustomed to the Roe decision over the last 19 years and have "ordered their thinking and living around" it.
As an initial matter, one might inquire how the joint opinion can view the "central holding" of Roe as so deeply rooted in our constitutional culture, when it so casually uproots and disposes of that same decision's trimester framework.
. . .
There is also a suggestion in the joint opinion that the propriety of overruling a "divisive" decision depends in part on whether "most people" would now agree that it should be overruled.
Either the demise of opposition or its progression to substantial popular agreement apparently is required to allow the Court to reconsider a divisive decision.
How such agreement would be ascertained, short of a public opinion poll, the joint opinion does not say.
But surely even the suggestion is totally at war with the idea of "legitimacy" in whose name it is invoked.
The Judicial Branch derives its legitimacy, not from following public opinion, but from deciding by its best lights whether legislative enactments of the popular branches of Government comport with the Constitution.
The doctrine of stare decisis is an adjunct of this duty, and should be no more subject to the vagaries of public opinion than is the basic judicial task.
There are other reasons why the joint opinion's discussion of legitimacy is unconvincing as well.
In assuming that the Court is perceived as "surrender(ing) to political pressure" when it overrules a controversial decision, the joint opinion forgets that there are two sides to any controversy.
The joint opinion asserts that, in order to protect its legitimacy, the Court must refrain from overruling a controversial decision lest it be viewed as favoring those who oppose the decision.
But a decision to adhere to prior precedent is subject to the same criticism, for in such a case one can easily argue that the Court is responding to those who have demonstrated in favor of the original decision.
. . .
By Justice Scalia Dissenting in part and concurring in part
My views on this matter are unchanged from those I set forth in my separate opinions in Webster v.
Reproductive Health Services and Ohio v.
Akron Center for Reproductive Health.
The states may, if they wish, permit abortion-on-demand, but the Constitution does not
require
them to do so.
The permissiblity of abortion, and the limitations upon it, are to be resolved like most important questions in our democracy: by citizens trying to persuade one another and then voting.
As the Court acknowledges, "where reasonable people disagree the goverment can adopt one position or the other."
The Court is correct in adding the qualification that this "assumes a state of affairs in which the choice does not intrude upon a protected liberty," but the crucial part of that qualification is the penultimate word.
A State's choice between two positions on which reasonable people can disagree is constitutional even when (as is often the case) it intrudes upon a "liberty" in the absolute sense.
Laws against bigamy, for example -- which entire societies of reasonable people disagree with -- intrude upon men and women's liberty to marry and live with one another.
But bigamy happens not to be a liberty specially "protected" by the Constitution.
That is, quite simply, the issue in this case: not whether the power of a woman to abort her unborn child is a "liberty" in the absolute sense; or even whether it is a liberty of great importance to many women.
Of course it is both.
The issue is whether it is a liberty protected by the Constitution of the United States.
I am sure it is not.
I reach that conclusion not because of anything so exalted as my views concerning the "concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of life." Rather, I reach it for the same reason I reach the conclusion that bigamy is not constitutionally protected -- because of two simple facts: (1) the Constitution says absolutely nothing about it, and (2) the longstanding traditions of American society have permitted it to be legally proscribed.
. . .
The Court's description of the place of Roe in the social history of the United States is unrecognizable.
Not only did Roe not, as the Court suggests,
resolve
the deeply divisive issue of abortion; it did more than anything else to nourish it, but elevating it to the national level where it is infinitely more difficult to resolve.


When Sports Pitchmen Fall It's Time to Control the Spin
NEVER mind the running, jumping and swimming scheduled for the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
All eyes are now on the furious scrambling, ambushing and maneuvering by the Olympic advertisers.
Most notable is an event that could be called the mad dash.
Reebok International Ltd. is hurriedly revamping its $30 million Olympic campaign to recover from the failure of the decathlete Dan O'Brien to qualify for the United States Olympic team when he missed three attempts at the pole vault at Saturday's trials in New Orleans.
Since January, brash advertising from Chiat/Day/Mojo in New York has promoted a Reebok-sponsored grudge match between Mr.
O'Brien and a rival, Dave Johnson, to decide who is "the world's greatest athlete."


Franklin Quest Co. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Note Offering By BankAmerica
The BankAmerica Corporation offered $500 million in 7 3/4 percent subordinated notes yesterday through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
The notes are due in 2002 at a price of 99.60, to yield 7.955 percent.
Noncallable by the banking company before maturity, the notes are priced to yield about 84 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Candidates On Television
The Presidential campaigners have scheduled these television appearances in coming days:  President Bush
WEDNESDAY: 7-8 A.M., CBS, "This Morning," interview. (Channel in 2 New York.)


Mikhail Tal, a Chess Grandmaster Known for His Daring, Dies at 55
Mikhail Tal, a Latvian grandmaster who held the world chess championship in 1960-61 and was one of the game's most popular and exciting players, died in Moscow on Sunday after a long illness, the Russian news agency Itar-Tass reported.
He was 55 years old.
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Mr.
Tal had hoped to represent Latvia in this month's world chess Olympiad in Manila, but was unable to make the trip because of illness.
No cause of death was given, but he had suffered from liver and kidney ailments for many years.
Itar-Tass said he died after being taken to a hospital to undergo surgery for a severe kidney illness.


15-Year-Old Dies From Shot to Chest
A 15-year-old Manhattan boy died yesterday after he was found with a bullet wound to his chest outside a known drug location in Washington Heights, the police said.
The boy, identified as Richard Perdomo, of 601 West 177th Street, was believed to have been the target of the shooting, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.
Officer Bloch said details of the incident remained sketchy last night and no suspect had been identified.


Aetna to Cut 10% of Work Force, or 4,800 Jobs, by End of '93
Aetna Life and Casualty announced yesterday that it would lay off 4,800 workers, more than 10 percent of its work force, by the end of next year as part of its effort to trim costs and narrow the business of the nation's largest publicly traded insurance company.
About 40 percent of the layoffs will take place in the Hartford area, a company spokesman said, adding to the 2,600 jobs the company has already cut in Hartford and its suburbs since last year.


U.N. Votes to Send Troops To Reopen Sarajevo Airport
As Serbian forces besieging Sarajevo backed down, the Security Council voted unanimously today to send troops to secure the airport for delivery of food and medicine to the hungry, war-battered residents.
As a first action, the Security Council ordered 850 Canadian peacekeeping troops to work with 50 French technicians to take over and reopen the airport.
The first units are expected to reach the airport this week.


USAir Is Said to Show Interest in T.W.A.
USAir Group's stock rose sharply yesterday after a report that the company was negotiating to buy the assets of Trans World Airlines.
But Carl C. Icahn, the chairman of T.W.A., called the report premature.
"While Trans World Airlines has had discussions with USAir and others, at this point T.W.A. has not received an offer from USAir," said Mr.
Icahn, reacting to the report in The Wall Street Journal yesterday.


Observer; Bush League Bogart
The White House professes shock and sorrow at evidence that Ross Perot likes to snoop around in people's lives -- likes to have people -- believe it or not -- investigated.
It makes you wonder what world the White House has been living in lately.
Surely President Bush knows his own vast investigating empire makes Inspector Perot look like a bush-league Sam Spade.
Or maybe it was Philip Marlowe, maybe Humphrey Bogart, with the battered old heap, bottle of booze in the desk drawer and bills for $25 a day and expenses.


New York City's Loft Law Is Extended
The New York State Legislature passed a bill today to extend and modify the law governing New York City's loft residences, allowing thousands of artists to continue living in lofts without fear of eviction.
The original bill was created as a compromise between landlords and tenants of the lofts, which are in commercial buildings and often do not comply with residential building codes.


This Honorable Court
The Supreme Court yesterday preserved liberty for American women and, because of three moderates, honor for itself.
Its abortion decision did not make yesterday a happy day.
The decision will allow states to impose new burdens on, especially, poor women.
The Court remains so divided that abortion rights may now turn entirely on the next Justice.
But even so, by reaffirming Roe v.
Wade, the decision that recognized a woman's right to control her reproductive fate, the present Court remains reasonably right.


Pavichevich Brewing reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Peoples Jewellers reports earnings for Year to March 31


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the transplanting of a baboon's liver into a human patient referred incorrectly to previous uses of animal organs in humans.
At least 33 other operations have involved animal organs, but not all have been from baboons.
Further reporting on the latest operation appears today on page C3.


O'Brien Sets His Sights on French Event
There may be no Olympics this year for DAN O'BRIEN, but there may still be a world record.
The world decathlon champion said his failure Saturday in the United States Olympic track and field trials in New Orleans had led him to accept an invitation to a major competition in early September in Talence, France.
O'Brien said a world record there would soothe his unexpected failure to make the Olympic team when he failed to clear his opening height in the pole vault.
Hours after that failure, the tears had vanished.
O'Brien returned to his hotel room and showered.
Then he went to Bourbon Street for dinner with TANYA HUGHES, who won the women's high jump in the trials, and his massage therapist.
They did the same Sunday night.


Biocircuits Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Giants Stadium Rolls Seven as World Cup Site
The designation of Soldier Field in Chicago as the site of the opening game of ther 1994 World Cup tournament, and the choice of Giants Stadium for seven games, highlighted today's announcement of the nine American stadiums that will be hosts to all 52 games of the soccer extavaganza.
Giants Stadium was not considered as a World Cup site originally, but wound up with the second-highest number of games in the monthlong tournament.
The Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., will be the host to the most games, eight, including the final.


Ernest Acker, 96, Who Worked For Utility Company for 45 Years
Ernest R. Acker, a utility executive who retired as head of the Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric Corporation in 1964 after 45 years with the company, died on Friday in the Caleb Hitchcock nursing home in Bloomfield, Conn.
A former resident of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., he was 96 years old.
A company spokesman said he died of pneumonia.


Marijuana vs. Alcohol for Teen-Agers
To the Editor:
As a New York City police officer, I was intrigued by Peter Passell's June 17 Economic Scene column about research showing that teen-agers who are priced out of the market for marijuana turn to alcohol.
Particularly important are the statistics that show that the risks for accidental injury and auto accidents are less serious for marijuana than for alcohol.
From 1976 to 1980 I was assigned to some of the Schaefer Beer concerts in Central Park.
When we had a crowd in the park that was predominantly beer drinking, there were so many fights and other problems that we had our hands full, and so did the burly security guards hired specifically to keep things under control.
On the other hand, when we cracked down on the beer drinking, marijuana smoke wafted overhead, and the few problems we encountered were usually the result of police officers arresting marijuana users.


37 South Africa Victims Evoke Angry Eulogies
In the dusty amateur soccer stadium of this previously uncelebrated black township, the leadership of black South Africa and a crowd of 25,000 today eulogized victims of the reform era's worst massacre and roared their bitterness at the white Government.
The funeral service for 37 of the people killed on June 17 in a night rampage through Boipatong united black leaders from moderate to militant in calling for the ouster of President F. W. de Klerk.
They disagreed over whether he should be driven from office by force or allowed to negotiate his own surrender.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Samaranch, Under the Gun Shoots Back
As president of the International Olympic Committee, Juan Antonio Samaranch has every reason to be happy.
This year's Winter Olympics, in Albertville, France, went off well.
The 1992 Summer Olympics are to open July 25 in his hometown, Barcelona, Spain.
And King Juan Carlos recently made him the Marquis of Samaranch in recognition of his work.
Yet, the elegant 71-year-old Spaniard seems tense and worried.
He is confident that everything is in place for the Barcelona Games, but already he is looking beyond the Olympics to next year when his current term ends.
And after 12 years as head of the Olympic movement, he is now convinced that a conspiracy is under way to block his re-election.


COMPANY NEWS: Fiber-Optic Feat; Lots of Conversations Over One Skinny Cable
Progress in modern telecommunications is often invisible, but enormous.
Scientists at A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories reported last week that they had succeeded in doubling the previous record for information that can be conveyed using blindingly fast pulses of light -- some 6.8 billion bits of information, or pulses of light, a second.
To put that gigantic figure into perspective, consider that household telephone lines carry about 64,000 bits of information per second.
Using a strand of fiber-optic cable about the thickness of angel hair pasta, the new system could provide enough telephone service -- about 100,000 simultaneous conversations -- for nearly all the fans in both Yankee Stadium and Candlestick Park, or for a city the size of Gary, Ind.


A Tax on Parking Attacks the Middle Class
To the Editor:
"End the Free Ride for Driving to Work" (editorial, June 8), in favor of the Federal Government's taxing employer-provided parking spaces, is another, and very bizarre, manifestation of upper-class, left-liberal revulsion for the free middle class.
One gets the impression that you will subscribe to any and all efforts to warehouse the middle class as government dependents, whether it's in Soviet-style public housing, Medicare-level health facilities or Government-run mass transit.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week; Disunity Is a Tradition That Hurts Democrats
Paul E. Tsongas was chatting with Ross Perot last week.
Jesse Jackson did his flirting the week before.
Both men are Democrats, but both seem in a persistent state of pique with their party, and neither seems to pay much of a price for it.
Party discipline is not a fashionable concept, but it is a useful one when it comes to winning elections, especially in a three-way race.
The Republicans know this.
Their President remains stuck in the low 30's in public approval polls, he has been unable to find a galvanizing, positive message, and his performance on the trail has been shaky at best.
But Republicans dutifully embarked on a surrogate strategy over the last few weeks aimed at shoring up their candidate by redefining Mr.
Perot.
And while doubts and frustrations about the course of the Bush campaign are rampant in the Republican Party, very few of them are publicly aired.


Dalfen's Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Reconstructing Jelly Through His Music
Luther Henderson, the pianist, composer and orchestrator, has been the arranger and conductor of more than 50 Broadway musicals.
But when people try to describe what he did for the hit musical "Jelly's Last Jam," he says, they can't figure out what to call him.
"There has been great concern about whether what we put forth is or is not new music," Mr.
Henderson said the other day.
"Nobody knows how to classify me or the music when it comes to this musical. I call myself a G.P., a general practitioner."


Top Lawmakers Vow to Push Abortion-Rights Bill
House and Senate leaders vowed today that Congress would pass legislation to protect abortion rights, although they ac knowledged that they lacked the votes to override an expected veto by President Bush.
Speaker of the House Thomas S. Foley said today's Supreme Court decision allowed states to limit abortions, even though "the great majority of voters believe that this is a right of privacy that should be protected."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-A10  RELIEF SUPPLIES IN SARAJEVO
A French military transport plane landed in Sarajevo with 10 tons of relief supplies after United Nations troops took control of the airport in the besieged city.
A1  U.N.
APPROVES BOSNIA FORCE
The Security Council voted unanimously today to send 850 Canadian peacekeeping troops to take over Sarajevo's airport.
A10  NORWAY TO RESUME WHALING
Norway announced plans to break an international moratorium on commercial hunting of the minke whale, evoking an emotional response and raising questions about the course other countries would take.
A1  THE SORROW OF SOUTH AFRICA
Thousands of South Africans mourned the victims of the Boipatong massacre, and mingled with their tears and anger was the shout "de Klerk must go!" A3  ALGERIAN LEADER SHOT TO DEATH
Mohammed Boudiaf, President of Algeria's ruling Supreme State Council, was assassinated as he delivered an address in Annaba.
A8  GUNFIRE STOPS ENVOYS IN MOLDOVA
A convoy carrying a United Nations delegation was kept from its fact-finding mission in a separatist region of Moldova by a volley of gun and artillery fire.
A3  A TROUBLESOME EMBRACE
Palestinian delegates to the Mideast peace talks were held by the Israeli police and questioned about their recent public embrace of Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O.
A6  THE TALLY IN CHILE AND ARGENTINA
Election results in Chile showed support for its return to democracy while those in Argentina could be construed as a warning about growing unease over corruption, according to political analysts.
A8  Toronto Journal: Backstage with "Russians on Broadway." A4  The Mongolian opposition says it lost in Sunday's elections.
A7  National A14-21  'ESSENCE' OF ROE V. WADE UPHELD
The Supreme Court, in a narrow and anguished decision, reaffirmed what it called the "essence" of the constitutional right to abortion while at the same time permitting some new state restrictions.
A1  Excerpts from the opinions in the abortion case.
A16  RULING A RELIEF FOR BUSH
The abortion ruling took the edge off a recurring nightmare for President Bush's re-election campaign.
But if Bush opponents are right about the potency of the abortion issue, it will continue to haunt him.
A1  UNITED IN NEGATIVE REACTION
Even before they had read the decision, advocates of abortion rights and their opponents sallied forth to shape public opinion on it.
They were agreed on one matter: they did not like it.
A15  A GO-AHEAD FOR THE STATES
The Court ruling guarantees many more years of legislation and litigation over how far states may go to restrict abortion, experts said.
A18  CONGRESSIONAL BATTLE RESUMES
House and Senate leaders vowed to pass legislation to protect abortion rights, but acknowledged that they lacked the votes to override a veto by President Bush.
A17  NARROW RULING ON PROPERTY LAW
The Supreme Court made it easier for some property owners to challenge land-use regulations and demand compensation from the government if "confiscatory regulations" prevent them from developing their land.
A18  'EDUCATION PRESIDENT'S' RECORD
Four years after George Bush proclaimed himself to be the "education President," he can point to few tangible advances in the nation's schools.
But he takes credit for starting a movement that he says will change American education.
A1  Clinton's running mate: A list of maybes.
A21  The President stressed the Presidential in a New York visit.
A21  AFTERSHOCKS MAR DESERT PEACE
On the day after the most powerful earthquake to rock California in 40 years, Carmen Mendoza's toddler is afraid to go back in their house on the mesa, the family dog crawls on her belly with every aftershock and there is no water.
But the Mendozas are determined to stay in their refuge from the cities.
A14  The San Andreas fault may be spreading, experts said.
A14  RISING BY CUTTING REGULATIONS
At the age of 34, David M. McIntosh has amassed influence in the loftiest councils of the White House, and his ideas, praised by industrialists and vilified by conservationists, have lifted the President's environmental policies to the top of the domestic and international agenda.
A19  Metropolitan Digest, B1  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-10  United States research and development spending slips.
C1  The science of pyrotechnics builds on chemistry and physics.
C1  The desert ant, no grasshopper, works in a harsh environment.
C1  A ground-breaking interspecies transplant and its implications.
C3  Forest management enters on a new logging experiment.
C3  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  How Luther Henderson reconstructed Jelly Roll Morton.
C11  A Scripps award for educating America's heart.
C11  Music: Classical reviews.
C12  "Rebirth of the Cool." C16  Dance: City Ballet ends its season with guest artists.
C15  Word and Image:  On suggestive late-night TV.
C11  Tales of family life.
C15  Bill Moyers on the family.
C16  Sports B8-13  Baseball: Mets lose to Cubs, 5-2.
B9  Slumping Piartes lose to Tewksbury.
B10  Yanks lose to Royals as ex-Mets excel.
B11  Column: Vecsey on Wimbledon B9  Olympics: Samaranch on his defense.
B12  Johnson and Bird have global effect.
B12  Major names missing, but U.S. team has good chance in track.
B12  Soccer: Giants Stadium to be host to 7 World Cup games.
B13  Tennis: McEnroe moves up; Lendl goes out.
B9  Obituaries D22-23  Mikhail Tal, chess champion.
D23  Allan Jones, Hollywood singer.
D23  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  This honorable Court.
Dirty business on clean air.
Steps back for Head Start.
Topics: Higher education.
Letters A22  Russell Baker: Bush league Bogart.
A23  A. M. Rosenthal: The Israeli gamble.
A23  Kathleen M. Sullivan: A victory for Roe.
A23  Fashion B7  Resort wear goes wherever.


Agreement Reached on Restoring $900 Million for School Rebuilding, Officials Say
The Dinkins administration and the Board of Education have agreed to a plan that would restore $900 million to the long-term effort to rebuild New York City's schools, officials involved in the talks said yesterday.
The agreement is to be announced this week, perhaps as soon as today, the officials said.
It represents a major turnaround for the $4.3 billion, five-year school reconstruction program, which was trimmed by more than $900 million a year ago when the city had to cut back substantially on its capital budget because of the region's severe recession.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; CLINTON CAMP SEEKS TO UNDERSTAND NEW YORK COMMUTE
The Democratic National Convention in New York is less than two weeks away, and the Clinton campaign is sweating the details.
The latest issue of the campaign's weekly convention planning newsletter, addressed to "our friends in Little Rock, Ark.," reports that Gov.
Bill Clinton has been able to "test" the Presidential suite at the Intercontinental Hotel.


Fear Persists as California Endures More Aftershocks


Concord Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Helen Olheim Is Dead; A Mezzo-Soprano, 87
Helen Olheim, a mezzo-soprano who sang with the Metropolitan Opera, died on Friday at the Beneva Nursing Pavilion in Sarasota, Fla.
She was 87 years old.
She died of natural causes, said her sister, Dorothy Dry of Berwick, Pa.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS U.N. Votes to Send Troops To Reopen Sarajevo Airport; Talks on U.S. Role
The Bush Administration stepped up talks with United Nations officials today over the use of United States planes and aviation experts to airlift food and medical supplies to Sarajevo.
United States officials have offered to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees the use of military planes and personnel to ferry supplies to the city, where they would be distributed by Red Cross and United Nations workers, said an Administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Scandal Brings Police Added Stress and Scrutiny
When Dennis Pagan became a New York City police officer, he followed his two older brothers into a job from which he thought professional satisfaction would flow as steadily as the paychecks.
On fleeting occasions he still feels that way: Two weeks ago, a crowd applauded when he helped arrest three burglary suspects.
But more often these days, he feels the burn of suspicious stares from pedestrians and the boot-camp snap of reprimands from superiors stringently enforcing dress codes.
He is learning, he said, that the shadow of corruption surrounding a few officers can shroud the entire Police Department in doubt.


Stars Are Missing? This U.S. Cast Could Still Reign in Spain
So how do you gauge this track and field team the United States will send to the Barcelona Olympics?
There are so many notable absentees, like Roger Kingdom in the 110-meter hurdles, Mary Slaney in the 1,500 and 3,000 and Carl Lewis in the sprints, that a sage might anoint this a team of change.
The old guard is dead; long live the new.


He'll Definitely Return, But Will Steinbrenner Bring Chill With Him?
Buck Showalter, the youngest manager in the major leagues, looks as if he has aged about 10 years since he took over the Yankees this season.
It could be worse.
The conscientious Showalter, 36 years old, could have been managing during the Yankees' G.M.S. epoch as opposed to the brief, shining moment known as Camelot, oops, make that the Yankees W.G.M.S. (Without George M. Steinbrenner).


Outside Court, Rival Rallies and Heavy Politicking
At the precise moment the Supreme Court was issuing its much-awaited opinion, advocates of abortion rights and their opponents sallied forth to interpret it.
They had not had a chance to read it, but never mind: with few exceptions they already knew they did not like it.
The broad esplanade in front of the Supreme Court building was a milling marketplace of commentary just minutes after the ruling was issued.
News releases, printed well in advance, were handed out as spokesmen and spokeswomen of various stripes spun from one knot of journalists to another.


Three Who Spoke as One
From the joint opinion by Associate Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter.
"Liberty finds no refuge in a jurisprudence of doubt. ... The essential holding of Roe v. Wade should be retained and once again reaffirmed.
. . .
"The Constitution serves human values, and while the effect of reliance on roe cannot be exactly measured, neither can the certain cost of overruling Roe for people who have ordered their thinking and living around that case be dismissed. No evolution of legal principle has left Roe's doctrinal footings weaker than they were in 1973.
. . .
"An entire generation has come of age free to assume Roe's concept of liberty in defining the capacity of women to act in society, and to make reproductive decisions.
. . .
"A decision to overrule Roe's essential holding under the existing circumstances would address error, if error there was, at the cost of both profound and unnessary damage to the Court's legitimacy, and to the nation's commitment to the rule of law. It is therefore imperative to adhere to the essence of Roe's original decision, and we do so today."


3 Newark Officers Charged in Shooting Cover-Up
Three Newark police officers were charged today with conspiring to cover up their actions in connection with the shooting of Howard Caesar, a 17-year-old who the police say was driving a stolen car.
Criminal complaints charging the officers with official misconduct were announced by James F. Mulvihill, the Acting Essex County Prosecutor.
He said the three officers were in West Side Park on June 9 near where the shot was fired that hit Mr.
Caesar.
Mr.
Mulvihill said the three officers failed to report the incident in violation of their legal duty, and at least two of them filed false reports saying they were somewhere else at the time.


COMPANY NEWS
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO., New York, said its joint venture in China announced a $13 million capital expansion program to increase manufacturing capacity at its Shanghai pharmaceutical plant.
ENCORE COMPUTER CORP., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., received a $4.4 million contract from Lockheed Corp., Calabasas, Calif., for 11 computer systems for the Air Force.


A G.O.P. Rift in Albany May Hinder Health Bill
New York State lawmakers said today that they had finally agreed to overhaul the state's health insurance system, but the agreement remains uncertain because of a highly unusual internal dispute among Senate Republicans.
For months, officials from the Senate, the Democratic-led Assembly and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's office have been struggling to put together a plan that all sides can live with.
And today, negotiators from all three sides said that they had worked until after 4:30 A.M.
Sunday, putting last-minute touches on a final agreement.


Topics of The Times; Whose Higher Education?
Higher education in New York has suffered in recent years.
Tuition at public colleges and universities has increased while public support has decreased.
So has the state's program of support for private universities.
How long can the state continue to reduce such help and still expect higher education to fulfill its mission?
That's just one question to be examined by a welcome new Commission on Higher Education just created by the State Board of Regents.


McElligott Wright Is Losing McElligott
McElligott Wright Morrison White in Minneapolis said yesterday that Tom McElligott, chairman, chief executive and creative director, would soon leave the two-year-old shop.
In a telephone interview, Tony Wright, McElligott Wright's president, confirmed part of the reports to that effect in this week's issues of Advertising Age and Adweek, which described Mr.
McElligott's departure as a "palace coup" that occurred while he was at the International Advertising Film Festival in Cannes, France.


A Busy '92 for Wall St. Underwriters
Wall Street's money-raising bonanza extended through this year's second quarter, as the value of stocks and bonds taken to market again topped $200 billion and set a record.
Domestic underwriting in the three-month period that ends today reached $212.9 billion, up 53 percent from the $139.5 billion raised in 1991's second quarter, and just higher than the previous record of $210 billion in offerings that hit the market in the first three months this year, IDD Information Services reported.


For Head Start, Two Steps Back
Head Start is, in a sense, the motherhood and apple pie of Government programs.
Everybody, rightly, is crazy about it -- the President and parents, Congress and local politicians of every persuasion.
But what all this love adds up to, Prof.
Edward Zigler of Yale wrote on The Times's Op-Ed page last week, is "public whispers of sweet nothings. When political push came to budgetary shove, Head Start lost."
Dr.
Zigler, an originator of the program, was referring specifically to the fact that Congress has now dropped $250 million from its emergency urban aid bill, money that would have kept centers for 220,000 children open this summer.
He might have added, "So what else is new?" Because when it comes to politicians putting money where their mouths are, Head Start often comes up a loser.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Clinton Is Quiet as Running-Mate Game Roars On
It may be a little difficult to detect this year, with all the fuss involving Ross Perot and President Bush, but the customary parlor games that surround the selection of a candidate for Vice President have begun.
The lists of possibilities are as varied as they are endless.
The main thing they seem to have in common is one inescapable fact: Virtually none of the people speculating have any idea what they are talking about.


On My Mind; The Israeli Gamble
Consider:
Later this summer, a free election will be held in an important Mideastern Muslim state, under the rules of parliamentary democracy.
The opposition will win on a platform of peace through major concessions to Israel and an end of enmity toward Jews.
It will create a new government dedicated to those ends.
The defeated government will step aside peacefully.


Business Scene; New Russian Car: Pretty Good Deal
OUTSIDE the Zhiguli Trade Center, the nation's largest new-car dealership, throngs of men loiter.
They represent a growing phenomenon in Russia today: the car merchant.
Their specialty is to collar people who have just bought new cars and to try to persuade them to sell their shiny vehicles on the spot.
Sometimes new-car owners are offered double the amount they paid minutes before to the dealer.
Clearly, the free market has come to car sales in Russia today, but in a form not easily recognizable in the United States.
In the United States, the supply of new cars is more than the American public will buy, so a new car's value begins to fall the minute it leaves the dealer's lot.
Here, the Government has allowed dealers to raise new car prices twentyfold since Jan. 1.
But even at the higher prices, long waiting lists exist for new cars and their value keeps rising after dealers sell them.


Lieut. Gen. Daniel Strickler, 95, Veteran of Three Wars, Is Dead
Lieut.
Gen.
Daniel B. Strickler, retired, who served in three wars and was a former Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania, died on Monday in a retirement home in Lancaster, Pa.
He was 95 years old.
A spokeswoman for the family gave no specific cause of death.


Adelphia Communications reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Justice Blackmun On His Longevity
Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who joined the majority in part in its ruling on the Pennsylvania abortion case, used his own opinion as an opportunity to ponder his mortality and its potentially pivotal effect on the abortion issue.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Aetna plans to lay off 4,800 employees, or more than 10 percent of its work force, by the end of next year as part of its effort to trim its costs and narrow the business of the nation's largest publicly traded insurance company.  [ Page D1. ]
Chris-Craft Industries may be forced to halt or postpone its proposed $310 million acquisition of a New Jersey television station because a partnership run by Mario Gabelli owns significant stakes in both companies.  [ D1. ]


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Columbia Hospital Corp., Fort Worth, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a proposed public offering of $135 million in senior subordinated notes due in 2002 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The offering is conditioned on the completion of Columbia's proposed merger with Basic American Medical Inc.
*
Houston Industries, the holding company for Houston Lighting and Power, is offering $100 million in 7 7/8 percent debentures due in 2002 at a price of 99.216, to yield 7.99 percent.
Noncallable, the notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P. Common  *
Banyan Systems Inc., Westboro, Conn., a computer software products company, has filed for an initial public offering of 2.67 million common shares through Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co.
Ratings  *
Societe Generale's long-term debt rating is under review for possible downgrading by Moody's Investors Service.
The bank is based in Paris.
*
TW Service Inc.'s long-term ratings are under review for possible upgrading by Moody's.


Lothar Kalinowsky, A Psychiatrist, 92; Used Electroshocks
Dr.
Lothar B. Kalinowsky, a psychiatrist who was a teacher and author in the field of electroshock therapy, died on Sunday in his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 92 years old.
Dr.
Kalinowsky, who was retired, had been in poor health, and the immediate cause of his death was heart failure, said a daughter, Marion Blakeley, of Ambler, Pa.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  OPINION DIVIDED ON BROOKLYN PRINCIPAL
Conflicts and tensions have roiled Public School 212 in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, since February, when Stuart Possner was named temporary principal.
Some parents say Mr.
Possner is the kind of strict chief needed to shape up a school that they say was academically drifting.
But other parents and most teachers at P.S. 212 say that he abuses parents and teachers and has frightened students.
B2.
SLIPPING RECRUITS UNDER FISCAL WIRE
In an audacious move to outwit the State Legislature and save the city $21 million next year, Mayor Dinkins announced that he would require 2,104 New York City police recruits to begin their training at 11:59:59 P.M. on Tuesday, the last second of the fiscal year.
B3.
RESTORING $900 MILLION FOR EDUCATION
The Dinkins administration and the Board of Education have agreed to a plan that would restore $900 million to the long-term effort to rebuild New York City's schools.
B3.
POLICE OFFICERS FEEL SCANDAL'S STING
Faced with the burn of suspicious stares from pedestrians and the boot-camp snap of reprimands from superiors stringently enforcing dress codes, some New York City police officers say they are learning that the shadow of corruption surrounding a few officers can shroud the entire Police Department in doubt.
B3.
Lawmakers in Albany pass bill to extend and modify guidelines for New York City lofts.
B3.
REGION
BUSH COURTS NEW YORK VOTE
President Bush, speaking at a fundraising luncheon at the New York Hilton for Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and the New York State Republican Party, went out of his way to make it clear that he wanted the state's 33 electoral votes.
The President's presence helped Mr.
D'Amato draw a good crowd to enrich his campaign chest for what is expected to be a lively re-election fight.
A21.
AMENDING NEW JERSEY CONSTITUTION
The education committees of the New Jersey Legislature took the first step toward amending the State Constitution to remove the legal underpinning for the system that transfers money from more affluent school districts to poorer ones.
The amendment, which would remove from the Constitution the requirement that the state provide "thorough and efficient" education to all its public school students, is one of a series that would, if enacted, result in drastic restructuring of state government.
B4.
MURDER CHARGES PENDING IN RESO'S DEATH
Authorities in New Jersey said they would wait at least a day to file murder charges in the kidnapping of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive whose body was found Saturday night in a shallow grave in the Pine Barrens.
B4.
THREAT TO INSURANCE PACT IN ALBANY
New York State lawmakers say they have finally agreed to overhaul the state's health insurance system, but the agreement remains uncertain because of a dispute among Senate Republicans.
B6.
Aetna Life &amp; Casualty Company announces layoffs.
D1.
New Jersey Republicans delay attempt to override Governor Florio's veto of budget.
B6.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B4
Chronicle B18


Scripps Winner's Dances Are for the Soul
The choreographer Donald McKayle received the 1992 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award on Sunday night at the Page Auditorium of Duke University.
The award of $25,000, which the festival has presented since 1981, honors lifetime achievements in modern-dance choreography.
It is believed to be the largest sum of money awarded annually anywhere to a single choreographer.
Other winners have included Martha Graham, Merce Cunningham, Paul Taylor, Alvin Ailey, Twyla Tharp and Anna Sokolow.


Review/Television; Parents Running Fast to Keep From Falling Back
"Family Matters" begins with plugs for family life from George Bush, Dan Quayle, Ross Perot and Bill Clinton.
The rest of the hour is devoted to documenting how remote such campaign fodder is from the daily problems of families with children and not much money.
The theme of this latest offering in Bill Moyers's election-year series, "Listening to America," on PBS tonight (in New York at 10 on Channel 13) is set by Richard Louv, a columnist for The San Diego Union-Tribune and author of the book "Childhood's Future." He emphasizes the need for "a web of support" for children that includes, along with parents and Government agencies, churches, schools, libraries, the police, volunteers and neighbors.
The uncommonly sensible-sounding panel agrees, in the words of one participant, that these days many people "can't raise kids alone."


Shift in School Fund Plan Gains in Trenton
The education committees of the New Jersey Legislature today took the first step toward amending the State Constitution to remove the legal underpinning for the system that transfers money from more affluent school districts to poorer ones.
The amendment, which would remove from the Constitution the requirement that the state provide "thorough and efficient" education to all its public school students, is one of a series of amendments proposed by the Republicans who control the Legislature that would, if enacted, result in drastic restructuring of state government.


Life at the Extremes: Ants Defy Desert Heat
BY midday the temperature at the desert's surface has climbed to 140 degrees.
As far as the eye can see to the shimmering horizon at the desert's edges, there is not even the tiniest patch of shade.
A few animals that have strayed too far from their underground shelters collapse from exhaustion under the Saharan sun.
Just as every other creature has taken refuge from the impossible heat, hundreds of Saharan silver ants burst out of their nest hole into the blazing noonday sun.
It's time to go a-hunting.


Biocircuits Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS U.N. Votes to Send Troops To Reopen Sarajevo Airport; Talks on U.S. Role
The Bush Administration stepped up talks with United Nations officials today over the use of United States planes and aviation experts to airlift food and medical supplies to Sarajevo.
United States officials have offered to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees the use of military planes and personnel to ferry supplies to the city, where they would be distributed by Red Cross and United Nations workers, said an Administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Melvin C. Steen, 85, a Founder Of the Cleary, Gottlieb Law Firm
Melvin C. Steen, a corporate and securities lawyer in New York, died at his home in Bronxville, N.Y., on Sunday.
He was 85 years old.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Lindros Decision Today
The National Hockey League said yesterday that a ruling on the Eric Lindros controversy by arbitrator Larry Bertuzzi is due today.
Bertuzzi must decide whether Lindros belongs to the Rangers or to the Philadelphia Flyers, who claim their handshake deal with the Nordiques preceded any deal between Quebec officials and the Rangers.


Justices Ease Way to Challenge Land-Use Rules That Prevent Development
Ruling in a closely watched case on property rights, the Supreme Court today made it easier for some property owners to challenge land-use regulations and demand compensation from the government if "confiscatory regulations" prevent them from developing their land.
But the 6-to-3 decision stopped well short of the sweeping vindication of property rights that many conservatives had hoped for when the Court agreed last year to hear a South Carolina property owner's challenge to a state law barring waterfront development.


Corrections
The Sports of the Times column on Sunday, about a dispute in the selection process for the United States Olympic boxing team, referred incorrectly in some editions to the light heavyweight who lost an elimination bout.
He is Terry McGroom.


Long Fight for Local Support Hampers Bush on Education
Four years after George Bush took office proclaiming himself to be the "education President," he can point to few tangible accomplishments that have improved the nation's schools.
But President Bush and his aides do claim credit for starting a movement called America 2000 that they say will force fundamental changes in American education.
It has spawned local education reform drives like one here in Memphis and in more than 1,000 other communities across the country.


Zip! Zap! Johnson Never Saw It Coming
The first inning was a blur for Jeff Johnson at Yankee Stadium last night.
A blur of hits whizzing off Kansas City bats, a blur of baserunners streaking for home and a blur of runs on the scoreboard before a Yankee had even lifted a bat.
The action was fast, furious and incredibly frustrating for Johnson.
Single, double, single, double, double translated into four rapid runs for the Royals and the Yankees never recovered in losing, 7-3.


Park Avenue on a Weekday? Thanks, Mr. President


First Human to Get Baboon Liver Is Said to Be Alert and Doing Well
A 35-year-old man who became the first human to receive a baboon liver in a transplant operation was reported today to be doing as well as as any recipient of a human liver a day after surgery.
The man, whose identity is being withheld, was awake and in critical but stable condition, his doctors at the University of Pittsburgh said.


The Summer Forecast: Widespread Wanderlust
More Americans will be traveling this summer than at any time in recent years, barring prolonged bad weather, a steep rise in gasoline prices or some other unexpected calamity.
At beach resorts, national parks and big cities across the nation, hotels and rental car companies are bracing for a robust summer, starting with the Fourth of July weekend and running through Labor Day.


U.N. Takes Control of Airport At Sarajevo as Serbs Pull Back
United Nations troops took control of Sarajevo airport today in a move described by United Nations officials as a major step toward ending a 12-week siege that has left the city's 400,000 people close to desperation.
Within two hours, a French military transport aircraft landed at the airfield with 10 tons of relief supplies, pressing home the gesture made on Sunday when the French President, Francois Mitterrand, defied warnings about the dangers and flew in here for an emotional seven-hour visit.


Long Battles Over Abortion Are Seen
Both sides in the abortion debate said that yesterday's decision in Planned Parenthood v.
Casey guaranteed many more years of legislation and litigation over how far states may go to restrict abortion.
"The only thing this means is full employment for lawyers," said Kathryn Kolbert of the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, which represented Planned Parenthood of Southeast Pennsylvania.
"I expect many, many attempts by anti-abortion legislators to create new restrictions, and a great deal more litigation."


Furiously, Indeed
Shug McGaughey stood outside Barn 20 at Belmont Park and reflected on the highs and lows of life with a prodigy.
Inside the stall stood the prodigy: the sensationally named colt Furiously, who has won his first three races in a blaze by a combined total of 31 lengths.
That is, furiously.
He is an imposing and almost imperious nearly-black son of Danzig and a full brother to Fiercely, both owned by one of the blueblood families in racing: James C. Brady and his brother, Nicholas, the Secretary of the Treasury, and their sisters, Eliot and Elizabeth.
He didn't race at all as a 2-year-old because he was so big and awkward and kept kicking his shins.
He didn't even race in the classics as a 3-year-old because he was still mending his muscles.


Market Place; A Slower Flow Into Stock Funds
THE stock market has gone nowhere fast this year, but only now are investors finally beginning to slow their headlong rush into stock mutual funds.
Several fund groups said yesterday that June had been the worst month of the year in terms of drawing cash into stock funds, and Fidelity Investments, the largest of the fund groups, reported seeing a significant reduction in investor demand in the last week.


What the French Pay For Their Electricity
To the Editor:
"Clean Is Profitable" (letter, June 12) by the North American representative of Electricite de France omits the price of electricity.
International statistics for 1989 show that the average price for residential electricity in France was 11.5 cents per kilowatt hour, compared with 7.5 cents in the United States.
The French energy recipe would increase the monthly electric bill for the average United States residential consumer by 50 percent.
And the reason the Government-owned Electricite de France has "one of the lowest greenhouse emission rates" is simple: it produces more than 75 percent of its energy from nuclear power.


Markets Surge as the Fed Prepares to Discuss Rates
Financial markets surged today on the eve of a Federal Reserve Board meeting as investors bet that the Fed would soon reduce interest rates -- just as President Bush called for last week.
But many Fed watchers said Mr.
Bush's call for lower rates could end up delaying a rate cut because the Fed cannot be seen as bowing to political pressure.
They say a Fed that is viewed as responding to the White House might lead investors to question the central bank's commitment to fighting inflation.
That could push up the long-term rates that are crucial to home-building and capital investment, defeating efforts to help the economy by lowering rates.


Marijuana vs. Alcohol for Teen-Agers; Drinking Drops Off
To the Editor:
In "Less Marijuana, More Alcohol?" (Economic Scene column, June 17), Peter Passell implies that the United States should fight alcohol abuse by decriminalizing marijuana.
He must be joking.
According to Government statistics, underage drinking is at its lowest level since 1974; accidents involving teen-age drunken drivers are down 39 percent since 1982; binge drinking among high school seniors has dropped more than 20 percent in the last 10 years.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House; Bush Denounces Rap Recording and Gives D'Amato a Hand
Casting about for new themes for his re-election campaign, President Bush yesterday copied a page from Vice President Dan Quayle's playbook -- almost.
A week after Mr.
Quayle lashed out at the rap artist Ice-T for an album that included the title "Cop Killer," Mr.
Bush said it was "sick" to produce a record that he said glorified the killing of police officers.


In Au Pair Trial, Judge Gets a Chance to Show His Verbal Sparring Skills
Lawyers, like all performers, play roles.
Laura A. Brevetti, the defense lawyer at the arson murder trial of the Swiss au pair, has perfected her role.
She is Ms.
Former-Federal-Prosecutor-And-Here-Come-Some-Tough-Questions-So-You-Better-Watch-Out.


Hubble Observations Find Universe Is Older Than Some Thought
SCIENTISTS using the Hubble Space Telescope say new observations of a distant galaxy suggest that the universe is older and larger than many scientists had thought.
The astronomers, who reported their findings yesterday at an international conference in Sardinia, estimated that the age of the universe is at least 15 billion years.


Lawrence Pomeroy, A Retired Lawyer, 79
Lawrence Pomeroy, a former New York City lawyer who devoted his retirement to conservation activities on Block Island, R.I., died on Friday at Newport Hospital in Rhode Island.
He was 79 years old and had lived in New Rochelle, N.Y., for many years before moving to Newport.
Mr. Pomeroy died of bone cancer, said a son, Lawrence K. Pomeroy.


McEnroe Moves Up but Lendl Bows Out
John McEnroe, a trifle grass-stained but otherwise chomping at the bit like a colt instead of the war horse that he is, stayed on course at Wimbledon today.
But Ivan Lendl, never a front-runner on turf, foundered altogether.
They were among the four bold old codgers who braved the summer sizzle with clenched teeth in their attempt to reach the men's quarterfinal round.
Only McEnroe, the oldest and perhaps most manic, emerged from the court victorious.


In Trenton, Battle Over Budget Goes Down to the Wire
Under pressure from a maverick Republican Senator who is trying to win more benefits for his district, Republican legislative leaders today delayed their attempt to override Gov.
Jim Florio's veto of their $14.6 billion budget.
In a budget debate that already has been highlighted by histrionics, the stance of Senator Leonard T. Connors Jr. set the stage for frantic activity on Tuesday as legislators rush to beat a midnight deadline to have a budget in place.


On July 4, Chemistry Will Paint The Night With Fire
WITH the coming of summer and a heady whiff of powder smoke in the air, America's pyrotechnicians, working like Santa's elves on Christmas eve, predict that their newest fireworks will dazzle the senses as never before.
New insights from chemists and physicists are helping to shape a traditional craft with spectacular results.
One new type of fireworks shell uses the firmament as a canvas for creating elaborate patterns painted in multicolored fire.
Some of these blazing tableaux may even include fiery letters forming entire words.


In Russia, Makarova Stars on the Stage, But Not as a Dancer
When Natalia Makarova was 12 years old, she gave a reading at a Young Communist Pioneers' Club here and brought her audience to tears.
The next year, she entered the Vaganova ballet school and put her acting ambitions aside.
Forty years later, Miss Makarova has returned to Russia to nurture her first artistic inclination.
She starred in a production of William Gibson's play "Two for the Seesaw," which had a brief run here in mid-June at the Pushkin Theater after a successful run in Moscow.


U.S. to Ease Push for Policy Shifts by Germany and Japan
After long pressuring Germany and Japan to do more to stimulate world growth, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that the United States would not prod them so hard at the economic summit meeting in Munich because they seem ready to adopt policies that Washington has favored.
With the United States plagued by slow growth for more than two years, Mr.
Brady had been pushing other major industrial nations to focus more on spurring growth, not only to help increase American exports but to help bolster the economies of the former Soviet bloc and the developing world.


Universal Seismic Associates reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Toronto Journal; Canada the Magnet: Enter Stage-Struck Russians
Sergei Pavlov is a concert pianist trained at the Moscow Conservatory.
In Canada he has been tuning pianos and manning an ice-cream cart.
Aleksandra Odintsova, educated at the Bolshoi Ballet School and a former member of the Beriozka Ensemble, is sewing gold brocade vestments with orange satin applique for the Russian Orthodox Christ the Savior Cathedral in Toronto.


Barrister Information Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Davis Distributing reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Review/Dance; A Roster of Guest Artists Ends City Ballet's Season
Personnel changes are in the works at the New York City Ballet, at least on the visitor's level.
Mikhail Baryshnikov completed the last of his guest appearances on Saturday night with a repeat of Mark Morris's "Three Preludes." In a rare show of emotion, he clasped his hands to his heart during a curtain call and then opened his arms to the audience.
The company also slipped in two more guests, Kevin O'Day and Melissa Podcasy, before ending its season at the New York State Theater on Sunday night.
A different new face will be that of Nikolaj Hubbe from the Royal Danish Ballet, who is to make his debut with the City Ballet on July 9 in "Donizetti Variations" at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center.
Igor Zelensky of the Kirov Ballet has been engaged for the fall.


Mongolia Ex-Communists Said to Win Vote
Opposition political parties said today that they had lost overwhelmingly in the election on Sunday and that the former Communist Party had won 72 of the 76 seats in the new Parliament.
But election officials declined to confirm or deny the reports, and said they would not be ready to announce the results until Saturday.
The only official result reported today was that voter turnout exceeded 91 percent.


HIGH COURT, 5-4, AFFIRMS RIGHT TO ABORTION BUT ALLOWS MOST OF PENNSYLVANIA'S LIMITS
By the narrowest of margins, and in words reflecting anger and anguish alike at its continuing role in the center of the storm over abortion, the Supreme Court today reaffirmed what it called the "essence" of the constitutional right to abortion while at the same time permitting some new state restrictions.
The 5-to-4 ruling redefined and limited the abortion right to some degree.
But it left it stronger than many abortion-rights supporters had expected and opponents had hoped for from a Court that had appeared for the last three years to be on a course leading inevitably to the evisceration, if not complete overruling, of Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 decision that established abortion as a fundamental right.  [ Excerpts from the decision, page A16. ] Unconstitutional Prohibitions


Algerian President Fatally Shot at Rally
The President of Algeria's ruling Supreme State Council, which was installed after a military coup in January, was assassinated today.
The President, Mohammed Boudiaf, was 73 years old.
He was shot in the back and head as he delivered an address this morning in Annaba, 280 miles east of Algiers, the Government announced.
It was his first official visit outside the capital since he was installed as titular head of the Government on Jan. 16.


INSIDE
Avis Raising New York Rates
Citing added costs under a New York State law, Avis said it would raise its rates 25 percent in the New York City area and reduce its fleet.
Page B1.
Narrow Property-Law Ruling
In a narrowly drawn ruling, the Supreme Court made it easier for some property owners to challenge land-use regulations.
Page A18.
Officers Charged in Newark


Protein May Hold Clues to Anti-AIDS Drug
THE virus that causes AIDS appropriates members of a newly discovered collection of cellular proteins in order to replicate, scientists have found.
The work "suggests a new direction" in the search for AIDS drugs, said Dr.
Craig Rosen, who heads the department of gene regulation at the Roche Institute of Molecular Biology in Nutley, N.J.
It means molecular biologists can start to search for drugs that stymie the human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, when it tries to latch onto one of these cellular proteins, he added.


Colony Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Magic in Midst of Act As U.S. Beats Canada
There are superstars of all sizes on the United States Olympic Team, including the best player in the game, Michael Jordan, but this would be no Dream Team without Magic Johnson and Larry Bird.
On Coach Chuck Daly's team, Jordan is the brightest star of a spectacular lot.
But Johnson and Bird, who reinvented the game for men their size, still carry the aura of masters of the universe.
Perhaps it is because they are here, finally, as teammates, an entry representing the East-West rivalry that helped turn the National Basketball Association from a struggling American enterprise into a global phenomenon in the 1980's.


Third World Women Aren't the Big Polluters; Vatican's Blind Spot
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen got it right in "Zero Population Talk" (column, June 10): discussion of population growth became taboo at the Earth Summit largely owing to Vatican pressure to keep it off the agenda.
Seeking the moral high ground, Vatican officials claim that admitting population growth is a problem will legitimize coercive use of family planning and abortion, unethically using people as a means to an end.
Despite such high-sounding ideals, churchmen have been talking about the relationship of population size and fertility for more than 1,000 years.
As long ago as the fourth century, despite the superior valuation of virginity in the early church, St.
Ambrose said the church should celebrate procreation because "the number of the devout people is increased."


Text of U.N. Resolution Allowing the Dispatch of Troops
Following is the text of Security Council Resolution 761, approved unanimously today, which authorizes peacekeeping forces to reopen the airport in Sarajevo for delivery of aid to Bosnia and Herzegovina: THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
NOTING the considerable progress reported by the Secretary General towards securing the evacuation of Sarajevo airport and its reopening by Unprofor and feeling the need to maintain this favorable momentum,


Short-Term Rates Fall Sharply
Fresh signs of economic weakness sent short-term interest rates to their lowest level in more than two decades yesterday on expectations that the Federal Reserve Board would soon ease its monetary policy.
The catalyst behind the drop was a report from the Government showing that new-home sales fell by 5.6 percent in May, to their lowest level since September.


Pettibone Corp. reports earnings for 12 mos March 31


Classical Music in Review
The Festival of Cultural Diversity  Grand Central Terminal
Culture struck Grand Central Terminal another of its glancing blows on Friday as 10 musical groups from around the world set up shop in this enormous space and played from midmorning to early afternoon.
Their audience, mostly standing, was a mix of stationary devotees and passing travelers.
Called the Festival of Cultural Diversity, the parade of performers ranged from Singapore to South America to the Australian outback to Europe and finally to Africa and the African-American tradition.
Diversity is perhaps a euphemism for chaos, and indeed there was little connection between the wide variations in style other than the differences.
Chaos, however, is a principle not foreign to Grand Central Terminal in particular, and the city in general.


Gay-Rights Bill in Peril
Gay-rights advocates have apparently failed in their bid to win Assembly passage this year of a bill that would specifically include gay men and lesbians among the groups protected under the state's civil rights law.
Assembly officials said today that they could not be assured of mustering the necessary 76 supporters in the 150-member chamber and that they would not schedule the bill for a vote.


Dream Team Routs Might Mean Lowly Ratings
No doubt about it, the men's Olympic basketball team proved it was the Dream Team on Sunday night.
So soothing, so numbing was its 136-57 embarrassment of Team Cuba that I confess I slept, perchance to dream of competitive basketball -- and Fidel Castro posting up big-time in the paint.
My, oh, my, Jordan, Magic, Bird and Barkley lived up to all the Dream Team promotion we have been inundated with on NBC.
Granted, there are other teams in the Tournament of the Americas who are better than Cuba and there will be teams in the Olympics who will give Team USA a bigger fight.


NORWAY IS PLANNING TO RESUME WHALING DESPITE WORLD BAN
The six-year-old international moratorium on commercial whaling began to crumble today, with both Norway and Iceland declaring that some species had been so well protected that they could be hunted again without danger of extinction.
Norway announced that it would resume commercial exploitation of minke whales next year, and Iceland left the International Whaling Commission, saying that it had been taken over by a "rabid" minority against whale hunting even though scientific fact no longer supported the prohibition.


Praying for Rebbe's Recovery


Of Gaps and How to Bridge Them
THE personal computer industry is diverging and converging at the same time.
An example of divergence is the split between International Business Machines and Microsoft on operating systems.
An example of convergence is the alliance forged between I.B.M. and Apple Computer Inc.
A smaller instance of convergence is that Claris, the software subsidiary of Apple, is introducing programs for Microsoft's Windows.
One strength of Windows is that it makes a P.C. almost as easy to use as a Macintosh, and Claris has been making Macintosh software since 1987.
I am writing this with the word-processing component of ClarisWorks, I keep my address book in the database module and, one of these days when we get organized around here, I will put my income-outgo information in its spreadsheet.


Corrections
An obituary on Sunday about Allison Dunham, a professor who helped to make states' laws uniform, misstated the day of his death in Pomona, Calif.
It was Friday.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Sunday about events surrounding the Columbus anniversary gave an incorrect date for the end of public viewing of reproductions of Columbus's ships at the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum in Manhattan.
They will be on view through July 14, not July 7.
The article also misstated the location for a fireworks display on July 4.
It will take place at Battery Park, not the South Street Seaport.


Murder Charges Expected This Week in Reso Case
The authorities said today that they would wait at least a day to file murder charges in the kidnapping of Sidney J. Reso, the Exxon executive whose body was found Saturday night in a shallow grave in the vast Pine Barrens with a bullet wound in one arm.
The Morris County Prosecutor, W. Michael Murphy, said his office would probably file felony murder charges within the next few days, pending autopsy results.
His spokeswoman, Lois Ferguson, said Mr.
Murphy and the United States Attorney for New Jersey, Michael Chertoff, had to "sit down and sort out all the various charges."


CHRONICLE
More travails for SALLY JESSY RAPHAEL: Her 19-year-old son JASON SODERLUND, who was severely injured in an automobile accident in January, was involved in another car accident on Sunday.
He was not seriously hurt, according to The Associated Press.
Mr.
Soderlund was driving north on the Taconic State Parkway in Dutchess County when his car collided with one driven by Victoria Corbo, 39, of New York City.
The police in Stormville, N.Y., said that Mr.
Soderlund; his passenger, April Horowitz, 14 years old, and Ms.
Corbo were taken to the Hudson Valley Hospital Center in Peekskill, N.Y., where they were treated and released.


Lilly Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Clone Maker AST Research Shakes Up Its Management
In a management shake-up, AST Research Inc. said today that Thomas C. K. Yuen, its co-founder, co-chairman and chief operating officer, had left the company.
AST, a leading maker of I.B.M.-compatible personal computers, also said Safi Quereshy, 40 years old, another co-founder, would give up his position as co-chairman but would remain president and chief executive.


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Ruling Inspires Groups to Fight Harder
It was clear today outside the Planned Parenthood clinic that challenged this state's abortion law that both sides in the debate remained a universe apart.
Hours after the Supreme Court handed down a decision upholding most of the restrictions in Pennsylvania's abortion law, opponents and proponents of abortion rights confronted each other across a narrow Philadelphia street in front of the clinic.


Topics of The Times; A Doctor's Life
Dr.
Jan Jakob Smulewicz died of heart failure in New York last week at the age of 69.
He was not famous.
He never made the gossip magazines or TV talk shows.
Before yesterday's obituary, he'd been mentioned in The Times only once.
Judging from that obituary, he was a man worth knowing.
Dr.
Smulewicz was the only member of his family to survive the Holocaust.
He survived concentration camps and three death sentences.
Nazi guards changed their minds twice, and the third time Dr.
Smulewicz, a medic and nurse in the camps, put his numbered prison uniform on an inmate who had died of typhus and compatriots said the body was his.
The guards were afraid to inspect the corpse.


Manor Care reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Argentine Chief Suffers Setback as His Senate Candidate Loses
President Carlos Saul Menem suffered a political setback on Sunday when voters in the Argentine capital, apparently upset over continued scandal involving Government officials, gave his Peronist party's candidate for the Senate just 32 percent of the vote, while the opposition Radical Party candidate won with 50 percent.
At the same time, in the first municipal elections held in Chile since the military coup of 1973 that brought Gen.
Augusto Pinochet to power, mayoral and city council candidates supported by the centrist President, Patricio Aylwin, won 53 percent of the vote on Sunday, compared with 30 percent for right-wing parties.


Bridge
Many collections of deals have been published in the past decade, and most of them have been flawed in one or more respects.
Some have hands of insufficient quality.
Some are poorly analyzed.
Some are badly presented.
And nearly all are unstructured, with no logical connection between the deals.
A book that passes all tests with flying colors is "Team Trial" by Allan Falk, available for $11.45 from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, Manhattan 10025.
The reader is asked to assume that he has reached the summit of American tournament play and is competing in the American Contract Bridge League's annual Team Trials, which determine the American representation in world championship play.


Washington at Work; Administration's Regulation Slayer Has Achieved a Perilous Prominence
In an airy office down the hall from the Vice President's, an Indiana lawyer with dark eyes and dawn-to-dusk work habits basks nervously in the limelight of power.
At the age of 34, David M. McIntosh has amassed great influence in the loftiest councils of the White House, and his ideas, praised by industrialists and vilified by conservationists, have lifted the President's environmental policies to the top of the domestic and international agenda.


Books of The Times; Snapshots From a Family Album
Marine Life  By Linda Svendsen  165 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.
Images of water -- as a metaphor for the amniotic fluids of birth, the terrors of drowning and the fresh, clean promise of redemption -- surface again and again in the stories that make up "Marine Life," Linda Svendsen's astonishing debut book.
Adele Nordstrom, the narrator of these interlinked stories, remembers playing at the beach as a child, "listlessly filling a bright yellow pail with the waves" while waiting for her brother and his girlfriend to pay her some attention.
Years later, she recalls a story about her boyfriend, Bill, how he and his brother watched a mother turtle struggle to make her way back to the water, after laying some eggs in the sand; if only she had been with him, she thinks, "witnessing this event might have made us kinder to each other."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
8.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
5.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.67
5.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.59
3.62
5.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.66
3.71
5.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.68
6.72
8.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.76
7.77
8.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.68
8.69
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.50
6.51
7.19
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Jay Jacobs reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


A Protest Is Thinned in Belgrade
An anti-Government protest faltered today when most of those who came out on Sunday to call for the resignation of Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, ignored pleas from the organizers that they remain in the plaza outside Parliament.
By midmorning the hundreds who camped out overnight were fortified by returnees and new arrivals, but at no point were there more than 10,000, a fraction of the crowd that had been there 24 hours earlier.


By Design; Shopper's Delight
This is utopia time for those who take their fashion seriously.
New fall styles are filling store racks.
American designers, toting their fall collections, are crisscrossing the country to promote them.
But best of all, top designer merchandise from spring is on sale.
Anyone looking for something in an animal pattern will find Azzedine Alaia's big bathrobe coat, with a swashbuckling collar and a sash to cinch the waist, at Barneys New York.
It's made of fake fur that feels like a teddy bear but is spotted like a leopard.
It was more than $1,500.
Now it's $760.


Leader Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Apirl 30


Critic's Notebook; For a Date (Wink) Or a Tease (Smirk), Try Late-Night TV
Looking for a date?
Problem with nail fungus?
How about plugging into a personal psychic?
Hang around after the late-night news and commercial television will do its best to satisfy you, preferably with a strategically placed tickle.
What used to be the almost exclusive preserve of talk shows and old movies is increasingly becoming a showcase for what are called relationship shows, their winking suggestiveness carried over to commercial breaks.
Spawned by formats like "The Dating Game," these new shows merely up the prurience ante as men and women, usually under 30 years old and usually white, engage in assorted mating games intended to elicit whoops of knowingly naughty endorsement from studio audiences.
Guests say things like "I took one look! Wow! Hot!," and the place falls apart.
Any mention of a great butt brings on pandemonium.
Family values, it might be noted, are not an urgent priority.


Classical Music in Review
Neo Classic String Quartet Daming Zhu  Taipei Theater Manhattan
The Taipei Theater, a comfortable, intimate chamber-music hall in the McGraw-Hill Building, has become a showcase for both traditional Chinese performing arts and Western music played by Chinese musicians.
On Sunday afternoon the theater presented the Neo-Classic Quartet, a Taiwanese ensemble that was formed in 1986, and Daming Zhu, a pianist from Shanghai who has lived in the United States since 1981.
There was nothing inherently Neo-Classic in either the quartet's program, which leaned heavily toward Romanticism with one foray into pure (not Neo-) Classicism, or its performing style, which favored a Romantic approach to phrase sculpturing.


Still Another Place To Install a Trackball
ALTHOUGH falling prices were the big news at the PC Expo computer trade show held in New York City last week, there were many new products of interest on display.
The Compaq Computer Corporation of Houston touched off the industry's latest price war with its new ProLinea, Deskpro/i and Contura families of low-cost computers, which drew a lot of attention from the thousands who attended the show.
But the brightest spot, literally, in Compaq's new product line was a color version of the popular LTE notebook.


Q&amp;A
Big Eyes
Q.
Do your eyes grow?
A.
Yes, but most of the growth takes place early in life, said Dr.
Anita Hendrickson, an anatomist who is professor of biological structure and ophthalmology at the University of Washington in Seattle.
For the retina, she said, a vast majority of growth takes place before the age of 2.
For the eyeball, most growth occurs before the age of 6, and there is supposedly no growth at all after puberty.


Classical Music in Review
Goldman Memorial Band Lincoln Center
The Goldman Memorial Band is celebrating its 75th anniversary this summer.
Or, more accurately, it is celebrating its 75th season of free concerts in the New York City parks.
The brass, wind and percussion band was founded by Edwin Franko Goldman as the New York Military Band in 1911, but changed its name to the Goldman Band early on.
From 1980 to 1984 it was renamed the Guggenheim Concert Band, in honor of its principal patron, the Guggenheim Foundation.
When Guggenheim backing dried up, it changed its name again, to the Goldman Memorial Band.
Like so many small groups, the band has weathered financial setbacks lately.
A decade ago, it played 50 concerts every summer, but because of cuts in government support, its season has been pared down to eight performances.
Judging from its opening concert in Damrosch Park on Sunday evening, the ensemble has a large following, and many of the listeners knew the ensemble's fare well enough to sing along in the audience-participation sections of Goldman's "On the Mall."


NEXT GETS $65 MILLION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Next Inc. said it had secured additional private financing in the form of a $55 million credit line from Canon Inc. of Japan and a $10 million line of credit from Steven P. Jobs, the computer company's founder, chairman and chief executive.
The financing, which the company said was the last it would need, indicated that Next would not make a public offering of stock this year.
Many analysts had expected such an offering.


Executive Changes
HOGAN SYSTEMS INC., Dallas, which produces software for financial institutions, appointed Michael H. Anderson president, chief executive and a director.
MASSACHUSETTS MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE CO., Springfield, Mass., named Gary E. Wendlandt executive vice president.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail; BUSH TO APPEAR ON MORNING INTERVIEW SHOW
President Bush, who recently suggested that he was not cool enough to appear with the talk-show host Arsenio Hall, apparently finds the hosts of the CBS News program "CBS This Morning," Paula Zahn and Harry Smith, more his speed.
On Wednesday morning the President will appear on a special segment of "CBS This Morning" to be broadcast from the White House from 7 to 8 A.M.


Thailand Sets General Election for Sept. 13
Thailand, recovering from weeks of political turmoil, will dissolve its Parliament on Tuesday and hold general elections on Sept. 13, the interim Prime Minister announced today.
Anand Panyarachun, appointed after protests forced the pro-military Prime Minister to resign, also said at a news conference that information from a parliamentary investigation into the May 17-20 bloodshed would be turned over to a Government panel that would continue the work.


Third World Women Aren't the Big Polluters; There's Plenty of Room
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen states that in the next century the population may double "on what already seems to be a 'No Vacancy' planet" (column, June 10).
What planet is she referring to?
It can't be Earth.
If the world's population of more than five billion were put in Jacksonville, Fla., every person would have about 4 square feet of standing space.
If that were too crowded, we could all move over to Texas and each have about 1,400 square feet, the area of a good-sized two-bedroom apartment.


Resignation Clears Path at Pepsico
One of Pepsico Inc.'s top executives resigned yesterday, leaving Roger A. Enrico as the heir apparent at the $20 billion food and beverage company.
The resignation also prompted a reshuffling of top management at several important Pepsico divisions.
Michael H. Jordan, chairman of Pepsico's international soft-drink and snack-food divisions and one of the company's top strategists, resigned to join Clayton Dubilier &amp; Rice, a leveraged-buyout firm in New York.
Mr.
Jordan is 56 years old, the same age as Pepsico's chairman and chief executive, Wayne Calloway.


Welcome to Japan; Leave All Stereotypes on the Plane, Please
A MONTH ago, Amy Weibel, Kirsten Malone and Adam Lobel thought they knew about Japan.
Today, they know what they thought they knew is only partly true.
And they've begun to wonder if what they thought they knew about each other might also be a little off.
Learning that unlearning stereotypes is as much a part of education as acquiring new knowledge isn't an insignificant lesson for five dozen high school students to carry into vacation from an unusual school year.
Even if that year ended with 25 hours of flying, nervous seat partners repeatedly reading the safety information aloud and consumption of an awful lot of fish, some cooked.


Principal's Tough Tack Roils Brooklyn School
Songs sounded, cameras clicked and colorful balloons and flowers adorned the packed auditorium at Public School 212 in Brooklyn last week as 200 fifth- and sixth-graders graduated in front of proud relatives.
But when boos mingled with applause for the temporary principal of the Bensonhurst school, it demonstrated that even the festive nature of graduation day could not contain the conflicts and tensions that have roiled P.S. 212 since February, when Stuart Possner was named temporary principal.


Ruling Eases a Worry for Bush, But Just Wait, His Critics Warn
From the standpoint of President Bush's re-election strategy, today's Supreme Court ruling on abortion took the edge off a recurring Republican nightmare.
But if his opponents are right about the potency of the abortion issue, it will continue to challenge him.
Had the Court overturned Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 decision recognizing a constitutional right to abortion, Mr.
Bush would have faced a far more perilous election year, in the view of many political professionals.
In such a climate, with voters keenly focused on the abortion issue, Mr.
Bush's staunch opposition to abortion could have been crippling.


Basic Earth Science reports earnings for Year to March 31


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 13


Allan Jones, 84, Hollywood Singing Star, Is Dead
Allan Jones, a Hollywood singing star in the 1930's and 40's whose romantic tenor rang out in 35 films, including "Show Boat," with Irene Dunne, died on Saturday in Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of lung cancer, said his wife, Maria.


THE 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Voices: Houston; Worries That the Nation's Schools Fall Short
Political experts, local officials and ordinary voters in several cities were asked to appraise President Bush's handling of issues involving education.
Gladys House  36, sandwich shop manager, active in working for education reform


Richard Fontana Dies; French Stage Actor, 40
Richard Fontana, a star of the Comedie Francaise and a leading stage actor in France, died here on Friday.
He was 40 years old and lived in Paris.
The Comedie Francaise administrator, Jacques Lassalle, gave no details on Mr.
Fontana's illness.


A Shelter From Addiction's Storm; In Bronx Apartments, Fresh From Treatment, the Poor Find the Will to Stay Clean
Fresh from a 10-month stay at a residential drug treatment program in upstate New York, Frank B. stands on the sidewalk outside his South Bronx apartment building, the shouts of drug dealers and their lookouts echoing faintly from a block away.
The incessant soundtrack presents him with a choice as stark as the streets and buildings that surround the apartment he shares with four other recovering addicts at 281 St.
Ann's Avenue in Mott Haven.


Quotation of the Day
"I'll take tornadoes any day. At least you can see them coming." --CHRISTINE CURRAN, a native of Indiana, who suffered through the earthquake in California yesterday.  [ A14:3 ]


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Sabonis Dominates Arvidas Sabonis scored 33 points and had 16 rebounds as Lithuania rallied for a 99-89 victory over Croatia in the European Olympic qualifying tournament yesterday in Zaragoza, Spain.
Sabonis, the starting center on the Soviet Union's 1988 gold-medal Olympic team and a two-time draftee of the Portland Trail Blazers, added three assists and two blocked shots as Lithuania improved to 2-0.
Only the top four teams in this eight-team round-robin will advance to the Olympics in Barcelona.
Germany beat Israel to also become 2-0. (AP) GOLF Stamberger Leads in Ike Mike Stamberger of Plainfield, N.J., shot a two-under-par 69 and took the first-round lead in the Metropolitan Golf Association Ike Tournament at the Shorehaven Golf Club in East Norwalk, Conn.
Stamberger holds a one-stroke lead over Mike Muehr of Roxiticus and R.J.
Nakashian of Glen Cove, who had rounds of 70 at the 6,520-yard course.
The field of 124 was trimmed to 44 for today's final.
Nakashian and Mike Meehan, who had 71, hold the team lead with 141.


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


No Headline


Having Fled City Ills, People Stay Despite Quakes
Like her neighbors on the high desert of California, where a vast mesa studded with ungainly Joshua trees fills the basin between the San Bernardino and Pinto mountains, Carmen Mendoza came here to escape big-city ills.
She found quiet, wide-open spaces, clean air, starry nights -- and, now, terrifying nights and days in which the sandy earth beneath her home heaves with frightening regularity.


Basic Earth Science reports earnings for Year to March 31


Arrow International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sports of The Times; Odd Sound: 'Come On, Jeremy!'
WHO sneezed?
Who clicked the camera?
Who made the noise that froze Jeremy Bates in mid-serve at match point, and ultimately plunged this island nation back into its normal state of sporting defeatism?
For years to come, British fans will see Bates, on the verge of actually reaching the quarterfinals of Wimbledon, tossing the ball in the air, reaching back . . . and . . . and . . . letting the ball drop.
Oh, this is a sad, sad story.


Review/Jazz Festival; From Gerry Mulligan, 'Rebirth of the Cool'
Each jazz era finds its own ancestors.
Now that many musicians and audiences are turning toward music that prizes structure as well as solos, it's appropriate that Gerry Mulligan has decided to revive the arrangements he wrote and played with the Miles Davis Nonet more than 40 years ago.
The music was collected in 1957 on an album titled "Birth of the Cool," and on Friday night Mr.
Mulligan and a "tentet" (the nonet's lineup plus an extra trumpeter and saxophonist) performed at Carnegie Hall for a JVC Jazz Festival concert called "Rebirth of the Cool."
At the end of the 1940's, Davis, Gil Evans, Mr.
Mulligan and other musicians were looking for a next step after be-bop, which had depended on small groups and extensive solos.
They wanted to create ensemble arrangements that would reflect the convoluted harmonies and whiplash rhythms that be-bop had wrought.
With Davis as leader, they assembled a nine-piece group that played a few club dates between 1948 and 1950, to a largely indifferent response among nonmusicians.
But the recordings, made in 1949 and 1950, have endured.
Musicians including Mr.
Mulligan and another member of both the original nonet and the current tentet, the alto saxophonist Lee Konitz, have both worked with similar groups in the intervening decades.
The tentet also included Bill Barber, another nonet member, on tuba.


Resort Wear for Sea, Shore or Wherever
Fashion in its inexorable way is going into its next phase.
Fall clothes are moving out of the workrooms into the stores.
By the middle of October, when they begin to look familiar and tired on the racks, the fall styles will be supplemented by new styles from collections called -- not totally appropriately -- resort and cruise.
The first wave of these collections by both European and American designers began breaking in showrooms in New York last week.
The nomenclature dates to the days when a winter cruise or a week in a warm-weather resort was the vacation aim of Americanwomen living in colder climates.
The concept has considerably broadened.
The development of the Sun Belt states has increased the demand for lighter-weight clothing almost all year.
And in stores all over the country, fans of certain designers look for new styles to add to their collections.


Jerrold S. Maxmen; Psychiatrist, 50
Jerrold S. Maxmen, a psychiatrist, author and associate professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia University, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old.
He died of a digestive disorder, said Carl D. Brandt, his agent and a friend of the family.


Big Guys Look Little Again as Mets Lose to Cubs
The autopsy reports on the Mets turn up nearly identical game after game.
The organization isn't fooled, even if it is limited in what it can do.
The manager has been reduced to acts of curious, even comic desperation.
The players make sense but no progress in their evaluation of it all.
"Pick the season apart any way you want," said Gerry Hunsicker, the vice president of baseball operations.
"Talk about middle relief. Talk about bad defense. The offense is the cause of where we are."


Patterns
Ripped-Up at Retail
Apocalyptic or "destroy" fashion has caused quite a stir in recent seasons on the Paris runway.
Maybe all those torn seams, unfinished sleeves and tatty hemlines reflect a kind of grim, postindustrial urban mood.
The ripped-up designs, which have been viewed as a commentary on everything from the victimization of women to the end of fashion, have even influenced the haute couture.
But the question remains, who would ever buy them?


Global Income Plus Fund reports earnings for As of April 30


Rebecca C. Simonson; Schoolteacher, 95
Rebecca C. Simonson, a New York City schoolteacher active in school affairs in the 1940's and 1950's, died on Sunday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
She was 95 years old and lived in Peekskill, N.Y.
She died of congestive heart failure, said her son, David C. Simonson.


Fiscal Footwork Is Fancy In Plan for Police Recruits
In an audacious move to outwit the State Legislature and save the city $20 million next year, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced today that he would require 2,104 New York City police recruits to begin their training at 11:59:59 P.M. on Tuesday, the last second of the fiscal year.
One City Hall aide conceded, almost proudly, that the scheme was "a gimmick with a capital G." He got no argument from angry legislators like Senator Frank Padavan, a Queens Republican who called the Mayor's plan "a midnight mugging" and "an outrageous form of fiscal chicanery."


Suit Names Cable Unit
The successor to the bankrupt Financial News Network Inc. announced yesterday that it was suing Telecommunications Inc., the nation's largest operator of cable television systems, saying it had interfered with FNN's 1990 attempt to sell a major asset, the Learning Channel.
Data Broadcasting, the Manhattan company that took over much of FNN's assets, is asking for triple damages of $26.5 million in a Federal suit contending violations of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
The suit is a class-action lawsuit on behalf of all shareholders in the Learning Channel, of which FNN owned 47 percent.


Chess
Sometimes there is cunning in being blunt.
When you make your intentions overt, they may look so gross and undisguised that no one believes you really mean to carry them out.
This works best when your plan takes a dozen moves or more.
Your opponent may think that vicissitudes will surely intervene to punish such elaborate machinations.
But in the seventh-round game between the grandmasters Manuel Rivas Pastor of Spain and Iosif Dorfman of Ukraine in the Barcelona International Tournament in early May, Black's ambitious stubbornness could not be denied.


Vote Near on Regulation Of Fannie and Freddie
The Senate is finally nearing a vote, expected as early as Wednesday, on a measure that for the first time would subject to independent regulation two Government-sponsored institutions that have guaranteed nearly $1 trillion worth of home mortgages.
The road to the vote has been tortuous, and not just because of the political influence of the two institutions: the Federal National Mortgage Association, also known as Fannie Mae, and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, better known as Freddie Mac.
As often happens in the Senate, the bill has become a vehicle for largely unrelated issues.


No New Report From Vincent
Commissioner Fay Vincent and George Steinbrenner met for an hour and a half at a midtown hotel yesterday in a session the commissioner said produced "nothing significant."
"It was a good meeting, but there's nothing to announce or say," Vincent said.
"I'm sure there will be another meeting, but there's no date set for it."


Times Completes Deliverers' Purchase
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that it had completed its long-planned purchase of two newspaper wholesale distribution companies, the Metropolitan News Company and Newark Newsdealers Supply Company, which deliver The Times and many other newspapers to retail outlets and home delivery depots in New York City and central and northern New Jersey.


Dirty Business on Clean Air
President Bush has celebrated the 1990 Clean Air Act as a triumph for the environment and for bipartisanship.
Now he has undermined the act with weak new regulations that risk fouling both the air and whatever good will he has left with Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill.
Regulations unveiled last week would allow manufacturers to increase the pollutants they emit without public hearings or judicial review.
That's plainly illegal.
The act requires states to negotiate, by 1995, new pollution limits on 35,000 big manufacturers.
It also expressly states that once the permits are issued, no changes can be made without public hearings and judicial review.


Avis Raising Rental Rates In New York
Six months after Hertz imposed surcharges of as much as $56 a day on car rentals in the metropolitan region by New York City residents, Avis said yesterday that it would raise its rates in the area by 25 percent now and perhaps 25 percent more in the coming months.
Avis also said it would cut back on the number of cars it rents in the area.
The reason, Avis said, is the failure of the State Legislature to change a legal doctrine -- known as vicarious liability -- that makes car rental companies liable when renters cause injuries to pedestrians or other drivers.


Macy Had $38.9 Million 4-Week Loss
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reported yesterday that it had lost $38.9 million in the four weeks that ended May 30, sending yet another signal that the bankrupt retailer was still unable to stop its continuing losses.
In a filing with the Federal Bankruptcy Court, Macy said it had sales of $474.7 million in May.
But its expenses and cost of merchandise and leases totaled $488.7 million, resulting in an operating loss of $14 million.


Reconstructing Quakes: New California Equation
At 7 o'clock this morning, Kerry Sieh, a seismologist, climbed into a helicopter, unfolded geologic maps of the Mojave Desert and set off on what he described as "the happiest day of my life."
The 41-year-old professor from the California Institute of Technology has spent his entire career digging trenches along California's notorious San Andreas fault, reconstructing how far the earth moved during prehistoric earthquakes.
Like a paleontologist who suddenly encounters a living dinosaur, Dr.
Sieh (pronounced See) is experiencing a monstrous earthquake in real life.


CHRONICLE
They bade farewell to Wilbur D. Mills, the former chairman of the Ways and Means Committee in the House of Representatives, at a service in the Longworth House Office Building in Washington yesterday.
For three hours, an audience of more than 200 listened to such eulogists as Senators DALE L. BUMPERS and DAVID H. PRYOR SR., both Democrats of Arkansas; former Senator RUSSELL B. LONG, Democrat of Louisiana; former Governor HUGH L. CAREY of New York and Representative DAN ROSTENKOWSKI, Democrat of Illinois.
Mr.
Mills died on May 2 at the age of 82.
Senator Pryor recalled that when Mr.
Mills first ran for Congress at the age of 29, "His opponent said, 'This young whippersnapper won't even carry his hometown.' " (Mr. Mills came from Kensett, Ark.) In response, he said, Mr.
Mills vowed, " 'I tell you that if I lose one vote in my hometown, I won't take my seat.' In the election he got every vote, but of course, several people were taken on an unexpected fishing trip that day."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Gay Pride parade in Manhattan misidentified a motorcycle group and referred incorrectly to the appearance of its contingent.
It is the Empire City Motorcycle Club.
While some members wore leather caps, vests and G-strings, most were fully clothed.


Investment in a TV Station Raises Questions
Has Mario Gabelli, who became a mutual-fund superstar in the 80's by dealing heavily in media stocks, exceeded the number of broadcast properties that a money manager can legally own in his portfolios?
An investor group in New Jersey and Washington says he has, and the Federal Communications Commission is currently studying Mr.
Gabelli's stock holdings.


Third World Women Aren't the Big Polluters
To the Editor:
Ordinarily I agree with Anna Quindlen's feisty feminist columns.
In "Zero Population Talk" (June 10), however, she echoes some neo-Malthusian cliches about the relationship between population and environment that mainstream pundits writing about the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro swallowed whole from the population lobby.
This is unfortunate, because such misleading assumptions have divided an effective counterposition in the United States to the Bush Administration's meanness and isolationism on the environment.
Ms.
Quindlen writes: "We fell trees for our houses, work in factories that produce effluents, buy products that pile up in landfills, burn fuels that foul the air, produce wastes that taint the oceans. . . . the more of us there are, the more these things take place."


Corrections
A contents listing on page 1 of the main news section on Sunday, citing a review in The Times Book Review, misidentified the author of "Woman of Valor: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America." She is Ellen Chesler. (Phyllis Chesler is the author of "Women and Madness.")


